the primary source of federal aid in support of elementary and secondary education is the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) —particularly its title i - a program , which authorizes federal aid for the education of disadvantaged students .

the esea was initially enacted in 1965 ( p.l .

89-10 ) "to strengthen and improve educational quality and educational opportunities in the nation's elementary and secondary schools. .

it was most recently comprehensively amended and reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , which was enacted "to ensure that every child achieves. .

the essa authorized appropriations for esea programs through fy2020 .

fy2020 appropriations for esea programs were $25.9 billion .

the essa also enacted a series of revisions to educational accountability requirements that are applicable to recipients of esea funds .

under title i - a of the esea , as amended by the essa , if a state accepts title i - a funds then the state , its local educational agencies ( leas ) , and its public schools are required to focus on educational accountability as a condition of receiving federal grant funds .

states , leas , and individual public schools are held accountable for monitoring and improving achievement outcomes for students and closing achievement gaps .

each state is required to have content standards , academic achievement standards , and aligned assessments in reading / language arts ( rla ) , mathematics , and science for specific grade levels .

states must also have an accountability system that incorporates ( 1 ) long - term and interim performance goals for specified measures ; ( 2 ) weighted indicators based , in part , on these goals ; and ( 3 ) an annual system for meaningful differentiation that is used to identify schools that need additional support to improve student achievement .

these academic accountability requirements must be detailed in each state's title i - a state plan .

each state educational agency ( sea ) is required to submit a state plan delineating its academic accountability system , among other state plan requirements , for approval by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) in order to receive title i - a funds .

this plan must be developed by the sea with "timely and meaningful consultation" with other education stakeholders , including the governor , the state board of education , members of the state legislature , school staff , and parents .

the plan must be peer - reviewed through a process established by the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) and then approved by the secretary .

the state plan will remain in effect for the duration of the state's participation in title i - a and must be periodically reviewed and revised as necessary by the sea to reflect any changes in the state's strategies or programs under title i - a .

as part of this plan , the sea is required to provide information on its standards , assessments , and academic accountability system .

state plans can be submitted for individual formula grant programs or , if permitted by the secretary , the sea may submit a consolidated state plan based on requirements established by the secretary .

following the enactment of the essa , all seas submitted consolidated state plans .

the secretary has approved these plans for all 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

this report discusses the title i - a requirements related to academic standards , assessments , and state accountability systems that are in effect under current law .

this is followed by a brief discussion of special rules that apply to schools operated or funded by the bureau of indian education ( bie ) , and an examination of sea and lea report card and reporting requirements related to standards , assessments , and accountability systems .

frequently asked questions ( faqs ) related to each of these areas are included at the end of the report .

as a condition of receiving title i - a funds , each state must have state standards in specific subject areas that meet certain requirements .

this section discusses general requirements related to standards , as well as alternate achievement standards for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities and english language proficiency standards .

states must implement a set of high - quality academic assessments in mathematics , rla , science , and any other subject chosen by the state .

the assessments must be the same academic assessments used to measure the achievement of all public elementary and secondary schools in the state and be administered to all students in the state within the required grades and subjects .

in order to receive funds under title i - a , each state is required to submit a plan to ed that , among other items , describes its accountability system .

the system must incorporate the state's academic standards and aligned assessments in rla and mathematics .

in addition , the system must meet numerous requirements discussed below .

the bie oversees a total of 183 elementary , secondary , residential , and peripheral dormitory ( i.e. , "boarding" ) schools across 23 states .

of these 183 schools , 130 are tribally controlled and 53 are operated by the bie .

there are special rules regarding standards , assessment , and accountability for schools operated or funded by the bie included in section 1111 ( k ) that apply until the requirements of section 8204 ( discussed below ) are met .

the special rules are as follows: each bie school accredited by the state in which it is operating shall use the assessments and other academic indicators the state has developed and implemented to meet the requirements of section 1111 , or such other appropriate assessment and academic indicators as approved by the secretary of the interior .

each bie school that is accredited by a regional accrediting organization ( in consultation with and with the approval of the secretary of the interior , and consistent with assessments and academic indicators adopted by other schools in the same state or region ) shall adopt an appropriate assessment and other academic indicators that meet the requirements of section 1111 .

each bie school that is accredited by a tribal accrediting agency or tribal division of education shall use an assessment and other academic indicators developed by such agency or division , except that the secretary of the interior shall ensure that such assessment and academic indicators meet the requirements of section 1111 .

esea , section 8204 contains provisions related to the setting aside of funds for the department of the interior to participate in the development of standards , assessments , and accountability systems in bie - funded schools .

for the purposes of title i - a , the secretary of the interior , in consultation with the secretary of education ( if requested by the secretary of the interior ) , shall use a negotiated rulemaking process to develop regulations that define the standards , assessments , and accountability systems for schools funded by the bie .

using the negotiated rulemaking process , the secretary of the interior was required to develop regulations for implementation no later than the 2017-2018 school year .

the tribal governing body or school board of a school funded by the bureau of indian affairs may waive the aforementioned requirements if they are determined by such body to be inappropriate .

if the requirements are waived , the tribal governing body or school board must submit a proposal to the secretary of the interior for alternative standards , assessments , and accountability systems within 60 days .

the secretary of the interior and the secretary of education shall approve such standards , assessments , and accountability systems unless the secretary of education determines that they do not meet the requirements of esea , section 1111 , while taking into account the unique circumstances and needs of the schools and students served .

the secretary of the interior and the secretary of education shall provide technical assistance , either directly or through a contract , to a tribal governing body or school board ( if requested by such body ) to develop alternative standards , assessments , and accountability systems .

section 1111 includes specific requirements related to annual sea , lea , and school public report cards .

it also includes requirements related to reporting data to the secretary and congress .

this section discusses these requirements as well as privacy requirements that apply to section 1111 .

the last part of this report provides responses to frequently asked questions ( faqs ) about various aspects of the educational accountability requirements enacted in the esea , as amended by the essa .

in particular , faqs related to academic content standards , assessment , accountability systems , and report cards are addressed .

this section highlights two frequently asked questions with respect to the state standards requirements under title i - a .

the esea explicitly says that a state is not required to submit its challenging state academic standards , alternate achievement standards , or english language proficiency standards to the secretary for review or approval .

the secretary also does not have the authority "to mandate , direct , control , coerce , or exercise any direction or supervision over any of the challenging state academic standards adopted or implemented by a state. .

concerns related to the diversity of accountability systems , student mobility , consistent expectations for students , preparation of students for global competition , and skills students need for employment spurred an effort led by the national governors association and the council of chief state school officers to develop common standards for english language arts / literacy and mathematics in grades k - 12 ( referred to as the common core state standards ) .

this effort is referred to as the common core state standards initiative ( ccssi ) .

according to the ccssi , the purpose of this state - led initiative ... is to create a rigorous set of shared standards that states can voluntarily adopt .

the standards are crafted to "define the knowledge and skills students should have within their k - 12 education careers so they graduate from high school able to succeed in entry - level , credit - bearing academic college courses and workforce training programs. .

overall , 45 states , the district of columbia , four outlying areas , and the department of defense education activity ( dodea ) adopted the common core state standards at some point in time .

adoption of the common core state standards has always been optional .

however , some federal initiatives such as the race to the top ( rtt ) state grant competition that began in 2009 provided substantial incentives to states that had adopted college - and career - ready standards that met specified requirements , and the common core state standards was the most widely available set of standards that met such requirements .

as discussed above , however , the secretary does not have the authority to tell states what standards they must use to comply with the requirements of title i - a .

thus , the decision to adopt ( or not adopt ) the common core state standards as a state's standards rests solely with the state .

this section discusses some examples of faqs that have arisen as seas and leas implement the assessment requirements .

the faqs are related to the use specific assessments , assessment of students with disabilities , and the new assessment flexibilities .

the esea contains multiple provisions that prohibit the secretary from specifying the assessments that a state must use to comply with the requirements of title i - a .

as previously discussed , the secretary is prohibited from prescribing which assessments a state must use , provided the assessments selected by the state meet statutory requirements .

through the race to the top assessment grant competition , the partnership for the assessment of readiness for college and careers ( parcc ) and the smarter balanced assessment consortium ( smarter balanced ) received grants to develop assessments aligned with the common core state standards .

many states continue to use assessments developed by these organizations , but doing so is optional .

a state may use the sat or act for its high school assessment in its statewide accountability system , provided that the assessment is approved for use in the state plan .

in short , the state must provide evidence that the sat or act ( 1 ) is aligned with and equivalent to the state's academic content standards ; ( 2 ) provides comparable , valid , and reliable data compared to the state assessment ; ( 3 ) meets the general requirements of assessment systems with the exception that it need not be administered to all students in the state ; and ( 4 ) provides unbiased , rational , and consistent differentiation between schools within the state .

while the use of the sat or act is a potentially viable option , the alignment evidence that must be collected and submitted to ed may be a barrier to implementing the flexibility .

in march 2016 , the sat administered a newly redesigned assessment , which made a more focused effort to align itself with the common core academic standards .

if there is a high degree of alignment between a state's academic content standards and the common core academic standards , the sat may be suitable for use in accountability systems ( provided the sat meets the other requirements ) .

the act was redesigned prior to the development of the common core academic standards ; however , a representative from the act maintains that there is "significant overlap" between the common core and the college - and career - readiness constructs measured by the act .

an education week survey of the states found that 25 require students to take the sat or act , and 12 currently use the sat or act for federal reporting and statewide accountability systems .

if the sat or act is not already used by the state in its accountability system , an lea may request the use of a locally selected high school assessment ( such as the sat , act , advanced placement or international baccalaureate exams , accuplacer , or the asvab ) .

the locally selected high school assessment must be approved by the state before an lea uses it for accountability purposes .

an education week article cites several reasons why states may not be adopting this flexibility more quickly , including the requirements that a state ( 1 ) figure out how to pay for the flexibility , ( 2 ) design a process for districts to apply for the flexibility , and ( 3 ) collect evidence that compares data from the statewide assessment and the locally selected high school assessment .

furthermore , an assessment expert explains in the article that it is difficult to have this flexibility and a comparable accountability system .

by allowing the flexibility , states are opening the door to leas requesting different assessments from one year to the next .

while the locally selected high school assessment must be comparable to the statewide assessment , it will not overlap 100% with the statewide assessment .

if assessments continue to change from one year to the next , it may be more difficult to compare results across assessments and track progress over time than if only one assessment was allowed .

some states have applied for waivers of the locally selected high school assessments requirements .

in one case , a state requested a waiver because an lea requested to administer the act in lieu of the high school assessment before the state approval process was completed .

the waiver was not approved , in part because the state had not submitted a timely request and did not demonstrate how the results of the act would be comparable to the results of the state test used in other high schools .

for school year 2017-2018 , 28 states requested a waiver to exceed the 1% cap for alternate assessments .

of the 28 states that requested waivers , 23 received them .

at least 19 of the 23 states were granted a one - year extension of the waiver for school year 2018-2019 , and 3 additional states were granted new waivers for school year 2018-2019 .

the national center on educational outcomes ( nceo ) tracks student participation in alternate assessments by state .

the most recent nceo publication reports on participation from school year 2015-2016 , before the new alternate assessment requirements were in place .

these data provide a baseline for expected rates of participation in alternate assessment in the short term .

in general , most states reported alternate assessment participation rates between less than 1% and 2.5% ; a participation rate of 2% is twice the allowable rate in statutory language .

the esea , as amended by the essa , no longer allows the use of modified achievement standards ( aa - mas ) .

assessment options for students with disabilities have changed over the last several years .

in the past , students with disabilities could participate in the general state assessment , alternate assessments based on alternate achievement standards ( aa - aas ) , or alternate assessments based on aa - mas .

states have been transitioning away from aa - mas since around 2014 .

therefore , students with disabilities who previously participated in aa - mas are now required to participate either in the general state assessment or the aa - aas ( if they are determined to be students with the most significant cognitive disabilities and eligible to participate in an alternate assessment ) .

the prohibition on the use of modified achievement standards ( and therefore the aa - mas option ) may have led to an overidentification of students found eligible to participate in aa - aas .

as discussed above , approximately 40% of states have requested waivers to the 1% cap on aa - aas , which may suggest that some of the students who were once eligible for aa - mas are now eligible for aa - aas .

states may need to consider revising their definition of most significant cognitive disability and consider strategies for successfully transitioning students who took the aa - mas to the general assessment .

as of september 2019 , the secretary has granted innovative assessment and accountability demonstration authority to four states: georgia , louisiana , new hampshire , and north carolina .

 , , georgia is piloting two technology - based assessments designed to provide educators with data that can be used to target instruction during the school year .

louisiana is developing a new format for the louisiana educational assessment program ( leap ) in ela and social studies .

new hampshire is building on its performance assessment for competency education ( pace ) system .

north carolina is using a customized , end - of - year assessment ( referred to as the "route" ) , which is developed for individuals based on their performance on two formative assessments administered during the school year .

excessive numbers of opt - outs may have consequences for both assessment and accountability purposes .

in terms of assessment , excessive numbers of opt - outs may undermine the validity of the measurement of student achievement because they may create a scenario in which states are measuring student achievement that is not representative of the whole student population .

when at least 95% of all students and 95% of students in each student subgroup participate in the assessments , the conclusions based on the results are more likely to be valid and reliable for differentiating schools based on academic achievement .

in terms of accountability , excessive numbers of opt - outs may lead to states failing to meet the requirement that 95% of all students and 95% of students in each student subgroup are assessed in the title i - a assessment and accountability system .

the specific consequences for failing to meet this 95% threshold for accountability purposes are determined by the state .

this section includes faqs that have arisen as seas , leas , and schools implement esea accountability requirements .

they cover topics such as the use of student growth measures , the identification of schools for improvement , and whether accountability requirements can be waived .

no , but states have the discretion to do so .

statutory language requires that the proficiency of students on the rla and mathematics assessments be included as an indicator for all public schools in a state .

it provides states with the option to use measures of student growth on the state assessments for high school students .

the use of these growth measures would be in addition to the use of the proficiency measures .

public elementary and secondary schools that are not high schools are required to use , in addition to the proficiency measures , either a measure of student growth , "if determined appropriate by the state," or another "valid and reliable statewide indicator that allows for meaningful differentiation in school performance. .

thus , the state also has the option to use student growth as measured by the rla and mathematics assessments as an indicator for elementary and secondary schools that are not high schools .

an lea may use measures of student growth only for limited purposes if the state chooses not to use them .

as previously discussed , the sea is charged with developing and implementing the state accountability system , including selecting the indicators that will be included in the system .

the use of student growth measures as indicators in the accountability system is left to the sea's discretion .

if an sea does not choose to incorporate these measures into the accountability system that is used by the state to meaningfully differentiate schools and identify schools for csi or tsi , then student growth is not an accountability system indictor .

however , an lea could choose to include student growth measures , for example , in the data that it uses at the lea level for data analysis purposes or makes publicly available .

an lea may only use additional indicators for limited purposes .

statutory language requires seas to include specific indicators in the state accountability system and provides seas with some flexibility in including other indicators .

the indicators included in the state accountability system are required to apply to all public schools in the state .

the sea is required to use its accountability system to determine which schools in the state will be identified for csi or tsi .

while an lea could choose to add additional indicators , for example , in the data that it uses at the lea level for data analysis purposes or makes publicly available , the lea could not use these additional indicators as replacements for the sea - selected indicators .

yes .

section 8401 provides the secretary with the authority to waive various esea statutory and regulatory provisions .

an sea or indian tribe that receives funds under any esea program may submit a request to the secretary to waive any statutory or regulatory requirement pertaining to the esea , unless the secretary is prohibited by law from waiving such provision .

an lea that receive funds under any esea program may also request a waiver of esea statutory and regulatory provisions , but the lea must submit its request to its sea .

the sea then has the option of submitting the lea's waiver request if the sea "determines the waiver appropriate. .

thus , an sea could request a waiver related to its accountability system .

for example , an sea could request that only measures of student growth rather than student proficiency be used in the accountability system or that the sea be permitted to create a combined measure based on student proficiency and student growth .

an lea could submit a waiver request to operate under a modified accountability system , such as an accountability system where the lea uses different indicators than those selected by the state .

however , as the lea waiver request would have to be approved by the sea prior to being submitted to the secretary , it is possible that an sea would deny the request and require that all public schools be evaluated using the state established accountability system , as is currently required by statutory language .

in identifying the lowest - performing 5% of title i - a schools for csi , statutory language requires each state to select these schools using a "state - determined methodology" that is based on the "system of meaningful differentiation. .

as there are no regulations clarifying the identification of schools for csi , based on ed's approval of state plans it appears that a state can decide whether to use all of the data included in the system of meaningful differentiation , including data for subgroups , or use only selected elements from the system of meaningful differentiation in its state - determined methodology for identifying csi schools .

there are ed - approved state plans that include subgroup performance in the identification of the lowest performing 5% of schools for csi and also approved state plans that do not include it .

for example , the district of columbia's state plan bases 25% of a school's overall accountability framework rating on student subgroup performance .

based on this accountability framework , the lowest performing 5% of schools are identified for csi .

on the other hand , north carolina's state plan only considers a school's total score on the state accountability model for the all students group when identifying the lowest performing 5% of schools .

for all years following the first school year in which schools are identified for atsi , the methodology for identifying schools for tsi begins with an sea's identification of schools with at least one subgroup that is "consistently underperforming , as determined by the state. .

as such , an sea has the flexibility to define this group of schools as broadly or as narrowly as it chooses .

this could result in a large group of schools being identified for tsi , of which only a subset will be identified for atsi .

it could also result in an sea identifying schools for tsi in such a way that every one of these schools would also meet the requirements for being identified for atsi .

because a school's designation for ats i hinges on being identified for tsi afte r the first sc hool year in which schools are identified for atsi , ats i schools are a subset of tsi schools .

because the esea allows seas to define what a consistently underperforming subgroup of students means for designation as a tsi school , it appears that an sea could use the ats i criteria—a school having at least one subgroup of students whose level of performance , if reflective of the entire school's performance , would cause the school to be among the lowest - performing 5% of schools receiving title i - a funds in the state—as its definition of a school having a consistently underperforming subgroup of student s. under such circumstances , the sea 's tsi and ats i schools would be the same .

a state could also choose to implement a more restrictive definition of a consistently underperforming subgroup of students than the atsi definition , resulting in fewer schools being identified for atsi than would otherwise be identified if schools did not have to be initially identified for tsi .

as previously discussed , there are special rules regarding standards , assessment , and accountability for schools operated or funded by the bie that apply until the requirements of section 8204 are met .

section 8204 requires the department of the interior to participate in the development of standards , assessments , and accountability systems in bie - funded schools using a negotiated rulemaking process .

the process was required to result in the development of regulations for the implementation of standards , assessments , and accountability systems no later than the 2017-2018 school year .

on june 10 , 2019 , the bureau of indian education proposed a rule developed using a negotiated rulemaking process as required by the esea to meet the secretary of the interior's obligation to define standards , assessments , and accountability system consistent with the esea for bie - funded schools .

comments on the rule were due on august 9 , 2019 .

a final rule had not been issued as of february 14 , 2020 .

this section includes two faqs related to state and lea report cards .

sea and lea report cards for the 2017-2018 school year must include the information required by essa with the exception of the per - pupil expenditures data .

ed is allowing seas and leas to delay reporting per - pupil expenditures data until report cards for the 2018-2019 school year .

seas and leas are required to explain the delay in reporting per - pupil expenditures if the data are not being reported until the 2018-2019 school year .

in addition , while the per - pupil expenditures data do not have to be reported at the same time as other report card data are released , ed expects seas and leas to make these data public by the end of the school year during which the other report card data are released .

seas and leas are not required to say why a school was identified for csi , tsi , or atsi .

for example , a report card does not have to indicate whether a school was identified for csi because it was one of the lowest - performing 5% of title i - a schools , had a graduation rate of 67% or less , or failed to exit atsi status in a state - determined number of years .

in its report card guidance , ed indicates that seas and leas "may wish" to provide this information on report cards and provides examples of the types of information that an sea or lea might consider including .

for example , an sea or lea might indicate which subgroup ( s ) led to the school's identification for tsi .

