serious disruptions for certain industries caused by the covid - 19 ( coronavirus ) pandemic have led to calls for federal government assistance to affected industries .

although out of the ordinary , this would not be the first occasion on which the federal government has provided aid to troubled or financially distressed industries .

to help inform congressional debate , this report examines selected past instances in which the government has aided troubled industries , providing information about the way in which such assistance was structured , the role of congress , and the eventual cost .

assistance for distressed industries or businesses—sometimes popularly referred to as "government bailouts"—historically has taken different forms and has occurred under varying circumstances .

assistance has not been limited to outlays by the treasury , or to actions explicitly authorized by congress , or to measures which imposed a net cost on taxpayers on an unadjusted cash - flow basis .

sometimes , the industry distress was being driven by external shocks , such as the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks or the 2007-2009 financial crisis , and other times it was driven by long - term secular trends , such as changes in the economic outlook for the railroad industry .

past assistance has involved such instruments as loan guarantees , asset purchases , capital injections , direct loans , and regulatory changes , with the specific mix of policies varying significantly from case to case .

these differences make it somewhat subjective what should be defined as a "bailout. .

in order to provide greater detail , the examples discussed in this report all involve cases in which federal assistance was ( 1 ) widely available to firms within an industry rather than being targeted to a particular firm ; ( 2 ) extraordinary in nature rather than a type of assistance that is routinely provided ; and ( 3 ) motivated primarily by a desire to prevent industry - wide business failures .

for each case , the report provides data on the costs and income to government , to the extent that they are available .

in some of the cases reviewed in this report , the government was able to recoup much or all of its assistance through fees , interest , warrants , and loan or principal repayments .

in others , there were no arrangements made for recoupment or repayment .

but the fact that a beneficiary of government assistance repaid a loan or gave the government shares that ultimately increased in value does not necessarily mean that the government "broke even" or "made a profit. .

the government had to borrow , incurring interest payments , to finance these programs , and adjusting federal outlays and receipts for inflation may not account fully for this .

in most cases , although not all , government assistance was provided under the assumption that it would be repaid , exposing the government to risk of credit loss that is not accounted for simply by adding up expenditures and receipts .

an economist would typically determine whether the government received full compensation for credit assistance by comparing the government's terms to what a private investor would have required for the loan or loan guarantee .

making such adjustments would increase the reported value of federal assistance and in some instances would indicate that taxpayers were not fully compensated—although it is fair to question what terms would have been required , for example , by a hypothetical commercial lender in the depths of the 2007-2009 financial crisis , when private credit markets were not functioning normally .

in any case , if such a standard were used , it would be a more demanding one than the government typically uses to measure the costs of federal credit and guarantee programs .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has provided assessments of the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) adjusting for borrowing costs and market risk , but cbo has not offered such estimates of other government assistance .

the final disposition of assets and liabilities arising from assistance often can take years .

but not all sources continued to consistently report data long after the initial intervention .

thus , while the cost estimates presented here are based on official sources , they sometimes involve a degree of uncertainty .

in some cases , precise information on the timing of outlays and recoupments is unclear and assumptions are necessary in order to compute the inflation adjustments .

where there is uncertainty about the timing of payments , we present a range of possible inflation - adjusted outcomes .

there are broader policy concerns raised by government assistance that are difficult to quantify and do not get captured in tallies of the government's income and expenses .

potential benefits of assistance can include avoiding potentially long - lasting disruptions to consumers , workers , local communities , and the overall economy ; averting losses to federally guaranteed retirement funds ; and maintaining federal tax revenues .

potential drawbacks to assistance include the possibility that it may reduce competition by rewarding incumbents over new entrants and distort the affected product market by causing ( or prolonging ) overproduction ; that it may cause "moral hazard" if firms respond to government assistance by acting with less financial prudence in the future ; and that it can delay an industry's adjustment to structural problems such as high production cost and excess capacity .

in every case , federal assistance to certain industries may raise questions about the fairness of providing assistance to some businesses but not to others .

in early 2018 , the trump administration—citing concerns over national security and unfair trade practices—imposed increased tariffs on steel and aluminum from a number of countries and on a broad range of u.s. imports from china .

several of the affected foreign trading partners—including china , canada , mexico , the european union , and turkey—responded to the u.s. tariffs with their own retaliatory tariffs targeting various u.s. products , especially agricultural commodities .

as a result of these retaliatory tariffs , both market prices and exports of affected u.s. agricultural products dropped sharply in the immediate aftermath of retaliation before gradually recovering as trade shifted to alternate markets .

the most notable result of this trade dispute was a decline in trade between the united states and china .

from 2010 through 2016 , china was the top destination for u.s. agricultural exports based on value .

in 2018 , u.s. agricultural exports to china declined 53% in value to $9 billion from $19 billion in calendar year 2017 .

the retaliatory tariffs affected producers of several major u.s. commodities , including field crops like soybeans and sorghum , livestock products like milk and pork , and many fruits , nuts , and other specialty crops .

following the imposition of retaliatory tariffs in 2018 , the united states began negotiations with several of the retaliating trade partners to resolve the disputes .

however , several of the negotiations were protracted—particularly the u.s. - china trade talks—and trade failed to return to normal patterns during 2018 and 2019 .

the secretary of agriculture used his authority under section 5 of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act of 1948 ( p.l .

80-806 ; 15 u.s.c .

714 et seq .

 ) , as amended , to initiate two ad hoc trade assistance programs in 2018 and 2019 .

referred to as "trade - aid packages," these two initiatives represented the administration's effort to provide short - term assistance to farmers in response to the foreign trade retaliation targeting u.s. agricultural products .

the first trade - aid package was announced on july 24 , 2018 .

it targeted production for nine agricultural commodities in 2018 and was valued at up to $12 billion .

the second trade - aid package was announced on may 23 , 2019 .

it targeted production for an expanded list of 41 commodities and was valued at up to an additional $16 billion .

according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the two trade - aid packages are structured in a similar manner and include three principal components ( table 8 ) : the market facilitation program ( mfp ) provides direct payments to producers of usda - specified "trade damaged" commodities .

usda used different payment rate formulas to determine the mfp payment distribution for each of the 2018 and 2019 programs ( described below ) .

mfp payments are administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) .

the food purchase and distribution program ( fpdp ) is for purchases of unexpected surpluses of affected commodities such as fruits , nuts , rice , legumes , beef , pork , milk , and other specified products for redistribution by usda's food and nutrition service through federal nutrition assistance programs including food banks , schools , and other outlets serving low - income individuals .

it is administered by usda's agricultural marketing service .

the agricultural trade promotion ( atp ) program provides cost - share assistance to eligible u.s. organizations for activities—such as consumer advertising , public relations , point - of - sale demonstrations , participation in trade fairs and exhibits , market research , and technical assistance—to boost exports for u.s. agriculture , including food , fish , and forestry products .

it is administered by usda's foreign agriculture service in conjunction with the private sector .

the two years of trade assistance , as announced by the secretary of agriculture , were valued at a potential combined $28 billion , the largest component being the mfp direct payments to producers valued at a combined $24.5 billion ( table 8 ) .

the broad discretionary authority granted to the secretary under the ccc charter act to implement the trade - aid package also allowed the secretary to determine how the aid was calculated and distributed .

some important differences between the 2018 and 2019 trade aid packages include the following: although the 2018 and 2019 mfp programs focused payments on the same three commodity groups—non - specialty crops ( grains and oilseeds ) , specialty crops ( nuts and fruit ) , and animal products ( hogs and dairy ) —the 2019 mfp included an expanded list of eligible commodities ( 41 eligible commodities in 2019 compared with nine in 2018 ) .

the 2018 mfp payments for eligible specialty and non - specialty crops were based on physical production in 2018 , and calculated as per - unit payment rates .

the 2019 mfp program based its payment rates for specialty crops on harvested acres , and non - specialty crops on planted acres .

this change was done to avoid having mfp payments reduced by the lower yields that were expected to occur across major growing regions due to the widespread wet spring and delayed plantings .

then a weighted - average mfp payment - rate - per - acre was calculated at the county level .

this was done to minimize influencing producer crop choices and avoid large payment - rate discrepancies across commodities grown within the same county .

the end result was a single 2019 mfp payment rate for each county with eligible commodities .

under both 2018 and 2019 mfp programs , payments to dairy producers were based on historical production , while those to hog producers used mid - year inventory data .

payments were made in three tranches under both the 2018 and 2019 mfp programs ; cumulative program receipts were subject to annual payment limits and adjusted gross income ( agi ) eligibility requirements .

the 2018 mfp payments were capped on a per - person or per - legal - entity basis at a combined $125,000 for eligible non - specialty crops , a combined $125,000 for animal products , and , separately , a combined $125,000 for specialty crops .

in contrast , the 2019 package used expanded payment limits per individual per commodity group ( $250,000 ) and an expanded maximum combined payment limit across commodity groups ( $500,000 versus $375,000 in 2018 ) .

both 2018 and 2019 mfp payment recipients were subject to an agi eligibility threshold of $900,000 , but with an exemption from the agi criteria if at least 75% of a farm's agi was from farming operations .

there is a general consensus among farm policy analysts that the mfp payments provided a substantial income boost to the u.s. agricultural sector in the aggregate during what otherwise would have been a period of low commodity prices and low net farm income .

however , an examination of mfp payments data reveals that they were unevenly distributed across both commodities and regions .

no congressional action was involved in the establishment , funding , or implementation of the 2018 and 2019 mfp programs .

the ranking member of the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry , debbie stabenow of michigan , has raised concerns about the methodology used to determine payment rates and the resultant distribution of payments across both commodities and regions .

in january 2020 , senator stabenow requested a comprehensive investigation by gao into the integrity of usda's trade aid to farmers affected by the trump administration's trade policies .

there is no provision for repayment or recoupment of any of the funds disbursed under the 2018 and 2019 trade - aid packages .

president trump has claimed that the tariffs imposed on products imported into the united states increased u.s. government revenue , and that these amounts , mainly paid by chinese exporters , were used to offset the cost of the trade - aid packages .

however , economic studies have generally found that the cost of tariffs on imported goods is borne largely by u.s. firms and consumers , not by foreign trading partners .

usda's use of ccc authority to initiate and fund agricultural support programs without congressional involvement is not without precedent , but the scope and scale of its use for the two trade - aid packages—at a potential cost of up to $28 billion—have increased congressional and public interest .

on february 11 , 2020 , usda inspector general phyllis fong told the house agriculture appropriations subcommittee that her office would be undertaking an investigation of the administration's trade assistance programs , starting with whether usda had the proper legal authority to make direct payments to farmers .

it is also possible that other countries may challenge mfp payments as a violation of u.s. trade commitments to the world trade organization .

