the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) authorizes the operation of three federal s tudent loan programs: the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , and the federal perkins loan program .

while new loans are authorized to be made only through the direct loan program , ffel and perkins loan program loans remain outstanding and borrowers of such loans remain responsible for repaying them .

as of december 31 , 2019 , $1.5 trillion in these loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 42.8 million individuals , remained outstanding .

direct loan program loans are owned by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

as of december 31 , 2019 , approximately 35.3 million borrowers owed about $1.3 trillion in direct loan debt .

ffel program loans may be held by private lenders , guaranty agencies , or ed .

as of december 31 , 2019 , approximately 11.8 million borrowers owed about $257.2 billion in ffel program debt .

of that , approximately $87.7 billion was held by ed , representing between 3.3 million and 6 million borrowers , and $169.3 billion was held by private lenders or guaranty agencies , representing debt for between 6.0 million and 7.2 million borrowers .

perkins loan program loans may be held by institutions of higher education ( ihes ) that made the loans or by ed .

as of december 31 , 2019 , about 1.9 million borrowers owed approximately $5.9 billion in perkins loans .

in response to the current coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic , numerous questions have arisen regarding student loan repayment flexibilities and debt relief that may be available to individuals to alleviate potential financial effects related to covid - 19 .

the hea generally authorizes several options for qualifying individuals .

recent administrative and congressional action , including the enactment of the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security ( cares ) act ( p.l .

116-136 ) , provide additional student loan relief measures .

this report provides an overview of student loan repayment flexibilities and debt relief provisions that may be available to borrowers facing financial difficulties resulting from the pandemic .

it first lists some pre - existing loan terms and conditions ( authorized through statute and regulations ) that may be available to individuals .

it then discusses specific administrative and congressional actions taken to address student loan debt in the context of covid - 19 .

the report concludes with a brief description of additional existing authorities that could be utilized to address other aspects of student loan relief .

several loan terms and conditions that offer forms of repayment relief to borrowers were authorized in statute and regulations prior to the onset of the covid - 19 pandemic .

these include periods of deferment and forbearance , which offer borrowers temporary relief from the obligation to make monthly payments ; and the availability of income - driven repayment ( idr ) plans ( eg , income - based repayment , pay as you earn [paye] ) , which afford borrowers the opportunity to make payments in amounts that are capped at a specified share or proportion of their discretionary income , for a maximum repayment period of 20 or 25 years .

recently , ed and congress have taken steps to provide additional forms of relief to federal student loan borrowers .

this includes cancelling direct loans for payment periods during which qualifying individuals withdrew from their course of study due to covid - 19 , waiving direct subsidized loan limitations for students affected by covid - 19 , temporarily setting interest rates to 0% on qualifying loans , expanding the instances under which a forbearance may be available to borrowers of qualifying loans , and temporarily ceasing collections on qualifying defaulted loans .

in addition to the above - described administrative and congressional actions that have been taken in response to covid - 19 , further flexibility and authority is provided through the higher education relief opportunities for students act ( heroes act ) .

the heroes act can only be implemented , however , in connection with a war or other military action or a national emergency declared by the president .

the heroes act provides the secretary with authority to waive or modify statutory and regulatory requirements that apply to the hea title iv student aid programs in an effort to help affected individuals .

there are three categories of affected individuals: 1. those who are serving on active duty or performing qualifying national guard duty during a war or other military operation or national emergency ; 2. those who reside or are employed in an area that is declared a disaster area by any federal , state , or local official in connection with a national emergency ; and 3. those who suffered direct economic hardship as a direct result of a war or other military operation or national emergency .

examples of support that may be available to student loan borrowers under the heroes act include the following: for borrowers of loans made under the direct loan , ffel , and perkins loan programs who are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals , the initial grace period excludes any period , not to exceed three years , during which a borrower is an affected individual .

borrowers of loans made under the direct loan , ffel , and perkins loan programs who were in an "in - school" status but left school because they became a 1 st or 2 nd category affected individual may retain their in - school status for up to three years .

during this period , the secretary will pay any interest that accrues on a ffel stafford loan .

borrowers of loans made under the direct loan , ffel , and perkins loan programs who were in an "in - school" deferment or a graduate fellowship deferment but left school because they became a 1 st or 2 nd category affected individual may retain their deferment for a period of up to three years during which they are affected .

during this period , the secretary will pay any interest that accrues on a ffel stafford loan .

for borrowers of perkins loans who are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals , any forbearance granted on the basis of their status as an affected individual is excluded from the usual three - year limit on forbearance .

also , for these categories of affected individuals , borrowers of perkins loans may be granted forbearance based on an oral request and without written documentation for a one - year period and an additional three - month transition period .

borrowers of ffel program loans who are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals may be granted forbearance based on an oral request and without written documentation for a one - year period and an additional three - month transition period .

for borrowers that may qualify for teacher loan forgiveness ( direct loan and ffel program borrowers ) or perkins loan cancellation ( perkins loan program borrowers ) on the basis of continuous or uninterrupted qualifying service , such service will not be considered interrupted by any period during which they are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals or during a three - month transition period .

for borrowers who defaulted on direct loan , ffel , or perkins loan program loans and are seeking to rehabilitate their loans by making nine on - time payments according to generally applicable procedures , any payments missed during periods when they are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals or during a three - month transition period shall not be considered an interruption in the series of payments required for loan rehabilitation .

for borrowers who defaulted on direct loan , ffel , or perkins loan program loans and are seeking to reestablish eligibility for title iv federal student aid by making six consecutive on - time payments , any payments missed during periods when they are in the 1 st or 2 nd categories of affected individuals or during a three - month transition period shall not be considered an interruption in the series of payments required for purposes of reestablishing title iv eligibility .

for borrowers who defaulted on direct loan or ffel program loans and are seeking to consolidate loans out of default , any payments missed during the period when they are in the 1 st or 2 nd category of affected individuals or during a three - month transition period shall not be considered an interruption in the series of payments required for purposes of reestablishing title iv aid eligibility .

borrowers who are repaying their direct loan or ffel program loans according to an idr plan and because of their status as 1 st or 2 nd category affected individuals are unable to provide information normally required annually to document their income and family size may maintain their current payment amount for a period of up to three years , including a three - month transition period .

this flexibility is made in lieu of having their payment amount adjusted to be based on a standard 10-year repayment plan or an alternative repayment plan , as applicable .

