this report is an overview of u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east and north africa ( mena ) .

it includes a brief historical review of foreign aid levels , a description of specific country programs , and analysis of current foreign aid issues .

it also provides analysis of the administration's fy2021 budget request for state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign operations and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations in the mena region .

congress authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance and conducts oversight of executive agencies' management of aid programs .

as the largest regional recipient of u.s. economic and security assistance ( see figure 1 below ) , the middle east is perennially a major focus of interest as congress exercises these powers .

the foreign aid data in this report is based on a combination of resources , including usaid's u.s. overseas loans and grants database ( also known as the "greenbook" ) , appropriations data collected by the congressional research service from the state department and usaid , data extrapolated from executive branch agencies' notifications to congress , and information published annually in the state department and usaid congressional budget justifications .

the release of this report has coincided with the global spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 , or covid - 19 ( see text box below ) .

the covid - 19 pandemic is expected to affect all mena countries , and may significantly affect poorer nations that benefit from u.s. and other international assistance .

much of the data presented in this report predates the covid - 19 pandemic .

u.s. bilateral assistance to mena countries is intended to support long - standing u.s. foreign policy goals for the region , such as containing iranian influence , countering terrorism , preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , preserving the free - flow of maritime commerce and energy resources , promoting israeli - arab peace , and preserving the territorial integrity and stability of the region's states .

u.s. foreign assistance ( from global accounts / non - bilateral ) also is devoted to ameliorating major humanitarian crises stemming from ongoing conflicts in syria , yemen , and elsewhere .

as in previous years , the bulk of u.s. foreign aid to the mena region continues to be focused on assistance ( mostly military ) to three countries: israel , egypt , and jordan .

israel is the largest cumulative recipient of u.s. foreign assistance since world war ii .

almost all current u.s. aid to israel is in the form of military assistance , and u.s. military aid for israel has been designed to maintain israel's "qualitative military edge" ( qme ) over neighboring militaries .

u.s. military aid to egypt and jordan ( which have been at peace with israel since 1979 and 1994 , respectively ) is designed to encourage continued israeli - arab cooperation on security issues while also ensuring interoperability between the united states and its arab partners in the u.s. central command ( centcom ) area of responsibility .

the united states also has provided economic assistance to some mena countries focusing on education , water , health , and economic growth initiatives .

in part , u.s. bilateral economic assistance is premised on the idea that governments across the mena region have had increasing difficulty meeting the expectations of their young citizens .

public dissatisfaction over quality of life issues and lack of economic opportunities persist in many mena countries .

according to the arab youth survey , the rising cost of living and unemployment are the two main obstacles facing middle east youth today .

arab barometer , a u.s. - funded , nonpartisan research network that provides insight into arab public attitudes , also notes that widespread youth discontent about their economic prospects translates into broad frustration with government efforts to create employment opportunities .

in recent years , as popular protests have proliferated across the mena region , governments have continued to grapple with systemic socioeconomic challenges , such as corruption , over - reliance on oil , inefficient public sectors , low rates of spending on health and education , and soaring public debt .

since 1946 , the mena region has received the most u.s. foreign assistance worldwide , reflecting significant support for u.s. partners in israel , egypt , jordan , and iraq ( see figure 2 ) .

for fy2021 , israel , egypt , and jordan combined would account for nearly 13.5% of the total international affairs request .

reducing mena aid .

for fy2021 , the administration proposes to spend an estimated $6.6 billion on bilateral assistance to the mena region , a figure that would be nearly equal to the 2020 request but 12% less than what congress appropriated for 2019 ( see figure 3 ) .

in order to achieve this 12% proposed reduction , the administration's fy2021 request would reduce total military and economic assistance to iraq , lebanon , and tunisia by a combined $544 million .

it also seeks to reduce total aid to jordan by $250 million and , as it did the previous year , does not request economic support fund / economic support and development fund ( esf / esdf ) for stabilization programs in syria .

in its fy2021 request to congress , the administration reiterated from the previous year that it seeks to "share the burden" of economically aiding mena countries with the international community while aiming to build countries' "capacities for self - reliance. .

stabilization support for iraq , syria , and beyond .

for fy2021 , the administration is again requesting that congress provide it flexibility in allowing up to $160 million in funding appropriated to various bilateral aid accounts to be used for the relief and recovery fund ( rrf ) .

the rrf is designed to assist areas liberated or at risk from the islamic state ( is , also known as isil , isis , or the arabic acronym da'esh ) and other terrorist organizations ( see "potential foreign aid issues for congress" below ) .

according to the congressional budget justification ( cbj ) , "esdf funding in the rrf will allow the state department and usaid to support efforts in places like syria , iraq , libya , and yemen , where the situation on the ground changes rapidly , and flexibility is required. .

among other things , funds designated for rrf purposes have supported iraqi communities through contributions to the united nations development program's funding facility for stabilization ( undp - ffs ) .

the trump administration had ended u.s. contributions to stabilization efforts in syria , but notified congress of an intended obligation in 2020 and indicates that it may use fy2021 funds for programs in syria .

no funds for the palestinians .

for the first time in over a decade , an administration has not requested any u.s. bilateral economic or security assistance aid for the palestinians ( see "potential foreign aid issues for congress" section below ) .

the trump administration , having clashed repeatedly with palestinian authority president mahmoud abbas , has significantly reduced bilateral funding to the west bank and gaza , and has discontinued contributions to u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) for palestinian refugees .

moreover , as a result of provisions in the anti - terrorism clarification act of 2018 ( atca , p.l .

115-253 ) , no bilateral assistance has been delivered to the palestinians since january 2019 .

the administration did suggest that funds from its re - proposed "diplomatic progress fund" ( $225 million ) could be used to "resume security assistance in the west bank" or support critical diplomatic efforts , such as "a plan for middle east peace. .

in fy2020 , the administration requested $175 million in esdf for the diplomatic progress fund , though congress did not fund it in the fy2020 further consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

116-94 ( referred to herein as p.l .

116-94 ) .

in addition to assistance provided directly to certain countries , the united states provides aid to middle eastern countries through regional programs , including the following .

middle east regional partnership initiative ( mepi ) .

mepi is an office within the bureau for near eastern affairs at the state department that specifically supports political reform , women's and youth empowerment , quality education , and promoting economic opportunity in the arab world .

since mepi's inception in 2002 , congress has allocated it an estimated $1.1 billion in esf .

one of mepi's contributions to u.s. democracy promotion in the arab world has been to directly fund indigenous nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) .

mepi's local grants program awards grants to ngos throughout the middle east in order to build capacity for small organizations .

however , in countries with legal restrictions prohibiting foreign funding of local ngos , u.s. officials and grant recipients may weigh the potential risks of cooperation .

between 2011 and 2013 , egypt arrested and convicted local and foreign ngo specialists on election monitoring , political party training , and government transparency in egypt .

middle east regional ( mer ) .

a usaid - managed program funded by esf , mer supports programs that work in multiple countries on issues such as women's rights , public health , water scarcity , and education .

for fy2021 , the administration is requesting $50 million in esf funding for mer .

in recent years , usaid has allocated $10 million to $15 million annually for mer .

near east regional democracy ( nerd ) .

a state department - managed program funded through esf , nerd promotes democracy and human rights in iran ( though there is no legal requirement to focus exclusively on iran ) .

nerd - funded training ( eg , internet freedom , legal aid ) for iranian activists takes place outside the country due to the clerical regime's resistance to opposition activities supported by foreign donors .

for fy2021 , the administration has bundled its nerd request together with mepi as part of an $84.5 million esf request for what it calls "state nea regional. .

for fy2020 , appropriators specified $70 million in esf for nerd ( $55 million base allocation plus $15 million to the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor or drl ) in division g of the joint explanatory statement accompanying p.l .

116-94 .

middle east regional cooperation ( merc ) .

a usaid - managed program funded through esf , merc supports scientific cooperation between israelis and arabs .

first established in an amendment to the foreign operations bill in 1979 , merc was designed to encourage cooperation between egyptian and israeli scientists .

today , merc is an open - topic , peer - reviewed competitive grants program that funds joint arab - israeli research covering the water , agriculture , environment , and health sectors .

for fy2021 , the administration is not requesting any esf for merc .

appropriators specified $5 million for merc in fy2020 appropriations ( division g of the joint explanatory statement accompanying p.l .

116-94 ) .

middle east multilaterals ( mem ) .

a small state department - managed program funded through esf , mem supports initiatives aimed at promoting greater technical cooperation between arab and israeli parties , such as water scarcity , environmental protection , and renewable energy .

for fy2021 , the administration is not requesting any esf for mem , and the last time the program was allocated funding was in fy2018 ( $400,000 ) .

trans - sahara counter - terrorism partnership ( tsctp ) .

a state department - led , interagency initiative funded through multiple foreign assistance accounts ( pko , nadr , incle , da , and esf ) , tsctp supports programs aimed at improving the capacity of countries in north and west africa to counter terrorism and prevent islamist radicalization .

three north african countries —tunisia , algeria , and morocco—participate in tsctp ; libya is also formally part of the partnership , but the majority of funding has been implemented in west africa's sahel region to date .

for nearly a decade , the united states has continued to devote significant amounts of foreign assistance resources toward several major humanitarian crises stemming from ongoing conflicts in syria , yemen , and elsewhere ( see figure 4 ) .

since 2010 , the united states has provided about $16.4 billion in humanitarian response funding to the middle east .

the united states is the largest donor of humanitarian assistance to the syria crisis and since fy2012 has allocated more than $10.6 billion to meet humanitarian needs using existing funding from global humanitarian accounts and some reprogrammed funding .

according to the united nations , yemen's humanitarian crisis is the worst in the world , with close to 80% of yemen's population of nearly 30 million needing some form of assistance .

the united states , saudi arabia , the united arab emirates , and kuwait are the largest donors to annual u.n. appeals for aid .

since 2011 , the united states has provided over $3 billion in emergency humanitarian aid for yemen .

most of these funds are provided through usaid's office of food for peace to support the world food programme in yemen .

during the government of iraq's confrontation with the islamic state , the united states was also one of the largest donors of humanitarian assistance .

since 2014 , it has provided more than $2.6 billion in humanitarian assistance for food , improved sanitation and hygiene , and assistance for displaced and vulnerable communities to rebuild their livelihoods .

the state department and usaid provide this humanitarian assistance through implementing partners , including international aid organizations and nongovernmental organizations humanitarian assistance is primarily managed by usaid's office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) , usaid's office of food for peace ( ffp ) , and the u.s. department of state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( state / prm ) using "global accounts" ( rather than bilateral ) , such as ida , ffp , and mra .

appendix a .

common foreign assistance acronyms and abbreviation .

