this report discusses issues related to providing employment services targeted at noncustodial parents ( ncps ) within the context of the child support enforcement ( cse ) program .

the cse program is a federal - state partnership that currently operates in all 50 states ; the district of columbia ( dc ) ; the territories of guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands ; and 60 tribal nations .

the program seeks to promote parental responsibility and ensure children receive support from both parents , notably through financial income transferred from an ncp to a child's primary caretaker ( usually a custodial parent ) .

in fy2018 , the cse program provided services on behalf of 14.7 million children , about 20% of children in the united states .

one analysis estimated that nearly two - thirds of families receiving cse services in 2015 had income below 200% of the poverty threshold .

the cse program collected 66% of the current support that was due in fy2018 , continuing the program's record of slow but steady improvement in recent years .

however , $11.5 billion in current support that was due went uncollected , becoming arrears ( i.e. , past due support ) .

a number of observers have concluded that some ncps have a currently limited ability to pay that restricts how much support is collected , and that those ncps would benefit from employment services being offered in the context of the cse program .

ncp employment and earnings , particularly through stable , formal employment , are positively linked to child support payment compliance .

this association is likely because ncps with higher earnings have a better ability to pay , but also because formal employment facilitates the use of income withholding , a particularly effective cse tool .

also , many low - income ncps face one or more significant barriers to having consistent employment and sufficient income to pay child support , including low wages and benefits , irregular and unsteady jobs , limited education or marketable skills , health conditions ( eg , substance use ) , lack of transportation or housing , discrimination , and history with the criminal justice system .

proponents of cse employment programs argue that they respond to the concern that ncps need help securing employment , but might be less likely than other populations to access employment services through the workforce development system or public benefit programs .

in addition , they posit that the cse program is a unique platform for providing employment services in that it already reaches ncps in practice , has a strong interest in improving ncps' earnings and child support payments , and can leverage cse policies so that they act as employment incentives and not barriers for ncps .

although cse employment programs are fairly widespread , they are not found everywhere and appear to serve a relatively small proportion of ncps who struggle to secure adequate employment and regularly pay their obligations in full .

to explain why cse employment programs operate on a limited scale , cse officials and observers have primarily cited a lack of sufficient and sustainable funding .

 ( the federal government normally reimburses each state for 66% of all allowable expenditures on cse activities , but employment services are currently not an allowable activity and funding through other mechanisms within the program is limited. ) .

many of those same observers have proposed that legislation be enacted to address this issue .

this report first reviews how cse - led employment programs may be designed with regard to ncp eligibility and recruitment , as well as services provided .

this is followed by an explanation of the current federal funding options for these programs .

the next section reviews the available evidence on the effectiveness of employment programs that have been led by or conducted in cooperation with cse .

the report concludes by highlighting recent proposals to dedicate federal funding for cse employment programs .

cse employment programs must establish criteria to determine eligibility for services .

unemployed , or underemployed , low - income ncps who are struggling to meet their obligations are the population that most frequently qualifies for services .

programs may also serve additional types of ncps , like those who are in the process of paternity or order establishment , to facilitate recruitment or expand their reach .

alternatively , cse employment programs may narrowly target services to conserve resources and prioritize certain cases ( eg , those owing current support versus those owing arrears only ) .

eligibility criteria can also help limit duplication with other public programs or risks of supplanting their funding .

another important decision cse employment programs make is whether to rely on mandatory or voluntary recruitment policies , or both .

courts can issue mandatory orders for ncps to participate in a work program .

when ncps fail to pay child support , states may issue contempt citations or file criminal nonsupport charges that bring parents before a court .

 ( the required administrative and court processes can be expensive for the cse program and state. ) .

at this point , the court may give ncps the choice to seek work as an alternative to incarceration , or order them to do so .

depending on the jurisdiction and court , ncps may be left to their own discretion for how to secure employment , or they may be firmly connected to or ordered into an employment program that can provide relevant services and assistance .

as a result , among the population presented with the choice of participating in a mandatory work program versus incarceration , enrollment and engagement rates are usually fairly high .

alternatively , or additionally , cse employment programs can focus on voluntary recruitment .

this approach allows programs to serve more ncps than just those who have been brought into court .

program referrals can be made by staff from cse agencies , courts , community organizations , and probation or parole offices .

even when programs are voluntary , court referrals and the consequences of nonpayment ( eg , license suspensions , interest charged on debt , the risk of eventually being incarcerated ) give ncps strong incentives to participate .

still , several voluntary programs report that recruitment and retention is challenging in that many ncps referred to or made aware of the programs decline to participate voluntarily or stay engaged .

in response , programs have developed several strategies for boosting recruitment and retention , including expansive program eligibility rules , incentives ( eg , removal of cse - initiated driver's license suspensions , forgiveness of state - owed arrears ) , intensive case management , co - locating services , and aggressive and multifaceted outreach .

cse employment programs typically provide a wide range of services , which can require the involvement of many partner organizations .

intensive case management is generally considered critical for engaging ncps , assessing their needs holistically , coordinating service receipt , and monitoring participant progress .

cse agencies may handle this general case management or make arrangements ( eg , contract ) with other organizations to do so .

case managers and other program staff may refer ncps to external resources for issues such as housing , mental health , substance use , legal aid , and financial education , although services may be limited in many communities .

cse employment programs may also provide ncps with access to parenting and fatherhood services , including classes and referrals to resources for addressing parenting time ( child access and visitation ) , co - parent mediation , and other legal concerns related to parenthood .

providing employment services is often contracted or delegated to partnering government workforce agencies or community organizations with relevant expertise .

these entities typically provide ncps with traditional services such as employment - focused case management , job search assistance , employment assessments , job readiness , basic or remedial education , short - term job skills training , job development and placement , and job retention .

these services may be provided in both individual and group settings .

employment programs may also provide work supports including transportation assistance , small incentives to promote program engagement , and specialized services for those with criminal records such as records expungement or voluntary drug testing .

less commonly , ncps may participate in subsidized employment , on - the - job training , vocational training and education , and other , more intensive employment services .

under current law , federal funds that can be used by cse programs to fund employment services are fairly limited .

the funding streams that are available may be uncertain from year - to - year , of short duration , or limited in amount relative to the potential demand for these services .

the largest source of federal funding for state cse administration is the previously mentioned 66% reimbursement rate for state and local expenditures on allowable cse activities , with no ceiling on the total amount of federal reimbursement .

federal matching payments on net totaled more than $3.5 billion in fy2018 , and accounted for approximately 90% of federal cse funding for states in recent years .

however , spending on work activities has not been allowed as a federally reimbursable cost .

alternatively , states can apply for a waiver under section 1115 of the social security act to receive federal matching payments for the purposes of a demonstration project designed to promote program objectives .

with respect to waiver projects , states have to invest new funds ( not redirect funding ) , they are time limited ( typically two to five years ) and must be evaluated , and total federal reimbursement must not exceed $2 million .

the second largest cse funding stream is incentive payments , which are designed to reward states for strong program performance and were estimated to exceed $510 million in fy2018 .

incentive payments must be reinvested back into the program on activities that are eligible for reimbursement .

however , states can request authorization to use incentive payments for activities that are not eligible for federal reimbursement but may contribute to improving the effectiveness or efficiency of child support , such as employment programs .

incentive spending must supplement and not supplant other state cse funding , states can determine how much of their incentive payment to allocate toward an approved activity , and the program does not have to be formally evaluated .

there are also non - cse federal funding streams that can support ncp employment activities , although they may not be directly under the control of the program or available on a consistent basis .

for example , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) funding can support employment programs for ncps .

states can include ncps as members of tanf - eligible family units and provide assistance and other services funded by tanf or separate state maintenance - of - effort ( moe ) programs , even when no other family member is receiving assistance .

states can also use tanf or state moe funding to provide non - assistance services and benefits , such as employment services , to needy individuals such as ncps when doing so is consistent with tanf goals .

the tanf block grant provides states with considerable flexibility in the use of its funds , so ncp employment programs have to compete with many other potential expenditure options .

similarly , funding for the workforce innovation and opportunity act's adult and dislocated worker programs and the supplemental nutrition assistance program's employment & training programs can be used to provide employment services to ncps who meet these programs' respective eligibility criteria .

in addition , the wagner - peyser act employment service ( es ) makes labor exchange services ( eg , counseling , job search and placement assistance ) universally available to all individuals .

states and localities have also used a variety of other public and private funding to support cse employment pilots , including competitive grants from the department of health and human services' ( hhs' ) office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) and office of family assistance ( ofa ) .

the effectiveness of cse - led or cse - supported employment programs has been analyzed by a few rigorous evaluations .

while many agencies and partner organizations providing employment services note that ncps who participate in employment programs show improvement when measured on the basis of comparing pre - and post - participation outcomes such as earnings and child support payments , this kind of analysis cannot address what would have occurred if ncps had not participated in those particular services .

for example , ncps might have secured employment without assistance , received employment services through another program , or benefited from changes in the economy over time .

rigorous research designs such as random assignment use valid comparison groups to isolate impacts , which are the changes in outcomes causally attributable to a program or policy .

this report focuses on statistically significant employment , earnings , and child support payment findings from random assignment experiments and other research designs that can plausibly identify program impacts .

in social policy , new or alternative interventions are often compared to a services - as - usual condition developed through many years of trial and error , sometimes including previous rounds of rigorous evaluation .

research in disciplines as varied as social policy , education , medicine , and business has found that the most common pattern of results when interventions undergo rigorous evaluation is "weak" or "no effects. .

a similar pattern of results has been observed for employment and training programs serving low - income populations other than ncps .

studies that do not find large positive impacts may still identify potentially promising changes for intervention implementation , design , or strategy .

employment programs for ncps have not shown consistent impacts on employment , earnings , and child support compliance when subjected to rigorous evaluation .

cross - site variation from two rigorous evaluations suggests that robust involvement from cse in employment programs might be beneficial for generating impacts , relative to less cse involvement .

however , there is no rigorous evidence on the relative effectiveness of spending on employment programs versus alternative cse program activities .

the combination of these points also means there is no rigorous evidence that spending on employment services is less effective than alternative collection strategies , and many cse practitioners believe from experience that these programs are a more effective tool for ncps with a limited ability to pay .

rigorous evidence with ncps is available for two employment program models: traditional employment services and transitional jobs .

alternative employment services that are more common with other low - income populations ( eg , substantive occupational skills training ) have typically not been rigorously evaluated with ncps and therefore are not discussed in this report .

earnings supplements such as the earned income tax credit , which provide monetary payments to individuals who work in an effort to increase employment and promote other policy objectives , are not regularly included as a service by cse employment programs and are also not covered here .

two notable , recent executive branch proposals have recommended increasing federal funding for cse employment programs , though neither has been adopted .

the obama administration proposed allowing federal reimbursement of state cse program expenditures to fund certain job services offered to eligible ncps ( notice of proposed rulemaking , november 17 , 2014 ) .

the trump administration , in its fy2021 budget submission , proposed allowing federal reimbursement of state cse program expenditures for mandatory work activities , capped at 2% of the total federal reimbursement of that state's cse expenditures .

legislation related to employment services for ncps has also been introduced in the 116 th congress .

the julia carson responsible fatherhood and healthy families act of 2019 ( h.r .

3507 ) proposes allowing federal reimbursement of state cse program expenditures to fund certain job services ( a more expansive set of services than in the obama administration proposal ) offered to eligible ncps .

other legislation would try to encourage states to focus more tanf funding on employment services , which might benefit some ncps ( typically , a parent of a child receiving tanf assistance ) .

the jobs and opportunity with benefits and services for success act ( h.r .

1753 / s. 802 ) would require that state tanf plans detail how low - income ncps will be able to access employment services through tanf .

the accelerating individuals into the workforce act ( h.r .

4571 ) would redirect funding from the tanf contingency fund to support subsidized employment opportunities for eligible individuals , including ncps of minor children receiving tanf assistance .

policymakers have also proposed funding new programs , separate from cse and tanf , for providing employment services .

the elevate act of 2019 ( h.r .

556 / s. 136 ) would provide funding for public and private subsidized employment programs that could serve ncps and other populations .

the pandemic tanf assistance act ( s. 3672 ) also would provide funding that could be used for , among other purposes , certain subsidized employment opportunities for low - income populations ( which could include ncps ) .

