swiping a card to pay for something seems routine today ; however , at one point in recent history , a piece of plastic with a magnetic strip capable of electronically communicating payment information between the banks of a consumer and a merchant was completely unprecedented .

financial technology , or fintech , refers to the broad subset of financial innovations that apply new technologies to a financial service or product .

although the term was coined only recently , it likely would have been applied to a broad set of innovations , such as the advent of automated teller machines , or atms , in the 1960s and mobile payments in the 2000s .

there is no singular definition of fintech , often making policy discussions around this topic complicated .

further , u.s. financial system regulation is fragmented across many regulators by industry , business practice , and geographical jurisdiction , so regulating fintech is multifaceted .

each financial regulator has a different mandate , creating gaps and overlaps among their jurisdictions .

regulators have used various policy tools to approach the new technologies in a manner consistent with their mandate , which impacts both institutions under their direct jurisdiction and new firms that do not cleanly fit under one regulator's jurisdiction .

recent congressional interest in fintech has led to several hearings , the creation of fintech task forces , and legislation pertaining to one or multiple financial system regulators .

this report examines activities and proposals initiated after the enactment of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ; p.l .

111-203 ) that are relevant to fintech .

these can include fintech actions as defined by a regulator or actions pertaining to areas of financial services that intersect with technology but may not be explicitly considered fintech .

financial regulators generally fall into three groups , which are responsible for ( 1 ) depository institutions , ( 2 ) consumer protection , and ( 3 ) securities .

their approaches may include the following: writing new rules or amending existing ones ; issuing guidance to clarify the applications of the rules to new types of business lines ; creating new types of charters for institutions ; using supervisory authorities to examine partnerships between regulated and unregulated entities ; issuing enforcement actions to companies that violate regulations or laws ; or establishing new offices and staffing experts to serve as outreach points - of - contact for relevant industry concerns .

table 1 summarizes the federal regulators discussed in this report , including their scope , and relevant authorities .

the depository institution regulators discussed in this report include the federal reserve , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , and the national credit union administration ( ncua ) —these are referred to as banking regulators .

the consumer protection agencies include the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

the securities regulators include the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and the commodity futures trade commission ( cftc ) .

more information on the mandates and relevant authorities of these regulators can be found in appendix a .

the banking regulators—the federal reserve , fdic , occ , and ncua—face particular fintech - related challenges regarding how to ensure banks and credit unions can efficiently and safely interact with nonbank fintech companies .

sometimes fintech companies partner with and offer services to banks or credit unions .

other times , they seek to compete with banks by offering bank or bank - like services directly to customers .

in some circumstances , banks themselves can develop their own fintech .

given their broad responsibilities , banking regulators can engage with and respond to fintech in numerous ways , including by amending rules and issuing guidance to clarify how rules apply to new products ; supervising the relationship banks form with fintech companies ; granting banking licenses to fintech companies ; and conducting outreach with new types of firms to facilitate communication between industry and regulators .

examples of these regulatory actions are discussed in more detail below .

each of the agencies has slightly different regulatory scope , so the efforts described in the sections below reflect each regulator's interest in balancing the risks and benefits of financial technologies .

the mandate for the consumer protection agencies—cfpb and ftc—is largely to ensure that consumers are unharmed by the practices of businesses under their jurisdiction while maintaining a competitive marketplace .

within the context of fintech , there are tradeoffs between these objectives .

for instance , encouraging firms to offer new kinds of consumer - friendly financial services can help create a competitive market , but the new products also can create the potential for unforeseen risks to consumers .

similar to the banking regulators , the cfpb and ftc issue and promulgate regulations on issues pertinent to fintech , such as payments and data security , and both agencies have created outreach offices .

the consumer protection agencies , however , tend to use enforcement actions as tools to manage the effects of fintech on the financial system to a greater extent than banking regulators .

this partly is because the consumer protection agencies are responsible for implementing and enforcing consumer protection laws for many nonbank financial companies—unlike the banking regulators , which generally do not have enforcement authorities for nonbank financial companies .

the consumer protection agencies use enforcement actions to balance their mandates with respect to fintechs in two additional ways: protect consumers by levying enforcement actions against firms that violate consumer protection laws , and promote market competition and facilitate innovations that benefit consumers by creating safe harbors for firms from enforcement actions in order to encourage firms to develop new technologies and solve challenges facing consumers .

whereas the cfpb has a broad range of regulatory authorities relevant to fintech , the ftc is somewhat limited to enforcement actions for many fintech activities , as it has some investigative authority but no supervisory authorities .

examples of these approaches are explored in more detail below .

the securities regulators—the sec and the cftc—are focused on any securities - related activities , including those of fintech companies .

examples would include a fintech company raising capital by issuing equity through an initial coin offering or a firm creating a new technology for derivatives contracts .

given their mandate , the securities regulators have used a range of regulatory tools , largely focused on clarifying whether and how the existing regulatory framework applies to new types of technologies , including the following: writing rules and guidance to clarify how existing rules apply to new types of approaches to securities ; issuing enforcement actions against any fintech firms that may violate the securities laws under their jurisdiction ; and setting up fintech outreach offices to serve as points of contact for stakeholders .

examples of these regulatory approaches are provided below .

the sec recently published guidance and rules on new capital - raising measures known as initial coin offerings ( icos ) and crowdfunding , as well as on issues regarding automated investment advice ( "robo advisors" ) .

both the sec and cftc have used their broad enforcement authorities to issue enforcement actions against digital asset practices that violated rules under their respective jurisdictions .

further , the sec used its nal policy ( similar to that used by the cfpb , discussed above ) to provide safe harbor to digital asset related companies .

these initiatives are summarized below .

firms that issue cryptocurrencies may consider an ico to raise capital by issuing digital assets to investors .

in 2019 , the sec published a framework to build on 2018 guidance for companies to understand whether their icos qualify as securities and are subject to sec regulation .

the process of issuing an ico is similar to a public companies' initial public offering—a well - regulated and commonplace way to raise capital in equity markets for newly public companies—in that both aim to raise funding , but confusion may exist among investors and industry over whether digital assets are treated the same way under sec regulation .

the jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ; p.l .

112-106 ) contains provisions that establish a regulatory structure for startups and small businesses to raise capital through issuing securities using internet - based crowdfunding .

effective may 2016 , the sec adopted a rule to implement these provisions , thereby governing the offer and sale of such securities and providing a framework for regulating certain registered funding portals and other intermediaries .

the sec has issued guidance for robo advisors , which provide automated investment advice .

the staff guidance serves to inform registered and other investment advisers on how to comply with the relevant securities statutes .

compliance requires firms or sole practitioners compensated for advising others about securities investments to register with the sec and conform to regulations designed to protect investors .

the sec has broad enforcement authorities , granting it the ability to suspend business practices through injunctions and to bring administrative proceedings , such as cease and desist orders .

the sec manages a robust enforcement action program across several industries and has issued 48 such actions against digital asset - related companies since 2013 .

similarly , the cftc issues enforcement actions to enforce derivatives laws ; since 2018 , it has issued more than 20 enforcement actions against firms related to bitcoin and other cryptocurrency fraud schemes .

in addition to its enforcement authority , the sec grants nals in some instances to provide relief from the sec taking an enforcement action against a company .

the sec provided three such letters to digital asset companies in 2019 .

in 2018 , the sec created the strategic hub for innovation and financial technology ( finhub ) to serve as a resource for public engagement on fintech issues , such as distributed ledger technology , digital assets , automated investment advice , digital marketplace financing , and artificial intelligence / machine learning .

finhub , developed from numerous sec internal working groups , also is designed to make the sec's fintech work more accessible to industry and serve as a platform to inform the sec's understanding of new financial technologies .

labcftc is the focal point of the cftc's efforts around financial innovation and is designed to make the cftc more accessible to innovators .

labcftc also serves as a platform to inform the cftc's understanding of new technologies , providing information for cftc staff that may influence policy development .

labcftc seeks to promote responsible innovation to improve the quality , resiliency , and competitiveness of markets .

it also aims to accelerate cftc engagement with new technologies that may enable the cftc to carry out its mission responsibilities more effectively and efficiently .

there are two main components to labcftc: ( 1 ) guidepoint , which creates a dedicated point of contact for stakeholders , and ( 2 ) cftc 2.0 , which serves as a beta testing environment for new technologies .

appendix a .

summary of financial regulator mandates banking regulators banks and credit unions serve a vital role in the economy .

thus , they are subject to a strong regulatory framework that requires institutions operate in a safe and sound manner .

depository institutions are routinely examined to ensure their business lines are healthy and to make sure they comply with various laws .

these regulators also write and provide guidance on rules for depository institutions to implement their legal authorities over certain business practices .

although the mandates and authorities for each agency are a bit different , the agencies all serve as primary federal regulators for some kind of depository institution .

the type of depository institution depends on whether a bank is chartered at the federal or state level and whether it is a member of the federal reserve system .

 ( see table a - 1 . ) .

federal reserve system the federal reserve act of 1913 ( p.l .

63-43 ) established the federal reserve as the central bank of the united states , comprising the board of governors and 12 federal reserve banks .

the board generally sets policy , which is carried out by the reserve banks .

in addition to its responsibility as the central bank to set monetary policy , the federal reserve is also responsible for supervising and regulating state banks that are members of the system and all bank - holding companies .

the federal reserve also has an important role in operating the payments and settlement system .

table b - 2 summarizes the federal reserve's notable recent activities in the payments system .

office of the comptroller of the currency the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) was established in 1863 as a bureau of the u.s. department of the treasury .

the occ is the primary federal regulator for nearly 1,200 national banks , federal savings associations , and federal branches and agencies of foreign banks operating in the united states .

the occ grants national bank charters , which allow the charter holder to legally operate as a bank .

federal deposit insurance corporation the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , established by the banking act of 1933 ( p.l .

73-66 ) and largely shaped into its modern form by the federal deposit insurance act of 1950 ( p.l .

81-797 ) , insures the deposits of banks and serves as the primary federal regulator for state - chartered banks and thrifts that are not members of the federal reserve .

the fdic manages the deposit insurance fund , which provides the funds necessary to insure deposits and to resolve failed banks .

the fdic provides deposit insurance for deposits at all u.s. banks , both national and state , but most of the banks the fdic supervises are smaller institutions , known as community banks .

national credit union administration in 1970 , congress amended the federal credit union act to establish the national credit union administration ( ncua ) as the regulator for the federal credit union system ( p.l .

91-206 ) .

the ncua supervises and insures deposit shares at federal credit unions and is responsible for resolving failing institutions .

consumer protection agencies consumer protection laws and regulations are mainly within the jurisdiction of two agencies .

the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) regulates certain financial firms for unfair , deceptive , and abusive acts and practices , as well as for compliance with several consumer protection laws .

in addition , many firms—both financial and nonfinancial—are subject to oversight by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which regulates firms for competition and fairness .

consumer financial protection bureau the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ; p.l .

111-203 ) established the cfpb to implement and enforce federal consumer financial law while ensuring that markets for consumer financial services and products are fair , transparent , and competitive .

dodd - frank consolidated the consumer protection authorities promulgated by other agencies and provided cfpb new powers to issue rules declaring certain acts or practices associated with consumer financial products and services to be unlawful because they are unfair , deceptive , or abusive .

the cfpb generally has regulatory authority over providers of an array of consumer financial products and services , including deposit taking , mortgages , credit cards and other extensions of credit , loan servicing , collection of consumer reporting data , and debt collection associated with consumer financial products .

the scope of its supervisory and enforcement authority varies depending on an institution's size and whether it holds a bank charter .

federal trade commission congress passed the federal trade commission act in 1914 to create the ftc and give it legal authority to protect consumers and promote competition .

specifically , the ftc looks to prevent unfair or deceptive acts or practices and to seek monetary redress or other relief for conduct deemed injurious to consumers .

generally , the ftc has broad investigation , rulemaking , and enforcement authorities that enable it to accomplish its mission .

securities regulators many companies issue stocks and bonds , trade derivatives , and offer other products collectively called securities .

securities are generally regulated by the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

 ( the cftc has specific responsibility for derivatives markets. ) .

the securities regulators promulgate rules and provide oversight over the institutions in their jurisdiction .

they also conduct enforcement actions to investigate and prosecute violations of relevant regulations .

securities and exchange commission congress passed the securities exchange act of 1934 ( p.l .

73-291 ) to establish the sec and restore confidence in the securities markets after the stock market crash of 1929 .

the sec is an independent agency that has broad authority over much of the securities industry in order to protect investors , promote fair and efficient markets , and facilitate capital formation .

commodity futures trading commission the cftc was created in 1974 by the commodity futures trading commission act ( p.l .

93-463 ) to address the expansion of commodities beyond agriculture .

prior to this law , commodities generally were regulated at the commodity exchange authority , a former agency within the u.s. department of agriculture .

the cftc regulates the u.s. derivatives markets , including futures , options , and swaps , and implements the commodity exchange act ( cea ; p.l .

74-675 ) .

similar to the sec , the cftc has rulemaking and enforcement authorities for a range of issues , but the cftc's authorities focus on derivatives markets derived from the cea .

appendix b .

financial innovation offices appendix c. select regulatory fintech initiatives federal reserve system innovation program .

the occ's office of innovation implements its responsible innovation framework in a number of ways that are described and summarized in table c - 1 .

for instance , the agency established an outreach and technical assistance program to establish a dialogue with banks , fintech companies , consumer groups , trade associations , and regulators .

it engages in outreach through a variety of channels .

over the past two years , for example , the office of innovation hosted office hours in five different cities for over 125 stakeholders , approximately 250 additional meetings and calls with stakeholders , and over 100 conferences and other events .

the office provides technical assistance to help banks and fintech companies understand occ expectations , relevant laws , regulations , and guidance , such as the agency's third - party risk management guidance .

the office of innovation also conducts research and develops content , including white papers , webinars , and collaborations with other occ business units to deliver in - house training , including on payment technologies .

the office of innovation convenes representatives from various occ business units to develop a coordinated strategy on particular topics , and it forms working groups to consider particular issues to coordinate and facilitate discussion between stakeholders and the occ .

it also endeavors to reduce regulatory uncertainty and inconsistency , provides assistance to agencies interested in establishing innovation offices , and helps the occ share information and communicate with other u.s. agencies on emerging trends and ways to improve its innovation initiatives .

the occ participates in various regulatory forums , such as the financial stability board's financial innovation network , and it serves as co - chair of the task force on financial technology , established by the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) .

furthermore , the occ collaborates on cybersecurity issues domestically and internationally through the federal financial institutions examination council , the financial and banking information infrastructure committee , and the bcbs .

consumer financial protection bureau financial innovation programs the cfpb's recent efforts pertaining directly to fintech are summarized in table c - 2 below .

financial crimes enforcement network the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) is a bureau of the u.s. department of the treasury charged with administering u.s. anti - money laundering ( aml ) and combating the financing of terrorism ( cft ) laws , most notably the bank secrecy act ( bsa ; p.l .

91-508 ) .

in 2018 , fincen , along with the federal reserve , the fdic , the ncua , and the occ , announced an effort to encourage banks and credit unions to take innovative approaches to combating money laundering , terrorist financing , and other illicit financial threats by enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of bsa / aml compliance programs .

fincen innovation initiative .

fincen launched an innovation initiative to address the challenges and opportunities of bsa and aml - related innovation in the financial services sector .

fincen's innovation initiative includes the fincen innovation hours program and regulatory relief programs to facilitate innovation around aml / cft compliance .

additionally , fincen suggested that it will consider incorporating testing programs , similar to sandboxes , and "tech sprints" to facilitate the development of innovative solutions to aml / cft challenges .

innovation hours program .

the innovation hours program is the most recent addition to the fincen innovation initiative .

fincen intends to host financial institutions , technology providers , and other firms involved in financial services to discuss their interests in innovation around aml / cft compliance .

appendix d. payments regulation and programs consumers generally have shifted toward electronic payments such as debit and credit cards .

since 2001 , the federal reserve has been studying consumer trends in payment activities on a triennial basis .

in 2019 , the cfpb issued a rule to grant protections to prepaid cards in a similar fashion to debit and credit cards—this reflects the shift in consumer preference toward electronic payments .

however , regulatory actions around electronic payments may create adverse conditions for some consumers who rely on cash .

balancing the interests of a faster , efficient payment system with one that works for different types of consumers is a challenge currently facing the federal reserve and cfpb .

table b - 1 shows a number of these rules , which can impact fintech companies that offer services or support payments operations through partnerships at banks .

as the federal reserve contemplates the design of its proposed faster payments system , it has numerous long - standing payments groups working on fintech and related issues .

many of these groups focus on the payments market .

an overview of the federal reserve's payments groups is provided in table b - 2 to show the scope of work of the agency and its reserve banks .

appendix e. crs fintech products cybersecurity crs report r44429 , financial services and cybersecurity: the federal role , by m. maureen murphy and andrew p. scott crs report r45631 , data protection law: an overview , by stephen p. mulligan , wilson c. freeman , and chris d. linebaugh .

crs in focus if10559 , cybersecurity: an introduction , by chris jaikaran .

lending crs report r44614 , marketplace lending: fintech in consumer and small - business lending , by david w. perkins .

crs report r45726 , federal preemption in the dual banking system: an overview and issues for the 116th congress , by jay b. sykes .

payments crs report r45927 , u.s. payment system policy issues: faster payments and innovation , by cheryl r. cooper , marc labonte , and david w. perkins .

crs report r45716 , the potential decline of cash usage and related implications , by david w. perkins .

banks and third - party vendor relationships crs in focus if10935 , technology service providers for banks , by darryl e. getter .

cryptocurrency and blockchain - based payment systems crs report r45427 , cryptocurrency: the economics of money and selected policy issues , by david w. perkins .

crs report r45116 , blockchain: background and policy issues , by chris jaikaran .

crs report r45664 , virtual currencies and money laundering: legal background , enforcement actions , and legislative proposals , by jay b. sykes and nicole vanatko .

crs in focus if10824 , financial innovation: "cryptocurrencies" , by david w. perkins .

digital assets and capital formation crs report r46208 , digital assets and sec regulation , by eva su .

crs report r45221 , capital markets , securities offerings , and related policy issues , by eva su .

crs report r45301 , securities regulation and initial coin offerings: a legal primer , by jay b. sykes .

crs in focus if11004 , financial innovation: digital assets and initial coin offerings , by eva su .

high - frequency securities and derivatives trading crs report r44443 , high frequency trading: overview of recent developments , by rena s. miller and gary shorter .

crs report r43608 , high - frequency trading: background , concerns , and regulatory developments , by gary shorter and rena s. miller .

regulatory approaches and issues for congress crs in focus if11195 , financial innovation: reducing fintech regulatory uncertainty , by david w. perkins , cheryl r. cooper , and eva su .

crs report r46332 , fintech: overview of innovative financial technology and selected policy issues , coordinated by david w. perkins .

