finance and technological development have been inextricably linked throughout history .

 ( possibly , quite literally .

the technology of writing in early civilization may have developed to record payments and debts. ) .

as a result , the term fintech is used to refer to a broad set of technologies being deployed across a variety of financial industries and activities .

although there is no consensus on which technologies qualify as new or innovative enough to be fintech , it is generally understood to mean recent innovations to the way a financial activity is performed that are made possible by rapid advances in digital information technology .

underlying , cross - cutting technological advancements that enable fintech include increasingly widespread , easy access to the internet and mobile technology ; increased data generation and availability and use of big data and alternative data ; increased use of cloud computing services ; the development of algorithmic decisionmaking ( and the related technological evolutions toward machine learning and artificial intelligence ) ; and the coevolution of cyber threats and cybersecurity .

the complementary use of these technologies to deliver financial services could potentially create benefits .

many technologies aim to create efficiencies in financing , which reduce costs for financial service providers .

certain cost savings may be passed along to consumers through reduced prices .

with lower prices , some customers that previously found services too expensive could enter the market .

in addition , some individuals and businesses that previously could not access financial services because of price or lack of available financial information could gain access at lower prices or through increased data availability and improved data analysis .

fintech also may allow businesses to reach new customers that were previously restricted by geographic remoteness or unfamiliarity with products and services .

increased accessibility may be especially beneficial to traditionally underserved groups , such as low - income , minority , and rural populations .

however , fintech may also generate risks and result in undesirable outcomes .

predicting how an innovation with only a brief history of use will perform involves uncertainty , particularly without the experience of having gone through a recession .

thus , technologies may not ultimately allocate funds , assess risks , or otherwise function as efficiently and accurately as intended ; they may instead generate unexpected losses .

some technologies aim to eliminate or replace a middle man , but in certain cases the middle man may in fact be useful or even necessary .

for example , an experienced financial institution or professional may be able to explain and advise consumers on financial products and their risks .

in addition , new fintech startups may be inexperienced in complying with consumer - protection laws .

these characteristics may increase the likelihood that consumers using financial technology engage in a financial activity and take on risks that they do not fully understand and which unduly expose them to losses .

furthermore , some studies suggest that fintech's use can result in disparate impact on protected groups , and that the increasing use of high - speed internet and mobile devices in finance may be leaving behind groups that cannot afford those services and devices .

as financial activity increasingly uses digital technology , sensitive data are generated .

on the one hand , data can be used to assess risks and ensure customers receive the best products and services .

on the other hand , data can be stolen and used inappropriately , and there are concerns over privacy .

this raises questions over data ownership and control—including consumers' rights and companies' responsibilities in accessing and using data—and whether companies that use and collect data face appropriate cybersecurity requirements .

given that fintech may produce both positive and negative outcomes , congress and other policymakers may consider whether existing laws and regulations appropriately foster the development and implementation of potentially beneficial technologies while adequately mitigating the risks those technologies may present .

this report examines ( 1 ) underlying technological developments that are being used in financial services , ( 2 ) selected examples of financial activities affected by innovative technology , and ( 3 ) some approaches regulators have used to integrate new technologies or technology companies into the existing regulatory framework .

policy issues that may be of interest to congress are examined throughout the report .

additional crs products and resources also are identified throughout the report and in the appendix .

for a detailed examination of how fintech is regulated , see crs report r46333 , fintech: overview of financial regulators and recent policy approaches , by andrew p. scott .

fintech is generally enabled by advances in general - use technologies that are used to perform financial activities .

this section examines certain of these underlying technologies , including their potential benefits and risks , and identifies policy issues related to their use in finance that congress is considering or may choose to consider .

when innovative financial technology is developed for a specific financial market , activity , or product , it might raise questions over the degree to which existing applicable laws and regulations foster the potential benefits and protects against potential risks .

this section examines certain fintech innovations , including their potential benefits and risks , and identifies related policy issues that congress is considering or may choose to consider .

given that most of the federal financial regulatory framework was created prior to the development and deployment of many recent technologies , fintech companies often face uncertainty over how—or whether—existing federal laws and regulations may apply to them or their products .

thus , policymakers may consider ways to reduce regulatory uncertainty and integrate fintech into the regulatory framework .

this often involves balancing efforts to encourage innovation while protecting consumers and the financial system from excessive risk .

many still - evolving terms are used to describe different programs regulators have implemented or proposed to address fintech uncertainty .

such programs are often informally called sandboxes or greenhouses .

generally , such programs use at least one of a variety of approaches .

one such approach involves fostering communication between fintech firms and regulators .

communication can help these firms better understand how regulators view a developing technology and potential regulatory concerns .

communication also helps make regulators aware of new fintech innovations when developing new or interpreting existing regulations .

as discussed below , certain regulators have established offices within their organizations to conduct outreach to fintechs—including maintaining outreach websites , participating in fintech conferences , and organizing office hours with fintech firms .

in another approach , some regulators have announced research collaborations with fintech firms to improve their understanding of new products and technologies .

such initiatives could include jointly designing a research trial or fintech firms sharing data about their product performance with regulators .

another potential approach policymakers may use if they determine that particular regulations are unnecessarily burdensome or otherwise ill - suited to a particular technology is to exempt companies or products that meet certain criteria from such regulations .

similarly , a regulator could issue a no - a ction letter —an official communication stating a regulator does not expect to take enforcement actions in certain situations .

regulators will often only provide such special regulatory treatment to companies that first demonstrate that consumers will not be exposed to undue harm or meet other conditions , like agreeing to share data with regulators for research purposes .

regulatory uncertainty can be resolved if regulators offer or require certain fintech firms to enter a regulatory regime with well - defined permissions , restrictions , and responsibilities .

for example , a regulator could offer or require a specific charter or license for certain firms .

financial regulators have begun to implement some of these approaches through a number of rulemakings and by establishing programs and offices and taskforces within agencies .

for a detailed examination of these initiatives , see crs report r46333 , fintech: overview of financial regulators and recent policy approaches , by andrew p. scott .

the regulatory approaches described above could be supported or opposed by various stakeholders depending on how they are designed and implemented and which firms or products are affected .

for example , while fintech firms may want to reduce regulatory uncertainty and operate under one set of rules nationally ( rather than different rules in each state ) , they may also oppose new or additional data - reporting requirements .

incumbent financial institutions may argue that regulatory tailoring and exemptions for fintech firms would put incumbents at a competitive disadvantage .

state regulators and consumer advocates may oppose any federal charter that would preempt state consumer - protection laws .

congress or financial regulators may consider various regulatory approaches .

policymakers choosing to tailor regulation for fintechs could apply a different regulatory treatment either to companies or to products .

if the goal is to provide new , inexperienced firms an opportunity to learn how they and their products would be regulated , institution - based regulation for firms meeting criteria associated with start - up companies may be the better option .

but if the goal is to integrate a new technology regardless of the size or sophistication of the firm offering it , the differentiated regulatory treatment could apply to the product rather than the firm .

policymakers could also choose to tailor regulation for fintechs meeting certain objective criteria .

alternatively , regulators could use discretion in determining which fintech companies or products would qualify for such tailoring , potentially based on authorities or directions enacted in legislation .

policymakers may also consider how long to apply a particular regulatory treatment to a fintech company or product .

for example , a specific charter could last indefinitely , while an exemption or no - action letter might last for only a finite period .

for more information on these issues , see crs report r46333 , fintech: overview of financial regulators and recent policy approaches , by andrew p. scott ; and crs in focus if11195 , financial innovation: reducing fintech regulatory uncertainty , by david w. perkins , cheryl r. cooper , and eva su .

cybersecurity crs report r44429 , financial services and cybersecurity: the federal role , by n. eric weiss and m. maureen murphy .

crs report r45631 , data protection law: an overview , by stephen p. mulligan , wilson c. freeman , and chris d. linebaugh .

crs in focus if10559 , cybersecurity: an introduction , by chris jaikaran .

lending crs report r44614 , marketplace lending: fintech in consumer and small - business lending , by david w. perkins .

crs report r45726 , federal preemption in the dual banking system: an overview and issues for the 116th congress , by jay b. sykes .

payments crs report r45927 , u.s. payment system policy issues: faster payments and innovation , by cheryl r. cooper , marc labonte , and david w. perkins .

crs report r45716 , the potential decline of cash usage and related implications , by david w. perkins .

banks and third - party vendor relationships crs in focus if10935 , technology service providers for banks , by darryl e. getter .

cryptocurrency and blockchain - based payment systems crs report r45427 , cryptocurrency: the economics of money and selected policy issues , by david w. perkins .

crs report r45116 , blockchain: background and policy issues , by chris jaikaran .

crs report r45664 , virtual currencies and money laundering: legal background , enforcement actions , and legislative proposals , by jay b. sykes and nicole vanatko .

crs in focus if10824 , financial innovation: "cryptocurrencies" , by david w. perkins , financial innovation: "cryptocurrencies" , by david w. perkins .

digital assets and capital formation crs report r46208 , digital assets and sec regulation , by eva su .

crs report r45221 , capital markets , securities offerings , and related policy issues , by eva su .

crs report r45301 , securities regulation and initial coin offerings: a legal primer , by jay b. sykes .

crs in focus if11004 , financial innovation: digital assets and initial coin offerings , by eva su .

high - frequency securities and derivatives trading crs report r44443 , high frequency trading: overview of recent developments , by rena s. miller and gary shorter .

crs report r43608 , high - frequency trading: background , concerns , and regulatory developments , by gary shorter and rena s. miller .

regulatory approaches and issues for congress crs report r46333 , fintech: overview of financial regulators and recent policy approaches , by andrew p. scott .

crs in focus if11195 , financial innovation: reducing fintech regulatory uncertainty , by david w. perkins , cheryl r. cooper , and eva su .

