t he global carbon cycle is the biogeochemical process by which the element carbon ( c ) moves in a balanced exchange between the atmosphere ( i.e. , air ) , terrestrial biosphere ( i.e. , land ) , ocean , and earth's crust ( i.e. , rocks , fossil fuel deposits ) .

within those pools , carbon exists in different inorganic ( i.e. , nonliving , such as carbon dioxide ) and organic ( i.e. , living , such as plant tissue ) forms .

when carbon moves out of one pool , it is recycled into one or more of the other pools ; this movement is known as a flux .

the flux of carbon into the atmosphere , particularly as the greenhouse gas ( ghg ) carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , is the dominant contributor to the observed warming trend in global temperatures .

consequently , climate mitigation strategies have generally focused on both reducing emissions of ghgs into the atmosphere and removing more carbon out of the atmosphere .

forests are a significant part of the global carbon cycle .

the forest carbon cycle consists primarily of the movement of carbon between the atmosphere and the terrestrial biosphere .

trees and other plants convert atmospheric carbon ( in the form of co 2 ) into terrestrial organic carbon , which is stored as biomass ( eg , vegetation ) .

this process of carbon uptake and storage is referred to as sequestration .

trees also release ( or emit ) carbon back into the atmosphere .

over time , however , forests accumulate significant stores of carbon , both above and below ground .

thus , forest ecosystems uptake , store , cycle , and release carbon .

congressional debates over climate policy have often included ideas for optimizing carbon sequestration in forests as a potential mitigation strategy for global warming .

to facilitate those debates , this report addresses basic questions concerning carbon sequestration in forests .

the first section describes the carbon cycle in forests , with an overview of where carbon is stored and how carbon moves through the forest ecosystem .

the second section provides a snapshot of data on carbon in u.s. forests and an overview of the methodologies used for estimating and reporting those measurements .

the third section discusses some of the broad issues and challenges associated with managing forests for carbon optimization .

figure 1 introduces some of the terms and units used for measuring and reporting carbon .

in addition , the appendix contains a more comprehensive glossary of relevant terms used throughout the report .

an accompanying report , crs report r46313 , u.s. forest carbon data: in brief , provides data on carbon in u.s. forests and will be maintained with annual updates .

figure 1 .

carbon terms and unitssource: crs , adapted from maria janowiak et al. , considering forest and grassland carbon in land management , u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) forest service , gtr - wo - 95 , june 2017 , p. 4.notes: because much of the data for this report are based on international standards , this report uses the metric system for consistency purposes .

forest carbon stocks are reported as measures of carbon , whereas greenhouse gas emissions and removals ( eg , sequestration ) are reported as measures of carbon dioxide or carbon dioxide equivalents ( to facilitate comparisons with other greenhouse gases ) .

as a chemical element , the mass of carbon is based on its molecular weight .

carbon dioxide ( co2 ) is a compound consisting of one part carbon and two parts of the element oxygen ( o ) .

the conversion factor between c and co2 is the ratio of their molecular weights .

the molecular weight of carbon is 12 atomic mass units ( amu ) , and the molecular weight of co2 is 44 amu , which equals a ratio of 3.67 .

the same method is used to convert measurements of other greenhouse gases to carbon dioxide equivalents ( co2 eq .

 ) .

forests are a significant part of the global carbon cycle , in that they contain the largest store of terrestrial carbon and are continuously cycling carbon between the terrestrial biosphere and the atmosphere .

through photosynthesis , trees use sunlight to sequester carbon from the atmosphere and accumulate organic carbon - based molecules in their plant tissue ( i.e. , leaves , flowers , stems , and roots ) above and below ground .

trees also respire: they use oxygen to break down the molecules they created through photosynthesis , and in the process they emit co 2 to the atmosphere .

the balance between photosynthesis and respiration varies daily and seasonally .

over time , individual trees and forests accrue significant stores of carbon .

when trees die , the accumulated carbon is released , some into the soil ( where it may be stored for millennia ) and the rest into the atmosphere .

this release can occur quickly , through combustion in a fire , or slowly , as fallen trees , leaves , and other detritus decompose .

some of the woody biomass from a tree may continue to store carbon for extended periods of time after death , due to long decomposition times or because it was removed ( eg , harvested ) from the forest ecosystem and used , for example , in construction or in manufactured products .

the carbon in harvested wood products eventually will be released , but the time scale varies considerably .

the amount of carbon sequestered in a forest is constantly changing with growth , death , and decomposition of vegetation .

if the total amount of carbon released into the atmosphere is greater than the amount of carbon being sequestered in the forest , the forest is a net source of co 2 emissions .

if the forest sequesters more carbon than it releases into the atmosphere , the forest is a net sink of co 2 .

whether a given forest is a net source or sink , however , depends on the time and spatial scale ( eg , geographic boundaries ) considered .

globally , forests are estimated to be a net carbon sink , with regional variations .

the following sections describe in more detail where carbon is stored and how it moves in a forest ecosystem , as well as how ecological events and anthropogenic ( i.e. , human - caused ) activities and changing land uses can influence the balance and cycle of carbon ( eg , the forest carbon budget ) .

the following sections provide data on the annual amount of carbon stored in u.s. forest pools ( eg , carbon stocks ) and the net amount of carbon that flows in or out of u.s. forests annually ( eg , carbon flux ) .

first , however , is a brief discussion of the methodology used to estimate and measure forest carbon .

the data are primarily derived from epa's annual inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks ( inventory ) for 2020 .

for purposes of this report , the data are intended only to provide context and complement the understanding of carbon dynamics in u.s. forests generally .

as such , the data in this report will not be updated in accordance with the publication of the annual inventory .

rather , an accompanying report , crs report r46313 , u.s. forest carbon data: in brief , will be updated to reflect the annual data published in the inventory and other sources .

because the methodologies used to estimate carbon measurements are constantly being refined , future iterations of the inventory may result in different stock and flux estimates for the years discussed in this report .

this section discusses policy issues related to managing forest carbon .

forests are generally managed for multiple reasons , often simultaneously .

for example , the forest service manages the national forest system under a congressional mandate to provide sustained yields of multiple uses , some of which may compete and require tradeoffs .

in many cases , optimizing carbon sequestration and storage could be one of many forest management objectives .

there are three primary strategic approaches for optimizing forest carbon sequestration and storage: ( 1 ) maintain or increase the area of forestland , ( 2 ) maintain or increase forest carbon stocks , and ( 3 ) increase the use of wood products .

the applicability of each approach will vary depending on existing site characteristics and land management objectives .

in addition , each of these approaches comes with varying levels of uncertainty related to effectiveness , potential for co - benefits , and tradeoffs .

maintai n or increase forest land area .

this approach involves avoiding and reducing deforestation and maintaining or increasing afforestation .

 ( this approach also could include increasing tree cover in urban areas , although the overall carbon benefits would be uncertain and likely highly variable based on site - specific characteristics. ) .

increasing forest area could provide a range of co - benefits ( eg , watershed protection , wildlife habitat ) , but in some cases it also could require substantial resources ( eg , fertilization , irrigation ) .

in addition , increasing forest area could require economic tradeoffs , such as income loss from reduced agricultural production in areas of increased afforestation , for example .

maintain or increase forest carbon stocks .

this approach involves managing forests to maximize tree growth potential , rehabilitating degraded forests , or otherwise mitigating potential carbon losses .

this could involve activities such as extending the time between timber harvests and / or implementing harvesting methods to increase the protection of remaining trees and soils .

this also could include restoring degraded forests whose biomass and soil carbon densities are less than their maximum potential value .

forest restoration could have additional benefits in terms of improving forest resilience to and recovery from ecological disturbances ( eg , mitigating the risk of catastrophic wildfires ) .

these activities all could require substantial resources ( eg , forest thinning , fertilization , irrigation ) and economic tradeoffs ( eg , loss of timber - related income ) .

increase use of wood products .

to have net impacts on the carbon balance , this approach requires substituting wood products as an alternative to materials that are more carbon intensive to produce ( eg , steel ) or using wood as a substitute for fossil fuel .

in some cases , these measures could require significant technological advances .

generally , a full lifecycle accounting of both products likely would be necessary to determine whether the use of wood generates net carbon benefits .

increasing the use of wood products could result in increased economic activity that incentivizes wood product innovation .

it also could result in forest management activities that reduce overall carbon storage potential ( eg , increasing , rather than decreasing , harvest cycles ) .

the above strategies share certain implementation issues and challenges .

one of the most fundamental challenges is determining whether an activity actually results in a net carbon benefit , which depends largely on the time and spatial scale of analysis .

any approach will encounter issues related to: p ermanence .

in this context , permanence means the extent the activities are reversible .

for example , is there potential for a new landowner to reverse previous management decisions and to nullify or reverse the carbon benefits of these practices ? .

this is especially an issue for private lands , which may change ownership status more frequently than public lands and forests .

ecological factors , such as a site's ability to recover post - disturbance , also may influence permanence .

l eakage .

the potential for changes in land management in one area to result in offsetting changes in another area is referred to as leakage .

for example , the afforestation of cropland in one area may result in the conversion of forestland to cropland in another to make up for the loss of agricultural production .

a dditional it y .

additionality is the extent the activity and associated carbon benefit would not have happened anyway .

for example , preserving an area to avoid deforestation is not additional if the forestland was not under threat of deforestation .

finally , all of these considerations are in the context of the uncertainty related to the future effects of changing climatic conditions on forests broadly .

the general scientific consensus is that , under most climate change scenarios , u.s. forests overall would likely continue to serve as a net carbon sink .

however , the strength of that sink would diminish over time and , under some scenarios , could reverse .

regionally , some forests could be net sources of carbon at various times .

part of the uncertainty related to how forests may adapt to climate change is because many of the potential effects are interrelated ( particularly in terms of ecological disturbances ) and because , in some scenarios , the various effects could amplify or counteract each other .

for example , more co 2 in the atmosphere could increase forest growth but also could result in drought conditions , which would inhibit forest growth .

another source of uncertainty is the maximum extent of u.s. forests .

after expanding steadily for several decades , the extent of u.s. forest area may have begun to plateau .

if forest area begins to decrease , then a net amount of carbon could be lost and u.s. forests would be expected to sequester less carbon annually .

if forest area expands further , however , then u.s. forests might be able to sequester more carbon moving forward .

finally , the carbon flux associated with u.s. forests is small relative to the amount of carbon stored in those forests , though u.s. forests offset 12% of ghg emissions in 2018 .

if u.s. forests sequester less carbon annually in the future , as predicted by some models , then u.s. forests would offset less ghg emissions and could potentially become a source of ghg emissions .

under such a scenario , even if ghg emissions were to remain constant at today's levels , the amount of atmospheric carbon would still increase .

thus , even minor shifts in carbon flux have the potential to significantly affect the nation's carbon balance and the overall global carbon cycle .

below is a glossary of selected terms used throughout this report .

most of the definitions are derived from several , interrelated sources , as listed below .

some terms may have a broad definition established through various international standards , which allow for the definition to be narrowed to fit national specifications .

in some cases , the definition has been edited for clarity .

food and agriculture organization of the united nations , global forest resources assessment 2020: terms and definitions , working paper 188 , 2018. international panel on climate change ( ipcc , which is the united nations body for assessing the science related to climate change ) , ipcc guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories , 2006 .

u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , epa inventory , 2020 , chapter 6 , "land use , land - use change , and forestry ( lulucf ) ," april 13 , 2020 .

forest service , the u.s. forest carbon accounting framework: stocks and stock change , 19902016 , gtr - nrs - 154 , november 2015 .

