the global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) is affecting communities around the world and throughout the united states , with case counts growing daily .

containment and mitigation efforts by federal , state , and local governments have been undertaken to "flatten the curve"—that is , to slow widespread transmission that could overwhelm the nation's health care system .

the families first coronavirus response act ( ffcra , p.l .

116-127 ) is the second of three comprehensive laws enacted specifically to support the response to the pandemic .

the first law , the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-123 ) , enacted on march 6 , 2020 , provides roughly $7.8 billion in discretionary supplemental appropriations to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of state , and the small business administration .

the law also authorizes the hhs secretary to temporarily waive certain telehealth restrictions to make telehealth services more available during the emergency .

the third law , the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security act ( cares act , p.l .

116-136 ) , was enacted on march 27 , 2020 .

in addition to a number of economic stimulus and other provisions , the cares act provides payment for or requires coverage of a covid - 19 vaccine , when available , for federal health care payment and services programs and most private health insurance plans ; it also provides appropriations to continue support for federal , state , and local public health efforts , and for federal purchase of covid - 19 vaccines .

the act also appropriates a $100 billion "provider relief fund" to assist health care facilities and providers facing revenue losses and uncompensated care as a result of the pandemic .

this crs report describes the health provisions included in ffcra as of the date of enactment , including relevant background information .

other divisions in the law contain provisions regarding hhs social services programs , federal nutrition programs , and other matters that are not within the scope of this crs report .

other crs reports summarize the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act , 2020 , and the cares act , and will link to this report as they become available .

some provisions described in this report have been amended by the cares act , and in such cases , footnotes reference the relevant crs expert who can answer questions about the amendments .

this report will not otherwise be updated or changed to reflect subsequent congressional or administrative action related to the ffcra health provisions .

the appendix contains a list of crs experts for follow - up on further developments .

this section describes the health care - related supplemental appropriations in ffcra division a for the defense health program , the veterans health administration , and hhs accounts , and applicable general provisions .

all such appropriations are designated as an emergency requirement and , as a result , are not constrained by the statutory discretionary spending limits ( often referred to as budget caps ) .

the defense health program ( dhp ) is an account in the department of defense budget that funds various functions of the military health system .

these functions include the provision of health care services , certain medical readiness activities , expeditionary medical capabilities , education and training programs , medical research , management and headquarters activities , facilities sustainment , procurement , and civilian personnel .

for fy2020 , congress appropriated $34.4 billion to the dhp .

ffcra appropriates an additional $82 million to the dhp for covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services outlined in ffcra section 6006 ( a ) .

 ( for a summary of this section , see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " section 6006 .

application with respect to tricare , coverage for veterans , and coverage for federal civilians ." ) .

the additional funds are designated as emergency spending and are to remain available until september 30 , 2022 .

the ihs within hhs is the lead federal agency charged with improving the health of american indians and alaska natives .

in fy2019 , ihs provided health care to approximately 2.6 million eligible american indians / alaska natives .

ihs's fy2020 appropriation was $6.1 billion , with $4.3 billion appropriated to the indian health services account , which supports the provision of clinical services and public health activities .

the services provided at ihs facilities vary , with some facilities providing inpatient services , laboratory testing services , and emergency care , while others focus on outpatient primary care services .

ihs does not offer a standard benefit package , nor is it required to cover certain services within its facilities or when it authorizes payment for services to its beneficiaries outside of the ihs system ( see " section 6007 .

coverage of testing for covid - 19 at no cost sharing for indians receiving purchased / referred care " ) .

ffcra appropriates an additional $64 million for covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services as specified in ffcra section 6007 .

 ( see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " section 6007 .

coverage of testing for covid - 19 at no cost sharing for indians receiving purchased / referred care ." ) .

the section also specifies that the additional funds are to be allocated at the discretion of the ihs director .

the additional funds are designated as emergency spending and are to remain available until september 30 , 2022 .

there is no federal assistance program designed purposefully to pay the uncompensated costs of health care for the uninsured and underinsured necessitated by a public health emergency or disaster .

in general , there has been no consensus that doing so should be a federal responsibility .

nonetheless , congress has provided appropriations for several limited mechanisms to address uncompensated health care costs in response to previous incidents .

the health care needs of uninsured and underinsured individuals and the financial pressures many individuals and their health care providers are facing during the covid - 19 outbreak have spurred congressional interest in these approaches .

among other forms of assistance , the cares act ( p.l .

116-136 ) appropriates a $100 billion "provider relief fund" to assist health care facilities and providers facing revenue losses and uncompensated care as a result of the pandemic .

ffcra uses the national disaster medical system ( ndms ) definitive care reimbursement program as the mechanism for federal payment for covid - 19 testing and related services for uninsured individuals .

historically , ndms has paid for health care items and services at between 100% and 110% of the applicable medicare rate , and the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) has processed payments .

to fund this approach , ffcra provides $1 billion to the public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) , an account used in appropriations acts to provide the hhs secretary with one - time or emergency funding , as well as annual funding for the office of the hhs assistance secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) .

covered covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related services are as defined in subsection 6001 ( a ) of the act .

 ( see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services ." ) .

an uninsured individual is defined , for purposes of this section , as someone who is not enrolled in ( 1 ) a federal health care program , as defined ; ( 2 ) a specified type of private health insurance plan ; or ( 3 ) fehb .

 ( see " definition of the uninsured " for more information. ) .

the additional funds are designated as emergency spending and are to remain available until expended .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the department of veterans' affairs ( va ) provides health care to eligible veterans and their dependents who meet certain criteria as authorized by law .

the vha is funded through five appropriations accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical community care , ( 3 ) medical support and compliance , ( 4 ) medical facilities , and ( 5 ) medical and prosthetic research .

the first four accounts provide funding for medical care for veterans .

ffcra provides $60 million in supplemental appropriations for fy2020 to the vha—$30 million for medical services and $30 million for medical community care—for covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services for visits for veterans .

 ( see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " veterans ." ) .

the additional funds are designated as emergency spending and are to remain available until september 30 , 2022 .

this title provides a reporting requirement ( section 1701 ) which states that each amount appropriated or made available by division a is in addition to amounts otherwise appropriated for the fiscal year involved ( section 1703 ) , and that unless otherwise provided , appropriations in division a are not available for obligation beyond fy2020 ( section 1704 ) .

title vii also includes section 1702 .

this section was repealed in its entirety by section 18115 of the cares act ( p.l .

116-136 ) , which replaced it with a requirement for all laboratories carrying out covid - 19 testing to report testing data to hhs , as specified .

an explanation of the repealed provision is provided here , for completeness .

generally , laboratories report testing results for specified diseases and conditions ( called notifiable conditions ) directly to state or territorial ( jurisdictional ) health departments , pursuant to requirements in jurisdictional law .

through its national notifiable diseases surveillance system ( nndss ) , the hhs centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) works with jurisdictions and the council of state and territorial epidemiologists ( cste ) to track national notifiable conditions , mostly infectious diseases and some noninfectious conditions ( eg , lead poisoning ) .

usually , such data are provided to cdc voluntarily .

covid - 19 is a reportable disease in all reporting jurisdictions , and cdc receives data on covid - 19 cases and laboratory test results through nndss from all jurisdictions , as well as directly from some commercial laboratories .

in addition , the fda often includes , as a condition of an emergency use authorization ( eua ) , the requirement that laboratories carrying out the eua test comply with all relevant state and local reporting requirements .

ffcra section 1702 would have required all states and local governments receiving funding under division a to report real - time and aggregated data on both testing ( tests performed ) and test results to the respective state emergency operations center .

these data would then have been transmitted to the cdc .

this section describes all of the provisions included in ffcra division f. some provisions described below have been amended by the cares act ; in such cases , foot n otes reference the relevant crs expert who can answer questions about the amendment s .

in some cases , the amendments made by the cares act are substantial , in which case , the footnote may also provide a brief description of the amendment .

private health insurance is the predominant source of health insurance coverage in the united states .

in general , consumers may obtain individual health insurance coverage directly from an insurer , or they may enroll in a group health plan through their employer or another sponsor .

group health plan sponsors may finance coverage themselves ( self - insure ) or purchase ( fully insured ) coverage from an insurer .

covered benefits and consumer costs may vary by plan , subject to applicable federal and state requirements .

the federal government may regulate all the coverage types noted above , and states may regulate all but self - insured group plans .

federal and state requirements may vary by coverage type .

some federal requirements apply to all coverage types noted above , while other federal requirements only apply to certain coverage types .

prior to the enactment of ffcra , there were no federal requirements specifically mandating private health insurance coverage of items or services related to covid - 19 testing .

in recent weeks , some states have announced relevant coverage requirements , and some insurers have clarified or expanded their policies to include relevant coverage .

ffcra newly requires most private health insurance plans to cover covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services ( see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " ) .

the coverage must be provided without consumer cost - sharing , including deductibles , copayments , or coinsurance .

prior authorization or other utilization management requirements are prohibited .

these requirements apply to individual health insurance coverage and to group plans , whether fully insured or self - insured .

this includes plans sold on and off the individual and small group exchanges .

per the definition of individual health insurance coverage cited in the act , the requirements do not apply to short - term , limited - duration plans .

the requirements do apply to grandfathered plans , which are individual or group plans in which at least one individual was enrolled as of enactment of the aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) , and that continue to meet certain criteria .

plans that maintain their grandfathered status are exempt from some federal requirements , but ffcra specifies that section 6001 applies to them .

the coverage requirements in this act apply only to the specified items and services that are furnished during the emergency period described in the act ( see " duration of emergency period " ) , as of the date of enactment ( march 18 , 2020 ) .

subsection ( b ) states that the secretaries of hhs , labor , and the treasury are required to enforce this section's provisions as if the provisions were incorporated into the phsa , employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) , and internal revenue code ( irc ) , respectively .

subsection ( c ) states that those secretaries also have authority to implement the provisions of this section "through sub - regulatory guidance , program instruction , or otherwise. .

cbo preliminarily estimates that section 6001 will decrease federal revenues by $4 million and increase federal outlays by $7 million over the fy2020–fy2022 period .

medicare part b covers physicians' services , outpatient hospital services , durable medical equipment , and other medical services .

most physicians , providers , and practitioners are subject to limits on amounts they can bill beneficiaries for covered services , and they can bill the beneficiary for only the 20% coinsurance of the medicare payment rate plus any unmet deductible .

part b also covers outpatient clinical laboratory tests provided by medicare - participating laboratories , such as certain blood tests , urinalysis , and some screening tests , including the test for the coronavirus that causes covid - 19 .

these services may be furnished by labs located in hospitals and physician offices , as well as by independent labs .

beneficiaries have no coinsurance , co - payments , or deductibles for covered clinical lab services .

ffcra eliminates the medicare part b beneficiary cost - sharing for provider visits during which a coronavirus diagnostic test is administered or ordered during the emergency period ( see " duration of emergency period " ) .

beneficiaries are not responsible for any coinsurance payments or deductibles for any specified covid - 19 testing - related service , defined as a medical visit that falls within the evaluation and management service codes for the following categories: office and other outpatient services ; hospital observation services ; emergency department services ; nursing facility services ; domiciliary , rest home , or custodial care services ; home services ; or online digital evaluation and management services .

the elimination of beneficiary cost - sharing for covid - 19 testing - related services applies to medicare payment under the hospital outpatient prospective payment system , the physician fee schedule , the prospective payment system for federally qualified health centers , the outpatient hospital system payment system , and the rural health clinic services payment system .

the hhs secretary is to provide appropriate claims coding modifiers to identify the services for which beneficiary cost - sharing is waived .

the hhs secretary is allowed to implement this section by program instruction or otherwise .

cbo preliminarily estimates that enacting sections 6002 and 6003 will increase direct spending by $6.7 billion over the fy2020-fy2022 period .

medicare advantage ( ma ) is an alternative way for medicare beneficiaries to receive covered benefits .

under ma , private health plans are paid a per - person monthly amount to provide all medicare - covered benefits ( except hospice ) to beneficiaries who enroll in their plan .

in general , cost sharing ( copayments and coinsurance ) under an ma plan must be actuarially equivalent to cost sharing under original medicare , but cost sharing for a specific item or service may vary from amounts required under original medicare .

private plans may use different techniques to influence the medical care used by enrollees , such as requiring enrollees to receive a referral to see specialists , or requiring prior approval or authorization from the plan before a service will be paid for .

ffcra requires ma plans to cover covid - 19 testing , the administration of the test , and related items and services during the emergency period ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

plans are prohibited from charging cost sharing for those items and services , and are prohibited from using prior authorization or other utilization management techniques , with respect to the coverage of the test or ancillary services .

the hhs secretary is allowed to implement this section by program instruction or otherwise .

cbo preliminarily estimates that enacting sections 6002 and 6003 will increase direct federal spending by $6.7 billion over the fy2020-fy2022 period .

medicaid is a federal - state program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports , to a diverse low - income population .

medicaid is financed jointly by the federal government and the states .

states must follow broad federal rules to receive federal matching funds , but they have flexibility to design their own versions of medicaid within the federal statute's basic framework .

this flexibility results in variability across state medicaid programs .

medicaid coverage includes a variety of primary and acute - care services , as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) .

not all medicaid enrollees have access to the same set of services .

an enrollee's eligibility pathway determines the available services within a benefit package .

most medicaid beneficiaries receive services in the form of what is called traditional medicaid .

in general , under traditional medicaid coverage , state medicaid programs must cover specific required services listed in statute ( eg , inpatient and outpatient hospital services , physician's services , or laboratory and x - ray services ) and may elect to cover certain optional services ( eg , prescription drugs , case management , or physical therapy services ) .

under alternative benefit plans ( abps ) , by contrast , states must provide comprehensive benefit coverage that is based on a coverage benchmark rather than a list of discrete items and services , as under traditional medicaid .

coverage under an abp must include at least the essential health benefits ( ehbs ) that most plans in the private health insurance market are required to furnish .

states that choose to implement the aca medicaid expansion are required to provide abp coverage to the individuals eligible for medicaid through the expansion ( with exceptions for selected special - needs subgroups ) , and are permitted to extend such coverage to other groups .

beneficiary cost sharing ( eg , premiums and co - payments ) is limited under the medicaid program .

states can require certain beneficiaries to share in the cost of medicaid services , but there are limits on ( 1 ) the amounts that states can impose , ( 2 ) the beneficiary groups that can be required to pay , and ( 3 ) the services for which cost sharing can be charged .

the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) is a federal - state program that provides health coverage to uninsured children and certain pregnant women with annual family income too high to qualify for medicaid .

chip is jointly financed by the federal government and states , and is administered by the states .

like medicaid , the federal government sets basic requirements for chip , but states have the flexibility to design their own version of chip within the federal government's framework .

as a result , chip programs vary significantly from state to state .

states may design their chip programs as ( 1 ) a chip medicaid expansion , ( 2 ) a separate chip program , or ( 3 ) a combination approach , where the state operates a chip medicaid expansion and one or more separate chip programs concurrently .

chip benefit coverage and cost - sharing rules depend on program design .

chip medicaid expansions must follow the federal medicaid rules for benefits and cost sharing .

for separate chip programs , the benefits are permitted to look more like private health insurance , and states may impose cost sharing , such as premiums or enrollment fees , with a maximum allowable amount that is tied to annual family income .

regardless of the choice of program design , all states must cover emergency services , well - baby and well - child care including age - appropriate immunizations , and dental services .

ffcra adds covid - 19 testing and related services the list of medicaid mandatory services under traditional medicaid benefits for the period beginning march 18 , 2020 , through the duration of the public health emergency as declared by the hhs secretary pursuant to section 319 of the phsa ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

states and territories are prohibited from charging beneficiary cost sharing for such testing , or for testing - related state plan services furnished during this period .

ffcra also permits states to extend covid - 19 testing , testing - related state plan services , testing - related visit and the administration of the testing without cost sharing ( as referenced earlier in this provision ) to uninsured individuals during the specified public health emergency period .

for the purposes of this provision , uninsured individuals are defined as those who are not medicaid - eligible under one of medicaid's mandatory eligibility pathways ( eg , the poverty - related pregnant women and child pathways , or the aca medicaid expansion pathway ) , and who are not enrolled in ( 1 ) a federal health care program ( eg , medicare , medicaid , chip , or tricare ) ; ( 2 ) a specified type of private health insurance plan ( eg , individual health insurance coverage and group plans , whether fully insured or self - insured ) ; or ( 3 ) fehb ( see " definition of the uninsured " ) .

the law provides 100% federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap or federal matching rate ) for medical assistance and administrative costs associated with uninsured individuals who are eligible for medicaid under this provision .

the law also requires chip programs ( regardless of program design ) to cover covid - 19 testing for chip enrollees for the period beginning march 18 , 2020 , through the duration of the public health emergency period as specified ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

states are prohibited from charging beneficiary cost sharing for such testing , or for testing - related visits furnished to chip enrollees during this period .

cbo preliminarily estimates that section 6004 will increase direct federal spending by a total of $1.9 billion in fy2020 and fy2021 .

in 2005 congress passed the public readiness and emergency preparedness act ( prep act ) , which authorizes the federal government to waive liability ( except for willful misconduct ) for manufacturers , distributors , and providers of medical countermeasures , such as drugs and medical supplies , that are needed to respond to a public health emergency .

the act also authorizes the federal government to establish a program to compensate eligible individuals who suffer injuries from administration or use of products covered by the prep act's immunity provisions .

ffcra explicitly adds to the list of prep act - covered countermeasures any personal respiratory protective device that is ( 1 ) approved by the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) ; ( 2 ) subject to an emergency use authorization ( eua ) ; and ( 3 ) used for the covid - 19 response , retroactive from january 27 , 2020 , and through october 1 , 2024 .

the cares act , section 3103 , amends this provision to define a covered personal respiratory protective device as one that "is approved by [niosh] , and that the secretary determines to be a priority for use during a public health emergency declared under section 319. .

this amendment removes the requirement for an fda authorization and extends prep act authority to these devices during both the covid - 19 emergency period and any future public health emergencies declared pursuant to phsa section 319 .

cbo did not provide an estimate of this provision .

under chapter 55 of title 10 , u.s. code , the department of defense administers a statutory health entitlement to approximately 9.5 million beneficiaries ( i.e. , servicemembers , military retirees , and family members ) .

these entitlements are delivered through the military health system ( mhs ) , which offers health care services in military hospitals and clinics—known as military treatment facilities—and through civilian health care providers participating in tricare .

with the exception of active duty servicemembers , mhs beneficiaries may have a choice of tricare plan options depending on their status and geographic location .

each plan option has different beneficiary cost - sharing features , including annual enrollment fees , deductibles , copayments , and an annual catastrophic cap .

ffcra requires the secretary of defense to waive any tricare cost - sharing requirements related to covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services provided during an associated health care office , urgent care , or emergency department visits during the emergency period ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

all veterans enrolled in the va health care system are eligible for a standard medical package that includes laboratory services .

currently , some veterans are required to pay copayments for medical services and outpatient medications related to the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

any health service or medication provided in connection to the treatment of a service - connected condition or disability is always furnished without cost sharing .

in addition , the va does not charge copayments for preventive screenings , such as those for infectious diseases ; cancers ; heart and vascular diseases ; mental health conditions and substance abuse ; metabolic , obstetric , and gynecological conditions ; and vision disorders , as well as regular recommended immunizations .

generally , laboratory services are also expressly exempt from copayment requirements .

ffcra requires the va secretary to waive any copayment or other cost - sharing requirements related to covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services for visits during the emergency period ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

the fehb program provides health insurance to federal employees , retirees , and their dependents .

cost - sharing requirements ( eg , deductibles , co - payments , and coinsurance amounts ) vary by plans participating in the fehb program .

for some services , such as the preventive care services outlined in the aca , plans are not allowed to impose cost sharing .

ffcra requires that no federal civil servants enrolled in a health benefits plan or fehb enrollees may be required to pay a copayment or other cost sharing related to covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , related items and services for visits during the emergency period ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

ihs provides health care to eligible american indians / alaska natives either directly or through facilities and programs operated by indian tribes or tribal organizations through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts authorized in the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) .

ihs also provides services to urban indians through grants or contracts to urban indian organizations ( uios ) .

the services provided vary by facility , and ihs does not offer a standard benefit package , nor is it required to cover certain services that its beneficiaries may receive at facilities outside of ihs .

when services are not available at an ihs facility , the ihs facilities may authorize payment through the purchased referred care program ( prc ) .

generally , prc requires prior approval except in cases of emergency .

prc funds are limited , and as such , not all prc claims are authorized and prc is not available to uios .

to be authorized , claims must meet medical priority levels , individuals must not be eligible for another source of coverage ( eg , medicaid or private health insurance ) , and individuals must live in certain geographic areas .

ffcra requires ihs to pay for the cost of covid - 19 testing and related items and services , as described in section 6001 ( a ) , without any cost - sharing requirements , from the date of enactment ( i.e. , march 18 , 2020 ) throughout the emergency period ( see the sections " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " and " duration of emergency period " ) .

this requirement applies to any indian receiving services through the ihs including through uios .

it also specifies that the requirement to waive cost - sharing requirements applies regardless of whether the testing and related services were authorized through prc .

medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states .

the federal government's share of a state's expenditures for most medicaid services is called the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rate , which varies by state and is designed so that the federal government pays a larger portion of medicaid costs in states with lower per capita incomes relative to the national average ( and vice versa for states with higher per capita incomes ) .

exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

in the past , there were two temporary fmap exceptions to provide states with fiscal relief due to recessions .

they were provided through the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( jrtrra , p.l .

108-27 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

to be eligible for both of these temporary fmap increases , states had to abide by some requirements .

these requirements varied in the two fmap increases , but for both increases , states were required to maintain medicaid "eligibility standards , methodologies , and procedures" and ensure that local governments did not pay a larger percentage of the state's nonfederal medicaid expenditures than otherwise would have been required .

ffcra provides an increase to the fmap rate for all states , the district of columbia , and the territories of 6.2 percentage points for each calendar quarter occurring during the period beginning on the first day of the emergency period ( i.e. , january 1 , 2020 ) and ending on the last day of the calendar quarter in which the last day of the public health emergency period ends ( see " duration of emergency period " ) .

states , the district of columbia , and the territories will not receive this fmap rate increase if ( 1 ) the state's medicaid "eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures" are more restrictive than what was in effect on january 1 , 2020 ; ( 2 ) the amount of premiums imposed by the state exceeds the amount as of january 1 , 2020 ; ( 3 ) the state does not maintain eligibility for individuals enrolled in medicaid on the date of enactment ( i.e. , march 18 , 2020 ) or for individuals who enroll during the emergency period through the end of the month in which the emergency period ends ( unless the individual requests a voluntary termination of eligibility or the individual ceases to be a resident of the state ) ; or ( 4 ) the state does not provide coverage ( without the imposition of cost sharing ) for any testing services and treatments for covid - 19 ( including vaccines , specialized equipment , and therapies ) .

ffcra adds another condition for the fmap rate increase .

specifically , states , the district of columbia , and the territories cannot require local governments to fund a larger percentage of the state's nonfederal medicaid expenditures for the medicaid state plan or medicaid disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments than what was required on march 11 , 2020 .

cbo preliminarily estimates that section 6008 will increase direct spending by about $50.0 billion over the fy2020-fy2022 period .

medicaid financing for the territories ( i.e. , america samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands ) is different than the financing for the 50 states and the district of columbia .

federal medicaid funding to the states and the district of columbia is open - ended , but the medicaid programs in the territories are subject to annual federal capped funding .

federal medicaid funding for the territories comes from different sources .

the permanent source of federal medicaid funding for the territories is the annual capped funding .

currently , the medicaid annual capped funding for the territories is supplemented by additional funding for fy2020 and fy2021 that was provided through the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

ffcra increases the additional funding available for each territory for fy2020 and fy2021 .

the aggregate additional funding for the territories increases from $3.0 billion to $3.1 billion for fy2020 and $3.1 billion to $3.2 billion for fy2021 .

cbo preliminarily estimates that section 6009 increases the allotment amount , and thus direct spending , by $204 million over the fy2020-fy2021 period .

medicare coverage under part b ( fee - for - service ) for telehealth services is defined under ssa sec .

1834 ( m ) , which places certain conditions on such care including who can furnish and be paid for the service , where the patient is located ( the originating site ) , where the physician is located ( the distant site ) , and the types of services that are covered .

recent legislation has modified some of the conditions under which telehealth services may be furnished under medicare .

the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

116-123 ) , division b , sec .

102 , added certain medicare telehealth restrictions to the list of applicable conditions for which the secretary could temporarily waive or modify program requirements or regulations during the covid - 19 emergency period .

 ( see " duration of emergency period ". ) .

the provision also defined a qualified telehealth provider , requiring a prior relationship within the past three years between the patient and the provider under medicare .

ffcra expands the definition of a qualified provider to include those who had provider - patient relationships within the past three years outside of medicare .

below is a list of the health care provisions in ffcra with the name and contact information for the crs expert on that provision .

in some cases , more than one expert contributed to a section , in which case their topics of expertise are also included .

