the covid - 19 pandemic is a complex and devastating shock to the global economy .

the virus has spread to around the world and combatting the pandemic has shut down large portions of the economy .

the pandemic has roiled stock markets , upended oil and other commodity markets , created mass unemployment , disrupted trade , resulted in shortages of food and medical supplies , and threatened the solvency of businesses and governments around the world .

the world food program warns that the number of people suffering acute hunger could almost double by the end of the year without swift international action .

in april 2020 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) cautioned that covid - 19 will likely be the worst recession since the great depression , far worse than the recession following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .

governments have undertaken extraordinary fiscal and monetary measures to combat the crisis .

however , low - and middle - income countries that are constrained by limited financial resources and weak health systems are particularly vulnerable .

in april 2020 , the imf forecast that developing and emerging - market countries could contract by at least 1% in 2020 ; six months earlier the projection was 4.5% growth ( figure 1 ) .

additionally , the covid - 19 pandemic has triggered capital flight from emerging markets on an unprecedented scale , exacerbating the fiscal challenges facing these governments ( figure 1 ) .

many developing countries are turning to the international financial institutions ( ifis ) , including the imf , the world bank , and the regional multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) , for financial support , and the ifis are working quickly to mobilize their existing financial resources .

the imf has pledged to use its current $1 trillion lending capacity if necessary , and the mdbs have pledged to mobilize $240 billion over the next 15 months .

in march 2020 , congress accelerated authorizations under consideration in the fy2021 budget request to increase funding to the imf , two world bank lending facilities , and two african development bank lending facilities ( p.l .

116-136 ) .

multilateral discussions are underway to increase further the ifi's ability to support countries responding to the pandemic .

further congressional action would be required to implement some of the proposals under consideration .

the imf and the world bank have called for a debt standstill for low - income countries , during which those countries could suspend debt service payments and instead devote their funds to the exigencies of the pandemic .

on april 15 , 2020 , the g - 20 donor countries in conjunction with the private sector agreed to a debt standstill through the end of 2020 .

some policy experts and policymakers in developing countries are calling for additional debt relief given the severity of the crisis for low - income countries .

no legislation is required to implement the april 15 agreement , but congressional action would be required for any permanent u.s. debt relief or contributions to finance debt relief provided by the world bank or other mdbs .

the path to the suspension of debt payments for ida countries took some time to gain momentum .

most donors prefer to coordinate debt relief efforts so the resources made available from debt relief can be used to benefit the developing country rather than be used to repay other creditors .

debt relief by donor governments has traditionally been organized by the paris club , an informal group of creditor countries , including the united states , whose origins can be traced back to the 1950s .

the paris club does not include china , which has in recent years emerged as a major creditor to developing countries and whose lending terms are opaque .

china has resisted international efforts to increase debt transparency through the imf and the world bank , and has been reluctant to set a precedent for widespread debt forgiveness .

at their first emergency teleconference summit on march 26 , the g - 20 leaders stopped short of providing the requested debt relief , but pledged to "continue to address risks of debt vulnerabilities in low - income countries due to the pandemic. .

negotiations continued and on april 15 , 2020 , the g - 20 finance ministers announced the debt service suspension initiative ( dssi ) , a temporary suspension of debt payments until the end of the year for the world's poorest countries ( those eligible for ida assistance ) .

the institute of international finance ( iif ) , a group that represents about 450 banks , hedge funds , and other global financial funds , concurrently announced that private creditors will join the debt relief effort on a voluntary basis .

this debt standstill potentially frees up more than $20 billion for these countries to spend on improving their health systems and fighting the pandemic , including $12 billion in payments to official creditors ( governments ) and $8 billion in payments to private creditors .

the standstill is to run from may 1 , 2020 through december 31 , 2020 .

repayment schedules are to be net present value neutral , meaning that no debt is actually written off , but rather rescheduled to be paid later .

the g - 20 decided that the dssi would apply to the 76 countries designated by the world bank as eligible for ida assistance , as well as angola , which is not eligible for ida assistance but is designated by the united nations as one of the world's least developed countries ( ldc ) .

according to estimates by iif , total external debt in dssi countries exceeds $750 billion .

this number may actually be much higher , however , since china and many other creditors do not publicly disclose the scale and scope of their external lending .

debt owed to the united states by dssi countries is approximately $7.7 billion ( figure 5 ) .

since the current proposal only provides debt rescheduling and not debt cancellation , it does not require u.s. legislation .

some advocates , however , are calling for debt forgiveness , which has been provided in the past .

in this case , authorizations and appropriations would be necessary .

the procedure for budgeting and accounting for any u.s. debt relief is based on the method used to value u.s. loans and guarantees provided in the federal credit reform act of 1990 .

since passage of the act , u.s. government agencies are required to value u.s. loans , such as bilateral debt owed to the united states , on a net present value basis rather than at their face value , and an appropriation by congress of the estimated amount of debt relief is required in advance of any debt relief taking place .

prior to the passage of the act , neither budget authority nor appropriations were required for official debt relief .

bilateral debt ( and other federal commitments ) were accounted for on a cash - flow basis , which credits income as it is received and expenses as they are paid .

for fy2021 , the administration had requested authorizations to increase funding for several ifis .

in march 2020 , congress enacted these authorizations in the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security act ( cares act , p.l .

116-136 ) .

the authorizations include: $38 billion for a supplemental fund at the imf ( the new arrangements to borrow , or nab ) ; $3 billion for the nineteenth replenishment of world bank's ida resources ; $7.3 billion for the seventh capital increase at the african development bank ; and $513.9 million for the fifteenth replenishment of resources at the african development bank's concessional lending facility , the african development fund .

given the size and scope of the financing needs faced by developing and emerging economies , policy experts and policymakers considering several unusual policy options to further bolster the ifi response .

these options , including stretching mdb lending using current resources , imf gold sales , imf policies to bolster global liquidity , and further multilateral debt relief , are discussed in greater detail below , as well as any legislation that would be required for u.s. participation in such efforts .

the ifis are mobilizing resources on an unprecedented scale to respond to the covid - 19 pandemic and ensuing economic crisis .

to respond to what the imf is projecting as the largest economic downturn since the great depression , multilateral efforts for debt relief are also underway .

some policy experts and policymakers are calling for additional policies to bolster the ifi response , as well as for further multilateral coordination on debt relief for low - income countries .

the role of the ifis in responding to the covid - 19 pandemic raises a number of potential policy questions for congress .

these include the following .

do the ifis have sufficient resources to respond to the covid - 19 pandemic ? .

does the united states support mobilization of additional resources , and if so , through what mechanisms ? .

developing countries face a variety of financing needs , including funding the immediate public health response , broad budgetary support , and liquidity support .

how should the ifis prioritize their financial assistance ? .

how should ifi assistance be allocated across countries ? .

how might coordination and coherence of covid - 19 responses among ifis and donor governments be handled ? .

many ifis are focused on the rapid disbursement of financial assistance .

what is the trade - off between streamlining approval processes and maintaining due diligence to protect ifi resources ? .

is there oversight of how the resources from debt relief are used ? .

do the ifis have sufficient staffing to process high volumes of financial assistance ? .

china has emerged as a major creditor in recent years , but the terms of its lending are opaque .

do the ifis have sufficient access to the information needed to assess the financing needs of developing countries and emerging markets ? .

would any ifi assistance be used to pay off china debt in certain countries ? .

while the current focus is on getting resources quickly to the poor and least developed countries , the imf is drawing attention to large project increases in debt / gdp ratios for many countries .

what is the administration's position on a new round of multilateral debt forgiveness ? .

how is the administration engaging on developing - country debt with official institutions and the private sector ? .

what is the administration's plan for debt relief negotiations with creditor governments outside of the paris club group of creditors ? .

what is the appropriate balance between ifi financing and debt relief in the covid - 19 response ? .

in what context is one policy more useful ? .

how might the disbursement of ifi financial assistance be impacted by an inability to reach multilateral agreement on debt relief ? .

developing and emerging economies are facing immediate financing needs to grapple with the spread of covid - 19 , and economic recovery from the pandemic may take years .

how should the ifis assess the capacity of countries to repay ifi loans given the short - , medium - , and long - term impacts of the covid - 19 pandemic ? .

