on february 10 , 2020 , the trump administration proposed its fy2021 budget for the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) accounts , totaling $44.12 billion ( including $158.90 million in mandatory retirement funds ) .

sfops funding typically represents about 1% of the annual federal budget and supports a wide range of u.s. activities around the world , including the operations of u.s. embassies , diplomatic activities , educational and cultural exchanges , development , security , and humanitarian assistance , and u.s. participation in multilateral organizations .

figure 1 shows funding for different sfops components based on fy2020 budget authority estimates , relative to each other and to the broader federal budget .

the administration's request is about 3% higher than the fy2020 request for sfops accounts but nearly 23% below the fy2020 sfops funding level enacted by congress , including supplemental funds to help combat the covid - 19 epidemic globally .

the trump administration has consistently requested far less sfops funding than congress has appropriated .

this is a reversal from the obama administration , when congress typically provided less total sfops funding than was requested , though the gap narrowed over time during obama's terms ( table 1 ) .

if enacted , the requested sfops funding level would be the lowest in over a decade ( figure 2 ) .

congressional action on sfops and other fy2021 appropriations has been delayed to an uncertain degree by disruption of congressional activity related to the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic .

congress held some hearings on the fy2021 budget request before all hearings were postponed in march 2020 .

subcommittee allocations have not been formally established , nor has sfops legislation been introduced for fy2021 .

the fy2021 request would cut funding for the department of state and related agency appropriations accounts to $14.03 billion , down 18.9% from an enacted fy2020 level of $17.31 billion ( including $588 million in covid - 19 supplemental funds ) .

the administration's request does not include funds to support the state department's response to the covid - 19 pandemic .

to date , congress has provided all state department operations funding for covid - 19-related matters through two fy2020 supplemental appropriations acts ( p.l .

116-123 and p.l .

116-136 ) .

the administration's stated priorities for funding provided via department of state and related agency accounts in fy2021 include supporting the indo - pacific strategy ; countering chinese , russian , and iranian malign influence ; protecting u.s. government personnel , facilities , and data assets ; and maintaining american leadership in international organizations while asking other nations to increase their support .

table 2 provides a comparative breakout of the administration's state department and related agency request , by account .

the foreign operations accounts in the sfops appropriation compose the majority of u.s. foreign assistance included in the international affairs budget ; the remainder is enacted in the agriculture appropriation , which provides funding for the food for peace act , title ii and mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition programs .

the administration's fy2021 foreign operations request totals $30.09 billion , representing a 3.7% increase from the administration's fy2020 request and a 25.7% decrease from fy2020-enacted levels .

total foreign assistance requested for fy2021 , including the food assistance funds provided in the agriculture appropriation , would represent a 29.1% reduction from fy2020-enacted levels .

the administration's budget request articulates five primary goals for u.s. foreign assistance that are meant to align with both the national security strategy and the state - usaid joint strategic plan: prioritize global strategic challenges , including countering chinese , russian , and iranian influence ; support strategic partners and allies , including israel , egypt , jordan , colombia , and venezuela ; enhance commitment to long - term development ; strengthen key areas of u.s. leadership , to include global health and humanitarian assistance ; and advance u.s. national security and economic interests .

these goals are also meant to guide the administration's regional thematic priorities ( see " country and regional assistance " ) , as well as how funds are allocated across assistance types .

the administration's fy2021 budget request proposes cuts in nearly all assistance types ( table 5 ) .

the only exception is export promotion assistance , which would see a significant increase .

this increase is largely due to proposed funding for the new u.s. development finance corporation ( dfc ) , which the administration states represents an "expansion of the role of development finance in advancing u.s. interests around the world," and an estimated increase in offsetting collections from the export - import bank .

consistent with prior year funding and the fy2020 enacted levels , proposed funding for global health programs , humanitarian assistance , and security assistance comprises approximately two - thirds of the $30.09 billion fy2021 foreign operations budget request ( figure 3 ) .

the total fy2021 request for the global health programs ( ghp ) account is nearly $6.00 billion , representing a 5.4% reduction from the fy2020 budget request and a 37.5% reduction from the fy2020-enacted level , including supplemental appropriations .

when compared with fy2020-enacted levels before enactment of supplemental funding for covid - 19 , all but one ghp subaccount would be reduced under the budget proposal ( table 6 ) .

budget documents indicate that the increase to pandemic influenza funding ( when compared with fy2020-enacted appropriations prior to the covid - 19 supplemental funding ) would include a $25.00 million deposit of nonexpiring funds to replenish the emergency reserve fund for rapid response to infectious disease outbreaks .

observers have expressed concern about the potential cessation of usaid's predict - ii pandemic preparedness program in march 2020 .

the administration does not indicate in the budget request , nor has it specified in any public fora , whether predict - ii will be continued .

however , the university of california , davis—one of predict - ii's implementing organizations—has reportedly received additional funding from usaid to extend predict - ii and continue related work through the "one health workforce—next generation" project .

requested cuts to ghp subaccounts range from 8.0% for malaria programs to 100% for usaid's hiv / aids and vulnerable children subaccounts .

the administration asserts that despite its proposed reduction to hiv / aids funding , the requested level would be sufficient to maintain treatment for all current recipients .

the proposal also reflects the administration's effort to limit u.s. contributions to the global fund—an international financing mechanism for efforts to combat aids , tuberculosis , and malaria—to 25% of all donations , rather than the 33% limit that the united states has provided since the george w. bush administration .

as noted above , the administration's fy2021 request does not include funds for covid - 19 , because the request was prepared prior to the outbreak .

congress enacted , and the president signed into law , three supplemental appropriations acts for covid - 19 preparedness and response in march ( p.l .

116-123 , p.l .

116-127 , and p.l .

116-136 ) .

as of this report's publishing , the administration has not submitted a request for additional fy2021 funds to combat the virus .

the fy2021 budget request for humanitarian assistance is nearly $6.27 billion , roughly equivalent to the fy2020 request but down 40.1% from the fy2020-enacted level of $10.46 billion .

in successive years , the administration has requested levels of humanitarian assistance far lower than those enacted the prior year , at times reflecting the fact that humanitarian assistance funds may be carried over from year to year and unobligated balances from prior years may still be available .

on a bipartisan basis , for many years , congress has consistently supported global humanitarian efforts through appropriation levels well above the budget request ( figure 4 ) .

in addition to the proposed $6.27 billion in new funding for humanitarian assistance , the administration's request assumes $2.80 billion in carryover funding from past - year humanitarian assistance .

the administration asserts that the fy2021 request , combined with the estimated carryover , totals close to $9.00 billion , which would allow the united states "to program well above the second highest level ever , and is sufficient to address the needs for syria , yemen , and other crisis areas. .

for fy2021 , as in fy2020 , the trump administration proposes to fund all humanitarian assistance through a single international humanitarian assistance ( iha ) account managed through usaid's new bureau for humanitarian assistance ( bha ) .

the administration has justified the restructuring as necessary "to optimize humanitarian assistance , prioritize funding , and use funding as effectively and efficiently as possible. .

the proposal would effectively move the administration of overseas refugee and migration assistance funding—currently funded through the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) and emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) accounts—from the state department to usaid .

in fy2020 , enacted funding for these accounts totaled $3.78 billion .

the budget request would eliminate the erma account and significantly reduce funding to mra , with none for overseas needs .

within usaid , the bha is in the process of combining the functions of the offices of u.s. foreign disaster assistance and food for peace .

the budget request would eliminate the international disaster assistance ( ida ) account ( fy2020-enacted funding totaled $4.95 billion ) , as well as food for peace act , title ii emergency food assistance funding , the latter of which is currently appropriated through the agriculture appropriation but administered by usaid ( fy2020-enacted funding totaled $1.73 billion ) .

funds previously requested in these accounts would be consolidated into the iha account .

the administration is requesting $7.73 billion in international security assistance for fy2021 , an increase of 4.3% from the fy2020 request and 14.3% below the fy2020-enacted level .

the greatest cuts to security assistance accounts would be to peacekeeping operations ( pko , - 36.6% ) and international military education and training ( imet , - 27.4% ) ( figure 5 ) .

consistent with prior year requests and appropriations , the majority of security assistance ( $5.19 billion ) would be for foreign military financing ( fmf ) to the middle east , including $3.30 billion in grants to israel .

as in the trump administration's past three budget proposals , the fy2021 request seeks flexibility to provide fmf assistance through a combination of grants and loans , including loan guarantees , rather than the current use of fmf on an almost exclusive grant basis .

the administration asserts that this authority would both "expand the tools available to the united states to help nato and major - non nato allies purchase more american - made defense equipment and related services" and "increase burden sharing by asking these partners to contribute more national funds to foreign military sales cases. .

the remaining third of the fy2021 foreign operations request proposes to allocate funds to development sectors other than those related to global health , independent agencies , multilateral assistance , and export promotion agencies .

the fy2021 budget request would reduce funding from fy2020-enacted levels in a number of development sectors ( table 7 ) .

environment - focused aid , for example , would be cut by 86.3% , while funding for education and water and sanitation would fall by 61.2% .

as with the fy2020 request , the fy2021 request includes a significant increase from prior year - enacted levels to programming that seeks to promote women in developing economies , largely due to a proposed $200.00 million for the women's global development and prosperity initiative ( w - gdp ) .

under the fy2021 request , most development accounts—development assistance ( da ) ; economic support fund ( esf ) ; assistance to europe , eurasia and central asia ( aeeca ) ; and the democracy fund ( df ) —would be combined into a single new economic support and development fund ( esdf ) .

the administration asserts that this consolidated account would streamline the deployment of resources , increasing efficiency in foreign assistance .

because the consolidated account would incorporate what are now both core and shared usaid accounts , it remains unclear what portion of the new account usaid would manage or implement .

the administration made a similar request in the fy2018 , fy2019 , and fy2020 budget requests , but congress did not enact the proposals .

the fy2021 budget request nestles the relief and recovery fund ( rrf ) and a proposed new diplomatic progress fund ( dpf ) —both previously requested as separate budget items—under the proposed esdf account .

according to the justification , the dpf would "allow the state department and usaid to respond to new opportunities arising from progress in diplomatic and peace efforts around the world. .

while congress provided funds for the rrf in previous fiscal years , congress has not accepted the administration's proposal for the dpf .

the administration's fy2021 request would reduce funding to the peace corps ( - 19.5% ) and the millennium challenge corporation ( - 11.6% ) .

the request also proposes eliminating the inter - american foundation ( iaf ) and the u.s african development foundation ( usadf ) , and incorporating staff and small grant activities of the two foundations into usaid's new bureau for development , democracy , and innovation .

the administration maintains that this consolidation would allow usaid to "capitalize on the existing expertise , capacity , relationships , and tools that usadf and iaf provide , including their regional and market segment emphases , in order to reinforce u.s. government bilateral development efforts. .

to implement the shuttering of the iaf and usadf , the administration requests $3.85 million and $4.66 million , respectively .

sfops multilateral assistance accounts provide for u.s. payments to multilateral development banks and international organizations that pool funding from multiple donors to finance development activities .

the administration's fy2021 request would reduce these accounts by 28.9% from fy2020-enacted levels .

as in the trump administration's three previous requests , the proposal would eliminate funding for the international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account , which funds u.s. voluntary contributions to international organizations , primarily united nations entities such as unicef .

congress appropriated $390.50 million for io&p in fy2020 .

the administration also proposes eliminating funds for the global environment facility ( gef ) and the international fund for agricultural development ( ifad ) .

for the gef , the administration asserts that carryover funds from fy2019 and fy2020 appropriations are sufficient to meet the u.s. pledge to the gef's seventh replenishment .

the fy2021 request includes an increased investment in the u.s. development finance corporation ( dfc ) , established in 2019 to implement the build act .

however , the administration would eliminate funding for the u.s. trade and development agency—the request includes $12.11 million for the agency's "orderly closeout"—and an 8.3% reduction from fy2020-enacted levels for the export - import bank of the united states' operations account .

as in previous years , the administration assumes that all export promotion expenditures would be offset by collections .

in the fy2021 request , the administration assumes $711.20 million and $496.00 million in offsetting collections from the export - import bank and the dfc , respectively .

the administration organizes much of its country and regional assistance into six thematic priorities ( figure 6 ) .

these priorities are also meant to reflect the broader foreign operations goals outlined in " foreign operations highlights . .

top country recipients under the fy2021 request remain consistent with prior year funding allocations .

israel , egypt , and jordan would remain the top three recipients of foreign assistance—though egypt would move ahead of jordan when compared with fy2019 actual funding—largely due to the proposed levels of military aid for those three countries .

other countries that the administration maintains are strategically significant , including afghanistan and ukraine , also remain top country recipients in the fy2021 request , as do several african countries that would receive high levels of global health and development aid ( table 8 ) .

regionally , the middle east and africa would receive the largest shares of aid in the fy2021 request—together comprising about 71.5% of total aid allocated by country or region—consistent with fy2019 year actuals ( figure 7 ) .

proposed funding for europe and eurasia and , separately , the indo - pacific , come to 3.9% and 9.2% , respectively .

notably , the distribution of assistance within regions vary significantly .

for example , africa receives a majority of ghp funding ( 58.1% in fy2019 and a proposed 66.7% for fy2021 ) , but accounts for a small proportion of incle funding ( 5.2% in fy2019 and a proposed 4.1% for fy2021 ) .

in comparison , the western hemisphere region accounts for a small percentage of ghp ( 2.5% in fy2019 and a proposed 2.2% for fy2021 ) and a large proportion of incle funds ( 37.7% in fy2019 and a proposed 44.8% for fy2021 ) .

appendix a. sfops funding , by account appendix b .

international affairs budget the international affairs budget , or function 150 , includes funding that is not in the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriation ; in particular , international food assistance programs ( food for peace act ( ffpa ) , title ii and mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition programs ) are in the agriculture appropriations , and the foreign claim settlement commission and the international trade commission are in the commerce , justice , science appropriations .

in addition , the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriation measure includes funding for certain international commissions that are not part of the international affairs function 150 account .

appendix c. sfops organization char .

