the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) is an agency within the department of defense with both military and civil works responsibilities .

congress directs usace's civil works activities through authorization legislation , annual and supplemental appropriations , and oversight activities .

this report summarizes usace's annual discretionary appropriations for civil works activities , which typically are funded through title i of annual energy and water development appropriations acts .

first , the report introduces usace and its funding .

second , it summarizes the appropriations process through discussions of three major milestones: president's budget request , congressional appropriations process , and annual usace work plan .

third , the report provides a brief discussion of trends and policy questions related to usace annual appropriations .

the annual appropriations process generally involves three major milestones: president's budget request , congressional deliberation and enactment of appropriations , and administration development of a usace work plan ( see figure 1 ) .

the process begins with the release of the president's budget request , typically in early february ( i.e. , roughly eight months before the start of the fiscal year addressed by the request ) , although it is sometimes delayed .

congress may consider the president's budget request , stakeholder interests , and other factors when creating an annual energy and water development appropriations bill that includes usace civil works activities .

the length of the congressional appropriations process varies from year to year , as shown in figure 1 .

following enactment of the energy and water development bill , the administration develops a usace work plan , which identifies the amount of additional funding provided to specific studies and projects .

the following sections describe these major milestones in more detail .

congress may consider the following trends and policy questions when determining future appropriations and funding allocation language directed to usace .

shift to administration - developed work plans since earmark moratorium policies were introduced in the 112 th congress , congress has provided annual appropriations above the president's request to fund various additional categories of work ( see figure 4 for funding levels from fy2012 to fy2020 ) .

the administration follows congressional guidance regarding priorities , new starts , and other matters , in part , to develop post - enactment agency work plans that specify which projects are to receive the additional funding .

unlike the justification documents that accompany the president's budget request , the administration limits the project - level details in the work plan to a few sentences per project .

potential policy questions related to the shift to administration - developed work plans include the following: what is the effect on congressional oversight when the usace work plan provides fewer project - level details than the budget request ? .

as congress debates the limits on congressionally directed spending ( or earmarks ) , will considerations include the type of direction congress can provide usace on the use of additional funding ? .

how might congress address differences between its priorities and the administration's priorities for usace in future fiscal years' appropriations ? .

construction backlog according to usace , in early fy2020 , there was a construction backlog of $96 billion , including projects with signed chief's reports ( i.e. , reports recommending new projects for congressional construction authorization ) , dam modifications , and deferred maintenance .

at the fy2021 budget release press conference , the chief of engineers stated that since the enactment of the last water resources development act ( title i of america's water infrastructure act of 2018 ; p.l .

115-270 ) , he had signed 19 chief's reports , representing over $9 billion in proposed construction ; he also said he anticipated signing another 19 chief's reports by the end of cy2020 .

if congress authorizes these projects , the construction backlog would likely continue to increase more quickly than construction would progress using available usace appropriations .

for example , congress appropriated $2.2 billion in fy2019 and $2.7 billion in fy2020 for the construction account and required five new construction starts in fy2019 and six new construction starts in fy2020 .

potential policy questions related to the construction backlog include the following: how might congress address the national demand for water resource infrastructure projects , in part illustrated by the usace construction backlog ? .

how might congress address stakeholder interest in new starts and identify a path to construction for authorized but unfunded usace projects ? .

shift to operation and maintenance u.s. water infrastructure is aging ; the majority of the nation's dams , locks , and levees are more than 50 years old .

an increasing share of usace's annual discretionary appropriations goes to o&m activities , including activities to maintain usace - constructed water infrastructure ( see table 1 for description of activities funded by the o&m account ) .

the o&m account increased from 37% of usace annual appropriations in fy2006 and fy2007 to a high of 53% in fy2018 and fy2019 .

the following is a potential policy question related to the shift toward more annual appropriations being used to for o&m: how might congress address the funding of aging usace infrastructure , while also meeting the other demands for agency projects and funds ? .

navigation as discussed in the box titled "navigation trust funds," in p.l .

116-136 , congress altered how some harbor maintenance trust fund spending is accounted for in relation to budget caps .

congress , as recently as for fy2020 appropriations in p.l .

116-94 , has reduced the funds to be derived from the inland waterways trust fund for some projects to allow more inland waterway construction projects to proceed .

the administration has proposed identifying additional ways for waterway interests to contribute to the costs of inland waterway construction and o&m .

potential policy questions related to funding navigation actives include the following: how might congress address the interest of the inland waterways industry and its stakeholders in spending on waterway construction that exceeds the inland waterways trust fund's ability to cover 50% of the construction costs ? .

will the anticipated changes to harbor maintenance trust fund accounting toward budget caps and allocations result in congressional adjustments to the annual appropriations levels for usace or other federal agencies' appropriations ? .

flood risk reduction congress has directed around 30% of usace's annual appropriations to support flood risk reduction activities , with around 90% of these funds , in most years , supporting riverine flood risk reduction .

in addition , as previously noted , the fcce account typically receives annual appropriations around $35 million , and its flood response and repair activities are primarily funded through supplemental appropriations .

potential policy questions related to funding flood risk reduction actives include the following: will congress or the administration address the balance between inland and coastal projects referenced in the explanatory statement accompanying usace's fy2020 appropriations in p.l .

116-94 ? .

what are the consequences of primarily using supplemental appropriations to fund fcce activities , including repair of damaged nonfederal levees ? .

environment as previously noted , appropriations for usace's environmental activities in recent years have been less than in the late 2000s .

annual funding for the environment was less from fy2014 to fy2019 ( ranging from $470 million to $591 million ) compared with funding in the earlier fy2006 to fy2012 period , which ranged from $609 million to $680 million annually .

postponed investments in aquatic ecosystem restoration may result in missed opportunities to attenuate wetlands loss and realize related ecosystem benefits .

potential policy questions related to the funding of usace environmental actives include the following: what are the consequences of the current level and distribution of usace restoration funding ? .

appendix a. usace business line / account crosswalk congress appropriates funding to the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) for its civil works activities at the account level ( eg , investigation , construction , and operation and maintenance [o&m] ) .

table 1 provides a description of each account .

activities funded in these accounts are categorized by business lines based on the type of activities .

whereas some business line activities ( eg , navigation , flood damage reduction , restoration , recreation ) are spread across accounts ( eg , investigations , construction , o&m ) , other business line activities are exclusive to one account with the same name ( eg , formerly utilized sites remedial action program , regulatory , expenses ) .

along with the president's budget request , usace publishes a press book that identifies in a crosswalk how the president's requests for various accounts are distributed across the agency's business lines .

for example , figure a - 1 shows the crosswalk for the fy2018 president's budget request for usace ; the columns are the accounts , and the rows are the business lines .

following enactment of appropriations and work plan development , usace typically also calculates the level of funding for each business line .

appendix b .

additional funding categories and amounts since the 112 th congress , congress has provided additional funding for specific categories of work within some usace budget accounts ( eg , investigations , construction , o&m , mississippi river and tributaries ) .

table b - 1 shows the additional funding congress provided in fy2018 to fy2020 for 26 categories of usace activities across four budget accounts .

congress directed usace to produce a work plan no later than 60 days after enactment of the appropriations bill , allocating these additional funds to projects meeting the criteria of the categories and any other direction provided in the explanatory statement or conference report .

some states received funding for larger projects , whereas others received funding for less extensive work .

for example , under the construction account , the work plan allocated $100 million or more per state in additional funding to 10 states―alabama , california , florida , illinois , louisiana , north dakota , new jersey , pennsylvania , tennessee , and texas―in at least one of fy2018 , fy2019 , or fy2020 ; the work plans over that same period included between $1 million and $7 million annually per state for other states ( eg , minnesota , montana , new mexico , nevada , and utah ) .

