congressional oversight of the executive branch is a topic of perennial interest to many members of congress , their staff , and the public .

statutory reporting requirements can be useful in facilitating congressional oversight by enhancing congressional access to information about the implementation of public policy .

each year , congress enacts a variety of requirements for the president , executive departments , agencies , and other federal government entities to provide advance notification of actions and decisions , to create plans and strategies to carry out certain activities , to summarize steps taken toward implementation of particular policies , or to study problems and issue recommendations .

reporting requirements can be used to accomplish a range of different goals .

when designing such requirements , policymakers face a number of choices that may affect the content , frequency , and other features of the information that congress receives as a result .

this report provides an overview of statutory reporting requirements used by congress to obtain information from the executive branch ; describes the goals that various types of reporting requirements may help achieve ; and analyzes statutory requirements enacted during the 115 th congress to identify common features of legislative language used to establish such requirements .

each year , congress typically enacts a range of reporting requirements of varying types .

most requirements can be roughly divided into several categories: notifications of actions or decisions ; descriptive reports that summarize actions taken or provide other factual information ; plans to accomplish particular goals ; and studies or evaluations relating to a specific problem or concern .

each category is discussed in additional detail below .

although statutory reporting requirements vary widely in the scope and nature of the information they are designed to elicit , most requirements carry several common provisions .

when designing these requirements , congress faces a number of choices that may affect the content , frequency , and other features of the information ultimately received .

to better understand various options and legislative considerations for creating reporting requirements , this report analyzes requirements enacted during the 115 th congress that could be identified using a keyword search .

reporting requirements can serve as a critical component of legislative oversight .

they may be designed to accomplish a variety of purposes , including monitoring executive activity , obtaining information on complex or emerging issues , and generating ideas and recommendations for legislative action .

however , legislators , agencies , and outside observers have periodically voiced concerns regarding the volume and cost of reporting requirements , whether certain requirements are duplicative and ineffective , and the difficulty in monitoring agency compliance with such requirements .

each concern noted above is complicated by the lack of a comprehensive inventory of existing report requirements and report submissions .

legislators have periodically introduced legislation to create a centralized repository of congressionally mandated reports .

for example , the access to congressionally mandated reports act ( h.r .

736 , 116 th congress ) would , among other things , require the government publishing office ( gpo ) to create a publicly available online portal of "all congressionally mandated reports," subject to certain exceptions .

the bill was passed by the house on july 7 , 2019 .

establishing a centralized , public repository for congressionally mandated reports may address a number of concerns related to the reporting process .

for instance , a comprehensive database of submitted reports may allow congress to more easily monitor whether an expected report has been submitted , and whether it was submitted in a timely fashion .

additionally , it may facilitate greater accessibility to and awareness of reports submitted to congress .

greater awareness of reports that have already been submitted may in turn help congress make better use of information provided by agencies , and also help determine whether contemplated requirements for new reports may be duplicative of existing reports .

lastly , a centralized database of submitted reports may help congress better assess the reporting burden placed on federal agencies .

on the other hand , creating a database of all submitted reports would not necessarily provide congress with a complete picture of reporting requirements .

reports that are required , but are not submitted , would not appear in a repository of submitted reports , potentially limiting its use as a tool for monitoring agency compliance .

for reasons already discussed , obtaining a complete inventory of existing requirements would be a complicated and potentially resource - intensive task .

additionally , the establishment of any centralized repository would require ongoing maintenance and other resources as new requirements are established and new reports are submitted .

however , an incomplete understanding of the full range of existing requirements may make it difficult or impossible to determine the total volume of reports required , to attempt to identify and eliminate outdated requirements , to assess agency compliance , or to determine whether a contemplated new reporting requirement is duplicative of existing requirements .

