credit unions are nonprofit depository financial institutions that are owned and operated entirely by their members .

in other words , na tural person credit unions , also known as retail credit unions , are financial cooperatives that return profits to their memberships .

for this reason , member deposits are referred to as shares , which may be used to provide loans to members , other credit unions , and credit union organizations ; and the interest earned by members is referred to as share d ividends , which are comparable to shareholder profit distributions .

credit unions ( and banks ) engage in financial intermediation , or facilitating transfers of funds back and forth between savers ( via accepting deposits ) and borrowers ( via loans ) .

the national credit union administration ( ncua ) , an independent federal agency , is the primary federal regulator and share deposit insurer for credit unions .

there are three federal bank prudential regulators: the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) charters and supervises national depository ( commercial ) banks ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) provides deposit insurance by collecting insurance premiums from member banks and places the proceeds in its deposit insurance fund ( dif ) , which are subsequently used to reimburse depositors when acting as the receiver of a failed bank ; and the federal reserve provides lender - of - last - resort liquidity to solvent banks via its discount window .

the ncua , by comparison , serves all three functions for federally regulated credit unions .

the ncua also manages the national credit union share insurance fund ( ncusif ) , which is the federal deposit insurance fund for credit unions .

although scholars are unable to pinpoint the precise origin of the credit union movement , the organization of membership - owned cooperatives to raise funds for members lacking sufficient collateral or wealth necessary to qualify for bank loans dates back to colonial times .

during their infancy stages , credit cooperatives basically emerged as a form of microlending in financially underserved localities to provide unsecured small - dollar loans .

small group cooperatives initially relied on pooled funds , donations , and subsidies to make loans ( allocated via lotteries or auctions ) until evolving into self - sufficient systems more reliant on deposits .

the advantage of small memberships for group credit cooperatives allow members to know each other , which facilitates peer monitoring of the lending decisions and borrowers' repayment behavior .

the original concept of a credit union stemmed from cooperatives formed to promote thrift among its members and to provide them with a low - cost source of credit .

following numerous bank failures and runs during the great depression that resulted in an extensive contraction of credit , congress sought to enhance cooperative organizations' ability to meet their members' credit needs .

congress passed the federal credit union act of 1934 ( fcu act ; 48 stat .

1216 ) to create a class of federally chartered financial institutions for "promoting thrift among its members and creating a source of credit for provident or productive purposes. .

over time , congress expanded credit unions' permissible activities because the original concept of a credit union arguably needed to evolve with the marketplace .

according to the ncua , when congress amended the fcu act in 1977 to add an extensive array of savings , lending and investment powers , it intended to "allow credit unions to continue to attract and retain the savings of their members by providing essential and contemporary services," and acknowledged that credit unions are entitled to "updated and more flexible authority granting them the opportunity to better serve their members in a highly - competitive and ever - changing financial environment. .

h.r .

rep. 95–23 at 7 ( 1977 ) , reprinted in 1977 u.s.c.c.a.n .

105 , 110 .

congress acknowledged the difficulty in "regulating contemporary financial institutions within the framework of an act that has on a continuing basis required major updating by means of regulation. .

although small memberships may be more advantageous for informal microlending systems , advanced intermediation systems—such as banking and the modern credit union industry—benefit from economies of scale .

in other words , more assets ( loans ) , greater access to deposits , and increased transactions volumes provide greater risk diversification and lower average cost per transaction , thus reducing vulnerability to financial disruptions that would be confined to a particular small group .

on april 19 , 1977 , p.l .

95-22 ( the mini bill of 1977 ) substantially amended the fcu act .

it authorized the credit union industry to provide many financial products ( eg , loans , checking and savings deposit services ) similar to those offered by the commercial banking system .

today , modern credit unions primarily engage in consumer and residential lending , and some originate commercial business loans for members .

the lending and investment powers of the credit union industry , however , are still more restrictive than those of commercial banks .

credit unions can make loans only to their members , other credit unions , and credit union organizations , thus limiting who they can serve .

a statutory interest rate cap for credit union loans exists ( with exceptions that allow for sufficient earnings necessary to maintain credit availability ) .

loans made by federally insured credit unions are generally limited to 15 years ( except for residential mortgages ) .

federal credit unions' investment authority is limited by statute to loans , government securities , deposits in other financial institutions , and certain other limited investments given their origins to promote thrift rather than be long - term investors .

business lending restrictions include an aggregate limit on an individual credit union's member business loan balances and on the amount that can be loaned to one member .

if some or all of these restrictions are relaxed to allow the credit union system's lending powers to expand and become more comparable to the banking system , the prudential regulatory regimes arguably may require greater harmonization to protect against comparable financial risk exposures .

this report focuses on policy developments pertaining to the credit union system .

it begins with an overview of recent efforts to further expand system lending capacities .

next , it describes how the system's exposure to mortgage credit ( default ) risk grew after credit unions were given greater intermediation authorities in the mortgage lending space .

it then discusses the system's financial distress and recovery resulting from the 2008 financial crisis , and updates the progress made to improve the system's resiliency to credit and insolvency risks .

this discussion will use the balance sheet terminology defined in the box below .

congress has passed legislation , and the ncua has implemented and proposed rules , supporting the expansion of lending activities that would increase financial transactions volumes ( economies of scale ) .

the expansion of lending activities , as discussed in this section , is likely to generate greater cash flows and revenues for the credit union system .

congress created the ncusif in 1970 to be the insurance fund for all federally regulated credit unions .

the ncua manages the ncusif , which is completely funded by insured credit unions .

the ncusif's primary income source is the premiums collected from credit unions , which pay the fund's operating expenses , cover losses , and build reserves .

premiums were originally set at one - twelfth of 1% of the total amount of member share accounts , but p.l .

98-369 required each federally insured credit union to maintain a fund deposit equal to 1% of its insured share accounts .

examination fees and any penalties ncua collects from insured institutions are also deposited into the ncusif .

fund portions not applied to current operations can be invested in government securities , and the earnings also generate fund income .

the ncusif's reserves consist of the 1% deposit , plus the fund's accumulated insurance premiums , fees , and interest earnings .

prudential safety and soundness regulation , which includes holding sufficient capital reserves , may reduce the financial institutions' insolvency ( failure ) risk and promote public confidence in the financial system .

although higher capital requirements may not prevent adverse financial risk events from occurring , more capital enhances the financial firms' ability to absorb greater losses associated with potential loan defaults .

the enhanced absorption capacity may strengthen public confidence in the soundness of these financial institutions and increase their ability to function during periods of financial stress .

for this reason , the ncua has proposed enhanced net worth ( capitalization ) requirements for credit unions , which is intended to increase the credit union system's resilience to insolvency risk and to minimize possible losses to the ncusif and ultimately to taxpayers .

these prudential issues are discussed in this section .

credit union industry advocates argue that lifting lending restrictions to make the system more comparable with the banking system would increase borrowers' available pools of credit .

community banks , which often compete with credit unions , argue that policies such as raising the business lending cap , for example , would allow credit unions to expand beyond their congressionally mandated mission and could pose a threat to financial stability .

by amending the fcu act several times to expand permissible lending activities , congress arguably had recognized that the credit union system has evolved into a more sophisticated financial intermediation system .

congress has also emphasized prudential safety and soundness concerns .

following the 2008 financial crisis , the federal bank prudential regulators implemented prudential requirements to enhance the u.s. banking system's resiliency to systemic risk events .

the ncua initially proposed in 2014 to increase capital requirements particularly for large credit unions ( those with $500 million or more in assets ) ; however , the proposal has been revised , delayed , and is currently scheduled to become effective in january 2022 .

in the meantime , the ncua has implemented and proposed rules to support expanding lending activities that would increase financial transactions volumes ( economies of scale ) , thus possibly generating greater cash flows and profitability for the credit union system .

the adoption of enhanced prudential net worth requirements for the credit union system , however , arguably may facilitate mitigating the financial risks that typically accompany increases in lending .

