m edicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports .

historically , medicaid eligibility generally has been limited to low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and individuals with disabilities .

since 2014 , however , states have had the option to cover nonelderly adults with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) medicaid expansion .

medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states .

the federal government's share of most medicaid expenditures is called the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

the remainder is referred to as the state share .

medicaid is a countercyclical program , meaning the rate of growth for medicaid enrollment tends to accelerate when the economy weakens and tends to slow when the economy gains strength .

during recessions , the rate of growth for medicaid enrollment increases , which also increases the rate of growth for medicaid expenditures at the same time that state revenues are decreasing .

the federal government provided states with fiscal relief through temporary fmap rate increases in response to the 2001 recession ( march 2001 through november 2001 ) and the great recession ( december 2007 through june 2009 ) .

the families first coronavirus response act ( ffcra ; p.l .

116-127 ) , enacted on march 18 , 2020 , recently added a temporary medicaid fmap increase , beginning january 1 , 2020 , and continuing through the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) public health emergency period .

this report begins with an overview of the fmap rate .

then , it discusses the recession - related impact on the medicaid program based on the experiences of the 2001 recession and the great recession .

the final section of this report describes the three recession - related fmap increases and compares them according to their various aspects , such as time periods for the fmap increases , the amounts of the increases , and the requirements for states to receive the increases .

the fmap rate generally is determined annually and varies by state according to each state's per capita income relative to the u.s. per capita income .

the formula provides higher fmap rates , or federal reimbursement rates , to states with lower per capita incomes , and it provides lower fmap rates to states with higher per capita incomes .

fmap rates have a statutory minimum of 50% and a statutory maximum of 83% .

for a state with an fmap of 60% , the state gets 60 cents back from the federal government for every dollar the state spends on its medicaid program .

in fy2020 , fmap rates range from 50.00% ( 13 states ) to 76.98% ( mississippi ) .

the fmap formula relies on each state's per capita personal income in relation to the u.s. average per capita personal income .

the national economy is basically the sum of all state economies .

as a result , the national response to an economic change is the sum of the state responses to economic change .

if more states ( or larger states ) were to experience an economic decline , the national economy would reflect this decline to some extent .

however , the extent of the total decline would be offset by states with small decreases or even increases ( i.e. , states with growing economies ) .

the u.s. per capita personal income , because of this balancing of positive and negative , usually has only a small percentage change each year .

because the fmap formula compares state changes in per capita personal income ( which can have large changes each year ) with changes in the u.s. per capita personal income , states' fmap rates often change from year to year .

for most of the states experiencing annual fmap rate changes , the change has been be less than one percentage point—but that can translate to a significant dollar amount .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states ( eg , the district of columbia and the territories ) , situations ( eg , during economic downturns ) , populations ( eg , aca medicaid expansion population and certain women with breast or cervical cancer ) , providers ( eg , indian health service facilities ) , and services ( eg , family planning and home health services ) .

the fmap is also used to determine the federal share of other federal programs .

for instance , it is used to determine the federal share of spending for foster care maintenance , adoption assistance , and guardianship assistance payments authorized by title iv - e of the social security act .

the fmap rate is also used to determine the relative federal and state shares of the "mandatory matching funds" provided by the child care entitlement to states .

in addition , it determines the federal share of funding under the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds and the federal share of collections under the child support enforcement program .

separate from the regular fmap rate , the enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip .

the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% .

medicaid expenditures are influenced by a number of economic , demographic , and programmatic factors .

economic factors include health care prices , unemployment rates , and individuals' wages .

demographic factors include population growth and the age distribution .

programmatic factors include changes to eligibility and benefits or other program changes .

other factors include the number of eligible individuals who enroll and their utilization of covered services .

medicaid is a countercyclical program .

during recessions , growth in the unemployment rate results in an increase in the rate of growth for medicaid enrollment , which increases the rate of growth for medicaid expenditures at the same time that state revenues decline .

reduced state revenues can make it difficult for states to continue financing their medicaid programs , especially with the recession - related growth in medicaid enrollment .

the effect of recessions on medicaid enrollment , medicaid expenditures , and state tax revenues are generally not isolated to the recession period and can continue after the recession has officially ended .

in the past , two laws have provided states with fiscal relief through temporary fmap rate increases due to recessions: the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( jgtrra ; p.l .

108-27 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 , as amended by p.l .

111-226 ) .

in addition , the families first coronavirus response act ( ffcra ; p.l .

116-127 ) recently provided a temporary fmap increase during the covid - 19 public health emergency period .

as noted by gao , "the fmap is a readily available mechanism for providing temporary assistance to states because assistance can be distributed quickly , with states obtaining funds on a quarterly basis through medicaid's existing payment system. .

the increased fmap rates help states maintain their medicaid programs during economic downturns .

also , the increased fmap rates effectively reduce the state share of medicaid expenditures for states , allowing states to use the state funding that would have been used for the state share of medicaid—if there were not a recession - related fmap rate—for non - medicaid state budget needs .

as shown in table 1 , the recession - related fmap increases have similar components , but there are differences .

all three recession - related fmap increases had across - the - board increases to the regular fmap rates as their main component .

the jgtrra across - the - board increase of 2.95 percentage points was lower than the 6.2 percentage point across - the - board increases for arra and ffcra .

the arra across - the - board increase phased out at the end of the time period for the fmap increase , but the other two increases do not phase down .

in addition , the jgtrra and arra fmap increases included hold - harmless provisions that kept states' regular fmap rates from declining , and these increases did not apply to certain medicaid expenditures that use the regular fmap rate .

the ffcra fmap increase , however , does not exclude medicaid expenditures that use the regular fmap rate .

also , the arra fmap increase included an unemployment - related additional increase to the fmap , but the jgtrra and ffcra fmap increases do not .

jgtrra and ffcra applied the fmap increases to the territories and provided the territories additional federal medicaid funding , but arra gave the territories a choice of the across - the - board fmap increase , along with increased funding or a larger increase in funding without an fmap increase .

all three of the recession - related fmap increases have requirements for states in order to qualify for the fmap increase .

for example , all three fmap increases require states to maintain medicaid eligibility standards that are no more restrictive than those that were in effect on a certain date .

all three also prohibit states from increasing the percentage local governments are required to contribute to the state share of medicaid .

the jgtrra fmap increase did not have additional requirements for states , but the arra and ffcra fmap increases include differing sets of additional requirements for states , which are listed in table 1 .

the following sections provide summaries of the recession - related fmap rate increases from jgtrra , arra , and ffcra , as well as the time period for the fmap increases , the amount of the increases , and the requirements for states to receive them .

the fmap rate has been used as a means to provide fiscal relief to states in response to the 2001 recession , the great recession , and current economic conditions due to the covid - 19 public health emergency .

these recession - related fmap increases have been provided at times when states have experienced growth in unemployment rates that results in increases in the rate of growth for medicaid enrollment , which in turn increases the rate of growth for medicaid expenditures at the same time that state revenues decline .

these recession - related fmap increases are similar but have some significant differences .

all three of these recession - related fmap increases have across - the - board fmap increases ; requirements to maintain medicaid eligibility standards that are no more restrictive than they were prior to the fmap increases ; and requirements to ensure that states do not increase the percentage that local governments contribute to medicaid expenditures .

however , the jgtrra and arra fmap increases included hold - harmless provisions that kept the states' regular fmap rates from declining , and these increases excluded certain medicaid expenditures from the fmap increases .

the arra fmap increase had an unemployment - related increase that the jgtrra and ffcra increases did not have .

also , the jgtrra fmap increase did not have additional requirements for states , but arra and ffcra have differing sets of additional requirements for states to adhere to in order to qualify for the fmap increases .

in addition , many states indicated that the jgtrra and arra fmap increases provided fiscal relief that allowed the states to prevent further reductions to the medicaid programs and other portions of their state budgets .

appendix a .

jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 fmap increase the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( jgtrra ; p.l .

108-27 ) included a provision that increased federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rates for the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories during the last two quarters of fy2003 and the first three quarters of fy2004 .

the fmap rates were held harmless and increased by an across - the - board 2.95 percentage points for each state ( i.e. , the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories ) .

the jgtrra fmap increases were subject to certain requirements for states .

for more detail about the jgtrra fmap increase , see " jgtrra fmap increase . .

table a - 1 shows states' regular fmap rates and jgtrra fmap rates for fy2003 and fy2004 .

appendix b. american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 fmap increase the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) provided a temporary fmap rate increase to the 50 states and the district of columbia that was later extended by p.l .

111-226 .

with the extension , the arra fmap increase lasted from the first quarter of fy2009 through the third quarter of fy2011 ( i.e. , october 2008 through june 2011 ) .

arra held all states harmless from any decline in their regular fmap rates throughout the period .

under the arra fmap increases , all states ( i.e. , the 50 states and the district of columbia ) received an across - the - board increase of 6.2 percentage points to their regular fmap through the first quarter of fy2011 , at which point the across - the - board percentage point increase phased down to 3.2 and then 1.2 percentage points for the second and third quarters of fy2011 , respectively .

throughout the period , states with unemployment rates that had increased by certain amounts for a quarter received an additional unemployment - related increase .

there were three tiers of the unemployment - related increase .

see "arra unemployment - related increase" for details about the unemployment - related increase , including how it was calculated .

the arra fmap increases were subject to certain requirements for states .

for more information about the arra fmap increases and these requirements , see " arra fmap increase . .

table b - 1 shows the fmap rate increases under arra and extended by p.l .

111-226 for each quarter , from the first quarter of fy2009 through the third quarter of fy2011 .

table b - 2 provides an example of how the fmaps under arra with the hold - harmless and the unemployment - related increases were calculated for the second quarter of fy2010 .

appendix c. families first coronavirus response act fmap increase the families first coronavirus response act ( ffcra ; p.l .

116-127 ) provides an increase to the fmap rate for the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories of 6.2 percentage points , beginning on the first day of calendar quarter in which the public health emergency period began ( i.e. , january 1 , 2020 ) and ending on the last day of the calendar quarter in which the last day of the public health emergency period ends .

see the " ffcra fmap increase " section for information about the state requirements for receiving the ffcra fmap increase .

table c - 1 shows states' fy2020 fmap rates and those fmap rates plus the 6.2 percentage points added by ffcra .

