throughout u.s. history , congress has created advisory commissions to assist in the development of public policy .

among other contexts , commissions have been used following crisis situations , including the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and the 2008 financial crisis .

in such situations , advisory commissions may potentially provide congress with a high - visibility forum to assemble expertise that might not exist within the legislative environment ; allow for the in - depth examination of complex , cross - cutting policy issues ; and lend bipartisan credibility to a set of findings and recommendations .

as congress considers its range of responses to the coronavirus pandemic , the creation of one or more congressional advisory commissions is an option that could provide a platform for evaluating various pandemic - related policy issues over time .

past congressional advisory commissions have retrospectively evaluated policy responses , brought together diverse groups of experts , and supplemented existing congressional oversight mechanisms .

policymakers may determine that creating an advisory commission is unnecessary and instead prefer to utilize existing congressional oversight structures , such as standing or select committees , or already established oversight entities .

this report provides a comparative analysis of five proposed congressional advisory commissions that would investigate various aspects of the covid - 19 pandemic .

the five proposed commissions are found in h.r .

6429 ( the national commission on covid - 19 act , sponsored by representative stephanie murphy ) , h.r .

6431 ( the made in america emergency preparedness act , sponsored by representative brian fitzpatrick ) , h.r .

6440 ( the pandemic rapid response act , sponsored by representative rodney davis ) , h.r .

6455 ( the covid - 19 commission act , sponsored by representative bennie thompson ) , and h.r .

6548 ( the national commission on the covid - 19 pandemic in the united states act , sponsored by representative adam schiff ) .

the overall structures of each of the proposed commissions are similar in many respects , both to each other and to previous independent advisory entities established by congress .

specifically , the proposed commissions would ( 1 ) exist temporarily ; ( 2 ) serve in an advisory capacity ; and ( 3 ) report a work product detailing the commission's findings , conclusions , and recommendations .

that said , each particular proposed commission has distinctive elements , particularly concerning its membership structure , appointment structure , and time line for reporting its work product to congress .

this report compares the ( 1 ) membership structure , ( 2 ) appointment structure , ( 3 ) rules of procedure and operation , ( 4 ) duties and reporting requirements , ( 5 ) powers of the commission , ( 6 ) staffing issues , and ( 7 ) funding for each of the proposed covid - 19 commissions .

table 1 ( at the end of this report ) provides a side - by - side comparison of major provisions of the five proposals .

several matters related to a commission's membership structure might be considered .

they include the size of a commission , member qualifications , compensation of commission members , and requirements for partisan balance .

past congressional commissions have used a wide variety of appointment structures .

considerations regarding appointment structures include partisan balance , filling vacancies , and the time line for making commission appointments .

the statutory scheme may directly designate members of the commission , such as a specific cabinet official or a congressional leader .

in other cases , selected congressional leaders , often with balance between the parties , appoint commission members .

a third common statutory scheme is to have selected leaders , such as committee chairs and ranking members , recommend candidates for appointment to a commission .

these selected leaders may act either in parallel or jointly , and the recommendation may be made either to other congressional leaders , such as the speaker of the house and president pro tempore of the senate , or to the president .

each of the five commission proposals would delegate most or all appointment authority to congressional leaders ( including chamber , party , and committee leaders ; see table 1 for details ) .

additionally , h.r .

6429 , h.r .

6431 , h.r .

6440 , and h.r .

6548 provide for one appointment to be made by the president .

h.r .

6429 , h.r .

6431 , and h.r .

6548 would have the president appoint the commission's chair .

h.r .

6455 has its membership appointed by the chairs and ranking members of designated house and senate committees , and the joint economic committee .

h.r .

6455 does not provide any executive branch appointments .

attention to the proper balance between the number of members appointed by congressional leaders and by other individuals ( such as the president ) , or to the number of members of congress required to be among the appointees , or to the qualifications of appointees , can be significant factors in enabling a commission to fulfill its congressional mandate .

in general , a commission's appointment scheme can impact both the commission's ability to fulfill its statutory duties and its final work product .

for instance , if the scheme provides only for the appointment of members of congress to the commission , it arguably might not have the technical expertise or diversity of knowledge to complete its duties within the time given by statute .

similarly , if the appointment scheme includes qualifying provisos so specific that only a small set of private citizens could serve on the panel , the commission's final work product may arguably only represent a narrow range of viewpoints .

none of the proposed covid - 19 commissions specify whether members of congress may serve on the commission .

while most statutes that authorize congressional advisory commissions do not provide detailed procedures for how the commission should conduct its business , the statutory language may provide a general structure , including a mechanism for selecting a chair and procedures for creating rules .

none of the five covid - 19 commission proposals contain language that directs the process for potentially adopting rules of procedure .

for a comparison of each proposed commission's specified rules of procedures and operations , see table 1 .

most congressional commissions are generally considered policy commissions—temporary bodies that study particular policy problems and report their findings to congress or review a specific event .

each of the five proposals would provide the proposed commission with certain powers to carry out its mission ( see table 1 for specifics ) .

one general issue for commissions is who is authorized to execute such powers .

in some cases , the commission itself executes its powers , with the commission deciding whether to devise rules and procedures for the general use of such power .

in other cases , the legislation specifically authorizes the commission to give discretionary power to subcommittees or individual commission members .

finally , the legislation itself might grant certain powers to individual members of the commission , such as the chair .

the proposed covid - 19 commissions contain staffing provisions commonly found in congressional advisory commission legislation .

congressional advisory commissions are usually authorized to hire staff .

most statutes specify that the commission may hire a lead staffer , often referred to as a "staff director," "executive director," or another similar title , in addition to additional staff as needed .

rather than mandate a specific staff size , many commissions are instead authorized to appoint a staff director and other personnel as necessary , subject to the limitations of available funds .

most congressional commissions are also authorized to hire consultants , procure intermittent services , and request that federal agencies detail personnel to aid the work of the commission .

commissions generally require funding to help meet their statutory goals .

when designing a commission , therefore , policymakers may consider both how the commission will be funded , and how much funding the commission will be authorized to receive .

four of the five proposals specify a funding mechanism for the commission .

how commissions are funded and the amounts that they receive vary considerably .

several factors can contribute to overall commission costs .

these factors might include the cost of hiring staff , contracting with outside consultants , and engaging administrative support , among others .

additionally , most commissions reimburse the travel expenditures of commissioners and staff , and some compensate their members .

the duration of a commission can also significantly affect its cost ; past congressional commissions have been designed to last anywhere from several months to several years .

 table 1 provides a side - by - side comparison of major provisions of the five proposals .

for each bill , the membership structure , appointment structure , rules of procedure and operation , duties and reporting requirements , proposed commission powers , staffing provisions , and funding are compared .

