on april 23 , 2020 , congress passed its fourth measure including supplemental appropriations to respond to the coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic .

the paycheck protection program and health care enhancement act ( the act ; p.l .

116-139 ) includes enhancements for the small business administration's paycheck protection program ( ppp ) , economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) , and emergency eidl grants , and emergency supplemental appropriations for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and small business administration ( sba ) .

the congressional budget office estimates that the act will result in $321.3 billion in additional direct spending for the ppp , and $162.1 billion in additional discretionary spending , including $50 billion for eidl and $10 billion for emergency eidl grants .

the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security act ( p.l .

116-136 ; the cares act ) established the paycheck protection program ( ppp ) , and provided it $349 billion .

the ppp authorized loans with a two - year term at a 1% interest rate to small businesses and other organizations adversely affected by covid - 19 .

loan payments are deferred for six months and feature loan forgiveness up to the amount borrowed under specified conditions related to the borrower's retention of employees and employee wages .

the sba started accepting ppp loan applications on april 3 , 2020 .

because the program neared its $349 billion authorization limit , the sba stopped accepting new ppp loan applications on april 15 , 2020 .

over 1.66 million loans were approved by nearly 5,000 lenders .

most of the loans ( 74% ) were for under $150,000 .

the cares act also enhanced sba economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) from january 31 , 2020 , through december 31 , 2020 , expanding eligibility and taking other steps , such as establishing emergency eidl grants of up to $10,000 , to make resources more broadly and quickly available to small businesses .

the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-123 ) had provided the sba an additional $20 million to support eidl .

the cares act appropriated $10 billion for emergency eidl grants .

the sba also stopped accepting new covid - 19-related eidl loan applications on april 15 , 2020 , because that program neared its appropriations limit for credit subsidies .

covid - 19-related eidl applications which had already been received continue to be processed on a first - come first - served basis .

the sba approved nearly 30,000 covid - 19-related eidls totaling nearly $5.7 billion , and 755,476 emergency eidl grants totaling nearly $3.3 billion .

division a of p.l .

116-139 increases the ppp authorization limit from $349 billion to $659 billion , and increases the direct appropriation in the cares act for the program from $349 billion to more than $670 billion to support that authorization amount .

division a of the act also: requires that no less than $30 billion of the additional ppp authorization amount be set aside for loans issued by insured depository institutions and credit unions with consolidated assets of $10 billion to $50 billion ; requires that no less than $30 billion of the additional ppp authorization amount be set aside for loans issued by community financial institutions ( including community development financial institutions ( cdfis ) , minority depository institutions , community development corporations , and sba microloan intermediaries ) , and insured depository institutions and credit unions with consolidated assets less than $10 billion ; and makes agricultural enterprises with not more than 500 employees eligible for eidl and emergency eidl grants during the covered period ( january 31 , 2020 , through december 31 , 2020 ) .

division b of p.l .

116-139 is a supplemental appropriations measure providing $100 billion for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) through the public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) and $62 billion for the small business administration ( $50 billion for eidl , $10 billion for emergency eidl grants , and $2.1 billion for sba salaries and expenses ) .

all of the supplemental appropriations are designated as being emergency requirements under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-177 , as amended ) , and thus do not count against the statutory limits on discretionary spending for fy2020 .

each appropriation in p.l .

116-139 , division b , explicitly provides its resources "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to coronavirus , domestically or internationally. .

table 1 details the supplemental appropriations included in division b , as well as subdivision and transfers of those appropriations outlined in p.l .

116-139 .

title i provides $100 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations to the hhs public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) , an account used in appropriations acts to provide the hhs secretary with one - time or emergency funding , as well as annual funding for the office of the hhs assistance secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) .

of the $100 billion , $75 billion is additional funding for the hhs "provider relief fund," established with an initial appropriation of $100 billion in the cares act .

these funds remain available until expended , and are to be used "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to coronavirus , domestically or internationally , for necessary expenses to reimburse , through grants or other mechanisms , eligible health care providers for health care related expenses or lost revenues that are attributable to coronavirus…. .

both p.l .

116-139 and the cares act define eligible providers broadly as any that provide "diagnoses , testing , or care for individuals with possible or actual cases of covid - 19…. .

hhs has made initial distributions from the provider relief fund .

the remaining $25 billion , also available until expended , is provided to augment national capacity for covid - 19 containment , such as expanded testing capacity—including supplies such as personal protective equipment ( ppe ) —and workforce and technical capacity for disease surveillance and contact tracing .

among other allowable uses , these funds may be used to build , purchase , renovate , or rent non - federally owned facilities .

of the $25 billion , the act requires the hhs secretary to transfer specified amounts to hhs agencies as follows: not less than $11 billion for states , localities , territories , tribes , tribal organizations , urban indian health organizations , or health service providers to tribes .

of this amount , not less than $2 billion is for states , localities , and territories according to the formula for the cdc public health emergency preparedness cooperative agreement in fy2019 ; and not less than $4.25 billion is for the same awardees according to a formula based on relative number of cases of covid - 19 .

of that $4.25 billion , not less than $750 million is for tribes , tribal organizations , urban indian health organizations , or health service providers to tribes .

not less than $1 billion for cdc for surveillance , epidemiology , and laboratory capacity expansion ; contact tracing ; data systems modernization ; outreach ; and workforce support to expand and improve covid - 19 testing .

not less than $1.806 billion for the national institutes of health ( nih ) as follows: not less than $306 million for the national cancer institute to develop , validate , improve , and implement serological testing and associated technologies for covid - 19 ; not less than $500 million for the national institute of biomedical imaging and bioengineering for research , development , and implementation of point - of - care and other rapid testing for covid - 19 ; and not less than $1 billion for the nih office of the director , broadly to support the agency's research and development efforts regarding covid - 19 testing .

not less than $1 billion for the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) for advanced research , development , manufacturing , production , and purchase of diagnostic , serologic , or other covid - 19 tests or related supplies , and other activities related to covid - 19 testing .

$22 million for the food and drug administration ( fda ) , salaries and expenses , for activities associated with diagnostic , serological , antigen , and other covid - 19 tests , and related administrative activities .

$600 million for the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) for grants under the health centers program , covering a broader range of facilities than was previously eligible .

$225 million for hrsa for rural health clinics , using the distribution procedures developed for the provider relief fund established under the cares act .

not more than $1 billion to cover the cost of testing for the uninsured , using the national disaster medical system ( ndms ) definitive care reimbursement program according to the families first coronavirus response act , p.l .

116-127 .

numerous reporting requirements apply to this $25 billion appropriation .

general provisions in title i allow the hhs secretary to transfer phssef funds to hhs agencies , as specified , with attendant reporting to the appropriations committees ; and require the secretary to transfer up to $6 million to the hhs office of inspector general for oversight of activities funded by this act through the phssef .

because division a provides significant additional authorization , resources , and direction for sba's ppp and eidl programs , the title ii provisions are for the most part straightforward .

$50 billion is provided for the cost of eidl , and $10 billion for emergency eidl grants , to fulfil the authorization in division a .

the $2.1 billion included for sba's salaries and expenses appropriation remains available until the end of fy2021 , to support the agency's increased rate of operations in providing covid - 19 pandemic relief .

