significant recent coastal and riverine flood events , as well as concerns about changing hydrologic conditions , have prompted interest in using a suite of approaches to reduce flood risk and improve flood resilience , which is the ability to adapt to , withstand , and rapidly recover from floods .

traditional options to reduce flood risk include constructing levees and dams .

some stakeholders and members of congress support protecting , restoring , and enhancing natural features and processes to reduce flood and storm damages .

examples include floodplains that can store excess water and coastal wetlands that may attenuate storm surge .

congress has directed the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) —the primary federal agency constructing projects to reduce flood risks—to evaluate the use of natural and nature - based features ( nnbfs ) when conducting its flood risk reduction activities along the nation's rivers and coasts .

as part of a usace authority , congress defined a nature - based feature as "a feature that is created by human design , engineering , and construction to provide risk reduction by acting in concert with natural processes. .

it defined a natural feature as a feature "created through the action of physical , geological , biological , and chemical processes over time. .

although nnbfs may provide flood risk reduction and resilience benefits in some circumstances , they may be unable to replicate the risk reduction provided by traditional structural and nonstructural measures for some communities .

how to effectively incorporate natural features and processes into planning of and investments in reliable flood risk management is an area of evolving policy and research .

part of the challenge is to identify where to use nnbfs and to determine how much flood risk reduction nnbfs can provided either on their own or in combination with structural and nonstructural measures .

whether to adjust—and , if so , how—usace's consideration and use of nnbfs for flood risk reduction is an ongoing policy issue .

although congress has authorized consideration of nnbfs , examples of usace using nnbfs in its flood risk reduction activities remain limited .

in november 2019 , the subcommittee on water resources and environment of the house transportation and infrastructure ( t&i ) committee held a hearing as part of preparations for developing water resource authorization legislation .

at the hearing , multiple witnesses referenced interest in facilitating the use of nnbfs for managing flood risks and improving resilience .

congress has requested various reports related to nnbfs , but the reports have not been delivered to the authorizing committees .

when available , these reports may inform congressional deliberations on nnbfs as part of authorization and appropriations legislation .

usace considers nnbfs to include wetlands , such as salt marshes and certain submerged aquatic vegetation ; oyster , mussel , and coral reefs ; maritime forests / shrubs ; and the combination of these natural features with engineered components , such as rock gabions ( i.e. , a basket or other container filled with rocks or other hard materials ) , stone toes ( i.e. , stones placed on the lower portion of an eroding streambank ) , and concrete reef balls ( which are shown in figure 1 along with other nnbfs ) .

in some contexts , nnbfs that stabilize banks and shores also may be referred to as living shorelines .

efforts to enhance natural management of floodwaters often include attempts to restore disturbed natural features .

for example , the ability of coastal mangroves , wetlands , and reefs to function as buffers of erosion or storm surge may be reduced if these features are degraded or improved if they are protected or restored .

this report introduces nnbfs in the context of usace flood risk reduction activities .

it first discusses how nnbfs relate to usace authorities for structural and nonstructural measures .

it next discusses the primary flood - related activities for which usace has nnbf - related authority: ( 1 ) federal flood risk reduction projects and ( 2 ) a program for the repair of damaged nonfederal flood control works .

the report then addresses challenges and opportunities for use and incorporation of nnbfs within usace's flood risk reduction and resilience efforts .

it concludes with questions pertinent to the future of use of nnbfs as part of usace's flood risk reduction activities .

through the engineering with nature initiative and comprehensive studies such as the post - hurricane sandy north atlantic coast comprehensive study , usace has identified ways in which nnbfs could be incorporated into flood risk reduction and resilience efforts .

incorporating nnbfs into usace feasibility reports and their recommended plans for flood risk reduction is a step that would move nnbfs from concepts into potential usace project features .

statutory direction in 2016 and 2018 requires that nnbfs be considered as part of feasibility studies and their reports .

the discussion below provides examples of how usace has incorporated nnbfs into completed feasibility reports and how nnbfs are evaluated and cost shared as part of usace flood risk reduction projects .

usace is authorized to fund the repair of certain nonfederal flood control works ( eg , levees , dams ) and federally constructed hurricane or shore protection projects that are damaged by factors other than ordinary water , wind , or wave action ( eg , storm surge rather than high tide ) .

to receive this assistance , damaged flood control works must be eligible for and active in the agency's rehabilitation and inspection program ( often referred to as the usace p.l .

84-99 program or rip ) and have been in an acceptable condition at the time of damage , as determined by regular usace inspections .

the p.l .

84-99 program does not fund repairs associated with regular operation , maintenance , repair , and rehabilitation .

as of 2018 , around 1,200 nonfederal entities operating roughly 2,000 levee systems participate in the p.l .

84-99 program , and the nonfederal levees in the p.l .

84-99 program cumulatively span nearly 10,000 miles .

congress funds the p.l .

84-99 program and usace's flood - fighting efforts through the agency's flood control and coastal emergencies ( fcce ) account .

in 1996 , congress amended the p.l .

84-99 program to authorize usace to implement nonstructural alternatives for reducing flood risk—previously the authority was limited to the repair or restoration of the flood control structures .

congress made the nonstructural alternative authority available only if a nonfederal entity requests the nonstructural alternative .

that is , usace does not include nonstructural alternatives in its evaluation of repair alternatives unless requested to do so by the nonfederal sponsor .

in 2014 , congress extended the nonstructural alternative option to authorized coastal storm damage reduction projects .

in 2016 , congress defined the nonstructural alternative for the p.l .

84-99 program authority as including "efforts to restore or protect natural resources , including streams , rivers , floodplains , wetlands , or coasts , if those efforts will reduce flood risk. .

congress also required usace to notify and consult with the nonfederal sponsor about "the opportunity to request implementation of nonstructural alternatives to the repair or restoration of a flood control work" under p.l .

84-99 program .

table 2 provides information on how usace shares the costs for the program .

under the p.l .

84-99 program , the costs for all lerrds are 100% nonfederal .

most repairs would require few or no new lerrds .

nonstructural alternatives may require significant new lerrd acquisition by the nonfederal sponsor .

also , if a nonstructural alternative is pursued , usace will provide no further flood - related assistance anywhere within the formerly protected area , except for rescue operations , with some exceptions .

for repairs under the p.l .

84-99 program , usace primarily follows engineer regulation ( er ) 500-1-1 from 2001 , and updated agency policies for how to return coastal storm damage reduction projects to design levels of protection ( eg , how to reconstruct and renourish with sand and engineered dune and beach to the design level of protection ) .

er 500-1-1 includes nonstructural alternatives to repair , pursuant to the 1996 amendment to the repair authority , but , in practice , the p.l .

84-99 program appears to remain a "repair - in - place" program or for minor adjustments in levee alignments to avoid repeated erosive damage to a levee segment often referred to as scour .

repair - in - place planning often is more expeditious for usace than the planning required for a nonstructural alternative .

usace does not appear to track the use of the nonstructural alternative authority within the p.l .

84-99 program .

selected uses of the nonstructural alternative authority include examples following the 1997 floods in california and the 2008 floods in the upper portion of the mississippi river .

in the p.l .

84-99 program , usace may setback a damaged levee segment ; usace considers the setback a structural realignment of the levee to restore the damaged levee system .

usace does not consider levee setbacks as nonstructural alternatives .

because levee setbacks are considered as structural realignments for the repair of the damaged levee , the levee setbacks as part of the p.l .

84-99 program are designed for purposes of the levee's functioning and integrity ( eg , to decrease scour ) rather than to enhance floodplain capacity or reduce peak flows .

if a nonfederal entity pursues a nonstructural alternative , such as the acquisition of floodplain lands , the nonfederal sponsor also may choose to setback the levee .

it appears that usace would consider the setback of the levee not as part of the nonstructural alternative but as a complementary investment by the nonfederal entity .

usace and other federal agencies also may own and operate levees and other flood control projects .

usace is responsible for rebuilding flood - damaged levees that it operates .

usace has no authority to evaluate and implement nonstructural alternatives ( or nnbfs ) for congressionally authorized usace - operated infrastructure .

some contend that traditional structural measures are institutionally easier for usace to implement , which disadvantages use of nnbfs , especially in situations and contexts that favor expediency or are time - constrained .

although usace has decades of experience planning and constructing structural levees and dams , and the authorities and policies to guide those measures , the agency's guidance and experience with nnbfs are less well - developed .

for example , implementing nnbfs may require usace to work with more federal and nonfederal agencies , landowners , and other stakeholders than the agency would with structural measures .

two factors that may shape the further adoption of nnbfs as part of usace flood risk reduction activities are ( 1 ) the availability of information and evaluation procedures for using nnbfs as flood risk reduction measures and ( 2 ) the classification of some nnbfs as structural measures for flood risk management .

identifying whether and , if so , how to incorporate nnbf concepts more fully into usace's engineered dunes and beaches presents another challenge .

congress has directed that the administration produce two reports that may provide information on nnbfs to decisionmakers and planners .

one report relates to how usace complies with the wiin act requirement to evaluate nnbfs as part of usace flood risk reduction projects .

the other report focuses on usace's authorities related to repair of nonfederal flood control works , including the use of the authority to support a nonstructural alternative in lieu of repairing the damage .

in 2010 , usace ramped up its efforts to identify opportunities to incorporate natural processes into its flood risk reduction activities with its engineering with nature initiative .

starting in the mid - 2010s , congress has authorized the consideration of nnbf alternatives in circumstances where nnbfs can reduce flood risk .

the reliance on natural processes in nnbfs may provide flood resilience advantages compared with traditional structural measures or when used in combination with traditional structural measures .

however , various challenges to the adoption of nnbfs as part of usace projects remain .

among recently completed feasibility reports , usace has recommended a few flood risk reduction projects that use nnbfs .

typically , the recommendation is to use the nnbfs in combination with structural measures if the combined alternative can be economically justified .

the limited use of nnbfs in usace flood risk reduction activities to date is shaped by various factors ranging from what is known about nnbf performance to how nnbfs are evaluated .

in some circumstances , nnbfs may not be able to provide levels of flood risk reduction similar to traditional structural and nonstructural measures .

in other circumstances , nnbfs may be able to reduce flood risks , but the ability to quantify the effectiveness and reliability of nnbfs as flood risk reduction measures in different environmental conditions and for different flood and storm conditions remains limited .

in circumstances where nnbfs may be effective alone or in combination with traditional flood risk reduction measures , they can provide a suite of environmental and social benefits .

the extent to which usace considers nnbfs' environmental and social benefits , as well as their flood risk reduction potential , in agency feasibility reports and their recommendations and in decisions on repairing damaged flood control works remains unclear .

usace's evaluations and recent applications of nnbfs have raised questions about how environmental and social benefits are considered in usace planning and the potential opportunities and limitations for usace's use of nnbfs .

some questions related to nnbfs relevant to decisions about usace authorities and policies include the following: what are the remaining knowledge gaps regarding the benefits and limitations of nnbfs in flood risk reduction ? .

what are the options for decisionmakers to direct usace or other federal agencies to address these gaps or otherwise support research that addresses these gaps ? .

what is the impact of current decisionmaking processes on the accounting of nnbfs' benefits , costs , and performance over time ? .

how do statutes , administration guidance , and agency practice create disincentives and incentives for nnbf adoption for usace and nonfederal project sponsors ? .

the congressionally directed reports discussed in the previous section may inform usace decisionmakers' and planners' understanding of the circumstances in which use of nnbfs may be beneficial .

they also may inform congressional deliberations on whether—and , if so , how—to support use of nnbfs as part of usace flood risk reduction and resilience efforts .

