a growing number of reported coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) cases have been identified in the united states , significantly impacting many communities .

as this situation rapidly evolves , the economic impact due to illnesses , quarantines , social distancing , local stay - at - home orders , and other business disruptions will be large .

consequently , many americans will lose income and face financial hardship due to the impact of the covid - 19 pandemic .

in response , four pieces of covid - 19-related legislation have been enacted—most relevant for this report is the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security act ( cares act ; p.l .

116-136 ) enacted on march 27 , 2020 .

the act establishes consumer rights to be granted forbearance for many types of mortgages ( section 4022 ) and for most federal student loans ( section 3513 ) .

the law also protects the credit histories of consumers with forbearance agreements ( section 4021 ) .

in addition , financial regulatory agencies have updated their guidance to provide clarity to financial institutions responding to these events .

for loan obligations where the cares act does not guarantee a right to loan forbearance , such as auto loans , credit cards , private student loans , and bank - owned mortgages , a consumer's ability to access this option may vary .

reports suggest that many consumers have requested payment relief for these types of loans not covered by the cares act .

different financial institutions may be subject to different laws and incentives to handle consumer relief requests .

for this reason , an individual consumer may find a range of responses from different financial institutions when requesting relief options .

this report focuses on policy responses relating to the financial services industry for consumers who may have trouble paying their loan obligations , such as mortgages , student loans , auto loans , and credit cards .

first , it provides an overview of loan forbearance and other possible relief options for consumers .

then , the report discusses relevant cares act provisions and federal financial regulatory responses .

lastly , the report describes the impact this pandemic and the proceeding policy responses have had on financial institutions and consumers .

ov erview of loan forbearance and o ther relief options for consumers during previous natural disasters , government shutdowns , or other similarly destabilizing events , the financial industry has provided financial assistance to some affected consumers , particularly those having temporary difficulties repaying their mortgages , credit cards , or other loans .

for example , financial institutions have agreed to defer payments , limit late or other fees , and extend credit to ease consumer financial struggles .

in response to the coronavirus pandemic , many banks have recently announced measures to offer various forms of assistance to affected consumers .

however , the covid - 19 pandemic is more widespread than previous events , affecting consumers across the country ; therefore , financial industry responses may differ from the past .

this section begins with a discussion of loan forbearance , a common form of consumer relief .

it then describes other types of assistance that financial institutions could provide to impacted consumers .

loan forbearance loan forbearance plans are agreements allowing borrowers to reduce or suspend payments for a short period of time , providing extended time for consumers to become current on their payments and repay the amounts owed .

these plans do not forgive unpaid loan payments .

loan forbearance plans between consumers and financial institutions usually include a repayment plan , which is an agreement allowing a defaulted borrower to repay the amount in arrears and become current on the loan according to an agreed upon schedule .

repayment plans take many shapes .

for example , these plans may include a requirement that all suspended payments are to be due at the end of the loan forbearance period ; the past due amount is to be added to the regular payment amount over the year after loan forbearance ends ; or payments are to be added to the end of the loan's term .

interest or fees may or may not accrue during the loan forbearance period .

as loan forbearance and repayment plans are generally offered to consumers experiencing a temporary hardship , they have become a common form of consumer relief during the covid - 19 pandemic .

during this pandemic , many businesses might be closed either by mandate ( eg , restaurants , concerts , or sporting event venues ) or facing significant revenue declines due to social distancing efforts ( eg , more space between people at open stores or restaurants ) or changes in consumer behavior ( eg , airlines , hotels , and the travel industry ) .

many of these disruptions may be temporary , lasting only for the duration of the pandemic .

many financial institutions offer loan forbearance plans as an option for consumers who have experienced job loss or temporary income loss but may be able to continue to repay their credit obligations after the disruption ends .

in addition , financial institutions may see loan forbearance plans as a good option for consumers at this time because these plans often do not involve renegotiating contracts .

loan forbearance may be a less viable option to deal with the financial ramifications of the pandemic if it causes prolonged disruptions , such as persistent elevated levels of unemployment or permanent business closures .

other relief options available to consumers loss mitigation ( or workout options ) refers to a menu of possible options financial institutions may offer to help a distressed borrower become and stay current with loan payments and avoid default .

loan forbearance is one type of loss mitigation .

loan modifications are another type of loss mitigation that renegotiates the contract with concessions to the borrower .

these concessions can take the form of principal balance reductions , interest rate reductions , term to maturity extensions , or some combination of such options .

financial institutions or loan servicers generally weigh the costs and benefits of the various loss mitigation options and offer borrowers the least costly option from a business perspective .

loan forbearance can be the least costly option when the duration of consumer hardship is temporary and short , and the lender can be paid back quickly .

loan modifications may also be beneficial to the lender under circumstances when the costs to modify and retain the loan are lower than the costs of default .

if a borrower's circumstances , such as becoming disabled or long - term unemployed , make it difficult for servicers to offer a workout option , the lender may find options such as debt collection , auto repossession , foreclosure , or wage garnishment a less costly way to resolve the default .

finally , various contractual arrangements that loan servicers are obligated to follow may dictate servicer actions from the time the loan became distressed until resolution .

these arrangements may limit servicers' authorities and options .

financial institutions can provide other types of relief to consumers , such as agreeing to limit late or other fees and offering new credit or loan products .

for example , a consumer can refinance out of a distressed mortgage into a new mortgage contract , potentially pulling equity out of their home to repay arrears and accumulated penalties .

generally financial institutions would choose to extend new credit only if they determine that the borrower is in a good position to pay the loan back in the future .

during the covid - 19 pandemic , some banks have decided to limit new credit to consumers due to increased economic risk .

loss mitigation procedures provided by financial institutions or loan servicers are regulated in order to help protect consumers .

for example , during the 2008 financial crisis , many consumers had trouble paying their mortgages due to unemployment and decreasing house prices .

when mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates rose , federal regulators identified pervasive documentation issues at many mortgage servicers , which became an issue when a large number of consumers defaulted .

in response , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , using its authority under the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ; p.l .

93-533 , implemented by regulation x ) , issued the respa mortgage servicing rule in january 2013 .

among other things , the rule created an obligation for mortgage servicers to establish consistent policies and procedures to contact delinquent borrowers , provide information about mortgage loss mitigation options , and evaluate borrower applications for loss mitigation in a timely manner .

this section of the report discusses various relief provisions of the cares act for borrowers and consumer lenders .

table 1 presents a summary of cares act provisions that pertain to loan forbearance by consumer credit type .

in addition , other provisions of the cares act , which help financial institutions cope financially when experiencing increased loan losses , will be discussed .

lastly , this section discusses legislative policy issues relating to consumers missing loan payments .

in addition to legislative responses , financial regulatory agencies have taken other steps to respond to the covid - 19 pandemic by encouraging loan forbearance and other financial relief options for impacted consumers .

on march 9 , 2020 , federal and state financial regulators coordinated a guidance statement to the financial industry , encouraging it to help meet the needs of consumers affected by the virus outbreak .

the regulators stated that "financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers and other consumers in affected communities," as long as they employ "prudent efforts that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices. .

this statement was similar to financial regulators' past statements during disruptive events , such as natural disasters and government shutdowns .

beyond this statement , financial regulatory agencies have used existing authorities to issue new covid - 19 guidance to help financial firms support consumer needs during this time .

regulatory guidance does not force a financial institution to take any particular action for consumers ( such as offering loan forbearance ) , but it can increase the incentives or reduce the disincentives of taking such actions .

the large economic impact of the covid - 19 pandemic affects the financial system in many important ways .

for example , if many consumers were to miss loan payments , this would have negative consequences on banks and other financial institutions .

these institutions have worked to comply with the cares act and relevant regulatory guidance during the covid - 19 pandemic period to provide loan forbearance and other flexibilities to distressed consumers .

however , the potential strain on the financial system might make it challenging for institutions to provide this support , and these efforts may be insufficient to provide widespread assistance without direct government intervention .

this section of the report describes which types of financial institutions hold different types of consumer loans and how the cares act or different financial regulatory regimes may impact consumer's access to loan forbearance .

it also discusses how private sector institutions may be significantly impacted by missed consumer loan payments and the economic impact of the covid - 19 pandemic .

most households rely on credit to finance some expenses because they do not have enough assets saved to pay for them .

some consumers may not be aware of their right to loan forbearance for certain loan obligations or other relief options their financial institution is offering , so these efforts might not reach the most in need .

in addition , an increase in covid - 19 pandemic - related scams might further confuse or harm consumers .

during the covid - 19 pandemic , congress and various financial regulators have taken significant actions to require , incentivize , and encourage lenders to grant loan forbearances and other types of relief to financially impacted consumers .

however , despite these major actions , the impact of these efforts on consumers and financial firms is still unclear due to uncertainty about the pandemic's persistence .

if the economic ramifications of the covid - 19 pandemic causes prolonged disruptions , such as persistent elevated levels of unemployment or permanent business closures , loan forbearance may become a less viable option .

in this scenario , congress may choose to consider additional types of assistance to consumers and financial institutions .

