robocalls are the top complaint received by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and a consistent congressional concern .

a robocall , also known as "voice broadcasting," is any telephone call that delivers a pre - recorded message using an automatic ( computerized ) telephone dialing system , more commonly referred to as an automatic dialer or "autodialer. .

the telephone consumer protection act of 1991 ( tcpa ) regulates robocalls .

legal robocalls are used by legitimate call originators for political , public service , and emergency messages , which are legal .

other legitimate uses can be , for example , to announce school closures or to remind consumers of medical appointments .

illegal robocalls are usually associated with fraudulent telemarketing campaigns , but an illegal robocall under the tcpa does not necessarily mean that the robocall is fraudulent .

illegal , fraudulent calls usually include misleading or inaccurate caller id information to disguise the identity of the calling party and trick called parties , which is called "spoofing. .

scammers sometimes use " neighbor spoofing " so it will appear that an incoming call is coming from a local number .

they may also spoof a number from a legitimate company or a government agency that consumers know and trust .

like robocalls more generally , spoofing can also be used for legitimate purposes , such as to hide the number of a domestic violence shelter or an individual employee extension at a business or government agency .

this report addresses robocalls that are both illegal under the tcpa as well as intended to defraud , not robocalls that are defined only as illegal .

the number of robocalls continues to grow in the united states , and the figures tend to fluctuate based on the introduction of new government and industry attempts to stop them and robocallers' changing tactics to thwart those attempts ( see figure 1 ) .

in 2019 , u.s. consumers received 58.5 billion robocalls , an increase of 22% from the 47.8 billion received in 2018 , according to the youmail robocall index .

in 2016 , the full first year the robocall index was tabulated , that figure was 29.1 billion calls—half the number of calls in 2019 .

further , the fcc states that robocalls make up its biggest consumer complaint category , with over 200,000 complaints each year—around 60% of all the complaints it receives .

over the past three years , the fcc has pursued a multi - part strategy for combatting spoofed robocalls .

the agency has issued hundreds of millions of dollars in fines for violations of its truth in caller id rules ; expanded its rules to reach foreign calls and text messages ; enabled voice service providers to block certain clearly unlawful calls before they reach consumers' phones ; clarified that voice service providers may offer call - blocking services by default ; and called on the industry to "trace back" illegal spoofed calls and text messages to their original sources .

the fcc estimates that eliminating illegal scam robocalls would provide a public benefit of $3 billion annually .

a survey by truecaller , a company that tracks and blocks robocalls , puts that figure as high as $10.5 billion .

the pallone - thune telephone robocall abuse criminal enforcement and deterrence act ( traced act ) empowered the fcc to take specific actions to fight illegal robocalls ; it was signed into law on december 30 , 2019 ( p.l .

116-105 ) .

the law requires the fcc to administer a forfeiture penalty for violations ( with or without intent ) of the prohibition on certain robocalls ; promulgate rules establishing when a provider may block a voice call based on information provided by the call authentication framework , called secure telephony identity revisited ( stir ) and signature - based handling of asserted information using tokens ( shaken ) ( together known as "stir / shaken" ) , and establish a process to permit a calling party adversely affected by the framework to verify the authenticity of its calls ; initiate a rulemaking to help protect subscribers from receiving unwanted calls or texts from a caller using an unauthenticated number ; assemble , in conjunction with the department of justice , an interagency working group to study and report to congress on the enforcement of the prohibition of certain robocalls ; and initiate a proceeding to determine whether its policies regarding access to number resources could be modified to help reduce access to numbers by potential robocall violators .

stir / shaken is seen by many , including the fcc , as a particularly important part of achieving the projected cost savings associated with eliminating illegal robocalls .

stir / shaken must be implemented by june 30 , 2021 .

both the telecommunications industry and the fcc are taking steps to counter illegal robocalls .

the telecommunications industry has developed new technologies and other tools to detect and block illegal robocalls .

the fcc has taken steps to create a policy environment in which those tools can be implemented .

the fcc has also expanded the scope of some existing rules and continues to target and fine illegal robocallers .

on june 6 , 2019 , the fcc adopted a declaratory ruling and third further notice of proposed rulemaking ( fnprm ) , "advanced methods to target and eliminate unlawful robocalls and call authentication trust anchor. .

the fcc published its latest guidance and proposals on march 31 , 2020 , in a new order and fnprm .

other fcc actions to fight illegal robocallers include ongoing enforcement actions , an extension of a robocall ban to international callers , and the establishment of a hospital robocall protection group .

the fcc has taken wide - ranging steps to stop illegal robocalls , including imposing fines on law breakers ; mandating the implementation of call authentication technologies by the telecommunications industry ; creating databases of numbers that should not be called ; and providing regulatory permission to implement call blocking .

although these steps appear to be having some impact , scammers remain determined to continue their attempts to defraud consumers using robocalls .

historically , decreases in the number of robocalls are sometimes followed shortly thereafter by spikes in those numbers , illustrating how robocallers continue to overcome measures to stop them ( eg , by changing their originating numbers ) .

most of the tools being used against robocalls have been developed recently , while some are still under development .

therefore , it may take telecommunications providers some time to fully implement them , and it may be some time before a long - term and ongoing decrease in robocall numbers will be realized .

the positive impacts of fcc initiatives on fraudulent robocalls , as well as potential negative impacts on the telemarketing industry due to blocking legitimate calls , may be the subject of continued oversight by congress .

