the saltonstall - kennedy ( s - k ) act of 1954 ( 15 u.s.c .

â§713c - 3 ) established a fund ( known as the s - k fund ) to support u.s. fisheries development and research .

funding originates from a transfer by the secretary of agriculture into the promote and develop american fisheries products and research pertaining to american fisheries fund ( p&d account ) .

the p&d account is administered by the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) in the department of commerce .

transfers of revenue into the p&d account have grown steadily from $26.7 million in 1980 to $182.8 million in 2020 .

currently , the bulk of p&d account revenue is transferred into the operations , research , and faculties ( orf ) account , which supports fisheries science and management administered by nmfs .

the remaining funds support the saltonstall - kennedy grant program ( s - k grant program ) and sometimes the national program , which focus on fishing industry research and development projects .

historically , the use of the s - k fund has evolved with changing fisheries management institutions and changing needs of u.s. fisheries .

congress is continuing to consider whether current funding from the p&d account meets the needs of u.s. fisheries and the u.s. fishing industry .

some have questioned whether the u.s. commercial fishing industry receives sufficient opportunities to provide input into the s - k competitive grant process .

due in part to what they perceive as a lack of industry input , some critics assert that nmfs has not distributed funding in accordance with the primary purposes of the s - k act , such as supporting projects related to the marketing of fish .

another concern is the allocation of funds , and specifically whether there is a need for more financial support of s - k competitive grants than for funding nmfs fisheries science and management activities in the orf account .

however , if funding were reallocated to provide greater support of the s - k grant program , congress may need to consider implications of the likely decrease in funds that would be transferred to orf from the p&d account to support nmfs fishery research and management activities .

figure 1 summarizes the flow of funding from the p&d account into noaa and the s - k program .

some fishing industry representatives have questioned whether the u.s. commercial fishing industry and fishing communities could benefit from greater direct support from s - k funding .

two of the main concerns have been whether the competitive grant process should include greater fishing industry input and whether a greater portion of p&d funds should be allocated to the annual s - k grant program .

some assert that nmfs decides by its own criteria which programs receive grants and that in some cases the fishing industry's priorities do not match those of nmfs .

they contend that broader , more direct fishing industry participation is needed to inform the process of identifying the needs and priorities of grant funding .

another concern has been whether a greater portion of p&d funding should be allocated to the s - k grant program .

some contend that congress , as reflected in statute , intended to provide at least 60% of funds to the s - k grant program and remaining funding to the national program for fishing industry research and development .

however , shifting significant funding from current nmfs activities may prompt questions about whether additional discretionary funding would be forthcoming to support other nmfs functions , such as data collection and fish population assessments .

several bills were introduced during the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses that would have significantly changed the allocation of p&d funding .

similar versions of the fisheries investment and regulatory relief act in each of these congresses would have allocated funding to fisheries management regions and would have established a regional fisheries grant program .

under these bills , each regional fishery management council would have established a fishery investment committee , which would focus resources on strengthening regional fisheries management .

each fishery investment committee would have developed a regional fishery investment plan ; reviewed grant applications and projects to implement regional fishery investment plans ; and made recommendations on grant applications .

the regional fishery investment plans would have identified research , conservation , and management needs , as well as corresponding actions to rebuild and maintain fish populations and associated fisheries .

each regional investment plan would have been required to include topics related to supporting stock surveys , stock assessments , and cooperative fishery research ; improving the collection and accuracy of recreational and commercial data ; analyzing social and economic impacts of fishery management decisions ; providing financial assistance and investment for fishermen and fishing communities ; developing methods or technologies to improve the quality and value of landings ; researching and developing conservation engineering technologies ; and restoring and protecting fish habitat .

investment plans would have been reviewed by the secretary of commerce to ensure consistency with the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( 16 u.s.c .

â§â§1801 et seq. ) .

limited funding also would have been provided for administrative costs of the grant program and for the development and implementation of investment plans .

under these versions of the fisheries investment and regulatory relief act , the secretary of commerce also would have established a regional fisheries grant program to provide funds to advance the regional priorities identified in the regional fishery investment plans .

the secretary would have awarded grants only to projects that would implement regional fishery investment plans and to projects recommended by respective regional fishery investment committees and approved by each regional fishery management council .

the secretary would have been required to allocate 70% of funds from the p&d account to the eight council regions .

half of this funding would have been allocated equally among the councils , and half would have been distributed according to the combined economic impact of recreational and commercial fisheries in each region .

the secretary also would have been required to allocate 20% of funds for a national fisheries investment program that would support rebuilding and maintaining fish populations and promote sustainable fisheries .

funding would have been divided equally among five general areas: ( 1 ) regional fisheries commissions ; ( 2 ) seafood promotion ; ( 3 ) fisheries management ; ( 4 ) fisheries disasters ; and ( 5 ) other needs , including highly migratory species and international fisheries .

each of the bills would have limited the transfer of orf funding from the p&d account to 10% of receipts .

the legislation also included a provision to provide funding to review regulations and procedures used to implement management under the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act and to make recommendations to streamline regulations and incorporate new information into the management process .

in the 114 th congress , a section of the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management reauthorization act of 2014 ( s. 2991 ) would have attempted to stop the transfer of p&d funds to the orf account .

according to section 205 of s. 2991 , it would not be in order in the senate or in the house of representatives to consider any bill , resolution , amendment , or conference report that would reduce any amount in the fund ( p&d account ) .

this change in the senate and house rules would have allowed any senator or representative to stop the transfer of p&d funds to the orf discretionary account by making a point of order that a rule is being violated .

no further action was taken following the introduction of s. 2991 .

in the 116 th congress , identical versions of the american fisheries advisory committee act ( s. 494 and h.r .

1218 ) were reported or ordered reported from the committees of jurisdiction in the senate and the house .

the bills would establish an american fisheries advisory committee and would change the process for awarding s - k competitive grants .

the committee would identify the needs of the seafood industry ; develop requests for proposals ; review grant applications ; and select grant applications for approval .

currently , nmfs is responsible for these functions , and nmfs considers industry input during the selection process .

both bills also would expand the specified purposes of fisheries research and development projects by explicitly including projects that focus on fisheries science and recreational fishing .

the committee would be composed of representatives from six geographic regions of the united states .

the secretary of commerce would appoint three members from each region , including ( 1 ) an individual with experience as a seafood harvester or processor , ( 2 ) an individual with experience in recreational or commercial fishing or growing seafood , and ( 3 ) an individual who represents the fisheries science community or the relevant regional fishery management council .

the secretary also would appoint four at - large members , including ( 1 ) an individual who has experience in food distribution , marketing , retail , or service ; ( 2 ) an individual with experience in the recreational fishing industry supply chain ; ( 3 ) an individual with experience in the commercial fishing industry supply chain ; and ( 4 ) an individual who is an employee of nmfs with expertise in fisheries research .

the committee members would meet twice annually , and meetings would rotate among the six regions .

the secretary of commerce would identify three or more experts to undertake technical review of grant applications , which would occur prior to committee review .

the secretary also would be required to develop guidance related to technical review , including criteria for elimination of applications that fail to meet a minimum level of technical merit .

a grant would not be approved unless the secretary was satisfied with the applicant's technical and financial capability .

based on the committee's recommendations , the secretary would evaluate the proposed project according to listed criteria and other criteria the secretary may require .

if the secretary fails to provide funds to a grant selected by the committee , the secretary would be required to send a written document to the committee justifying the decision .

