the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , an agency within the department of the interior ( doi ) , is responsible for the management and development of many of the large federal dams and water diversion structures in the 17 conterminous u.s. states west of the mississippi river .

reclamation and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) are the two principal federal agencies that own and operate water resources facilities .

reclamation is the country's largest wholesaler of water and the country's second - largest producer of hydropower ( behind usace ) .

in addition to water supplies , reclamation facilities provide flood control , recreation , and fish and wildlife benefits in many parts of the west .

congress has authorized more than 180 individual r eclamation projects .

the goal of these projects was generally to "reclaim" arid western lands for irrigated agriculture and other types of development .

reclamation projects are unique in a number of ways .

among other things , these projects operate according to a beneficiary pays principle in which project beneficiaries must reimburse the government for their allocated share of project costs ( some costs are considered federal in their nature , therefore no reimbursement is required ) .

most reclamation projects also must obtain state water rights and operate in accordance with state law .

reclamation has evolved over time , and it remains an agency in transition .

its earliest projects were single - purpose irrigation projects ; later projects were more complex and served multiple authorized purposes .

the bureau has constructed few new projects since the 1970s , but it has been increasingly involved in other project types ( eg , water reuse and recycling , water conservation , indian water rights settlements , and rural water , among others ) .

the primary purpose of most of these projects is not reclaiming land for agricultural purposes .

how to balance these priorities with the upkeep of existing reclamation projects , and whether to facilitate new project development ( and , if so , how ) , has been of interest to congress .

this report provides background on the bureau of reclamation , including its history and authorities .

it also discusses selected issues before congress , in particular those related to the bureau's most prominent areas of responsibility .

the bureau of reclamation has been an important entity in shaping federal development efforts in the western states and territories .

along with the usace ( whose founding dates to the revolutionary war ) , it was one of two principal federal agencies involved in the majority of federally - sponsored water resources development in the 20 th century .

the below sections discuss reclamation's history and evolution as a federal agency .

reclamation's primary project types generally can be divided into the following areas: "traditional" single purpose or multipurpose water supply projects ; federal or nonfederal water storage projects under section 4007 of the wiin act ; dam safety modification projects ; rural water projects ; indian water rights settlements ; and grants for nonfederal projects that encourage investment in alternative water supplies ( eg , water reuse and recycling [title xvi program] , water and energy efficiency [watersmart grants] , and desalination ) .

reclamation also possesses multiple other programmatic authorities that are beyond the scope of this report .

cost - share structures and authorities for some of these projects are summarized in table 2 .

congress regularly considers matters related to reclamation .

persistent drought in parts of the west and the enactment of the wiin act's sections 4007 and 4009 authorities , as well as other recent developments , such as the increasing surplus balances in the reclamation fund , have spurred broader congressional discussions of reclamation's missions and its future role .

in the 116 th congress , two bills propose broad reclamation policy changes: s. 1932 , the drought resiliency and water supply infrastructure act , and draft legislation ( currently unnumbered ) circulated for public comment by representative huffman .

numerous other bills target specific reclamation programs , projects , or authorities for change .

some of the issues and legislation in this debate are discussed below .

one overarching question for reclamation is how ( or if ) the bureau should support the construction of new water supply infrastructure , in particular new surface water storage infrastructure .

the last major reclamation water storage project constructed was the animas la plata project on the colorado / new mexico border ; it was originally authorized under the colorado river basin project act of 1968 ( p.l .

84-485 ) and constructed from 2002 to 2009 .

outside of indian water rights settlements and rural water projects , congress generally has not authorized reclamation to construct major new water storage projects in the last 30-40 years .

the status of the section 4007 water storage authorities enacted in the wiin act could be important in determining the bureau's future direction .

when enacted , section 4007 was the first new major water storage project construction authority in years .

it was notable for its deference to nonfederal project sponsors to lead or contribute to activities traditionally led by the federal government .

the process set up under section 4007 was also notable for its departure from the traditional congressional approval process for reclamation projects , in which congress enacts project - specific authorizations .

although the financing structure for wiin act projects requires less of an overall federal investment than was necessary for many past reclamation projects , the lower relative up - front federal subsidy also appears likely to shrink the pool of projects using these authorities compared with those that benefited from traditional reclamation projects .

six of the nine water storage projects that were funded through early 2020 were located in california ; two were located in washington , and one was located in idaho .

that is , 3 of the 17 reclamation states appear likely to benefit from section 4007 funding in the near term .

some members of congress have proposed extending and / or amending the section 4007 authority in the 116 th congress .

for instance , s. 1932 would extend that part of the wiin act for five years ( through fy2025 ) and authorize $670 million for new ground and surface water storage projects under this section .

separately , a draft bill introduced by representative huffman would set up a new annual reporting process to inform congressional authorization deliberations for "major" federal projects , as well as nonfederal water storage projects .

under this legislation , certain nonfederal water storage projects ( specifically , nonfederally sponsored projects costing less than $250 million ) would not be subject to this reporting process and would not require explicit authorization by congress .

the legislation would increase the authorization of appropriations for section 4007 storage projects to $750 million and extend this authority through fy2025 .

supporters have advocated for continuing section 4007 authority for several reasons .

they argue that new construction will increase water availability in the west and help to address the water resource effects of climate change , and thus it warrants federal prioritization .

they also note that significantly more funding is required to complete the projects that have initially received wiin act funds .

some oppose the extension of the section 4007 authority and believe there should be little or no federal role in projects that otherwise would be the responsibility of nonfederal entities .

some opponents would prefer that congress focus on promoting alternatives that are more environmentally friendly , such as water conservation and water reuse .

if congress chooses to extend the wiin act section 4007 authority , it would signal to some that reclamation will continue to have an active role in new water development projects .

at the same time , it might suggest that this role is likely to be more of a supporting capacity than has traditionally been the case .

if congress opts not to extend the authority , it may choose to focus on other reclamation mission areas to reduce reclamation involvement and continue to transition reclamation projects and responsibilities to nonfederal users .

congress also might decide to complete some projects that have been initially funded through the wiin act on an ad hoc basis or to use other financing authorities to support new projects ( see below section , " financing infrastructure " ) .

title xvi has been a popular option for funding water reuse and recycling projects in the west since the first projects were authorized under that authority in 1992 .

in section 4009 of the wiin act , congress set up a process that allowed for the approval of the first large set of new title xvi construction projects since 2010 .

in that same section , congress also authorized federal support for nonfederal desalination projects at a similar level to that provided to title xvi projects ( i.e. , a 25% federal cost share ) , with projects to be approved through a similar reporting process .

reclamation published the first report under the section 4009 authority in 2017 , and congress approved additional new projects via the wiin act reporting by reclamation in 2018 and 2019 .

similar to the authority for water storage projects under section 4007 , section 4009 was notable for its deference to nonfederal interests ; section 4009 allows nonfederal entities to carry out studies and receive approval for federal support by reclamation based on a limited set of criteria .

congress in turn may appropriate and approve the release of funding for individual projects after they have been recommended by reclamation .

in the 116 th congress , several bills propose to extend section 4009 of the wiin act .

s. 1932 , for example , would authorize $160 million and $80 million in new funding for wiin act title xvi and desalination projects , respectively .

draft legislation introduced by representative huffman would authorize $500 million and $260 million for these projects , respectively .

both pieces of legislation would extend the section 4009 authorities through 2024 and increase the per - project federal cap for newly funded title xvi projects from $20 million to $30 million .

although some support title xvi and / or desalination projects , others question whether they should be a priority of the bureau .

opponents sometimes point out that these projects largely benefit urban areas , in particular those in california .

for their part , supporters note that by avoiding new consumptive uses of freshwater supplies , these projects have the potential to be more environmentally friendly than traditional water storage projects .

they also add more relatively drought - resilient water supplies to many fast - growing areas of the west that also depend on water from traditional reclamation projects .

although the cost - effectiveness of most water reuse and some desalination projects compares favorably with similarly located traditional water storage projects in terms of project yield per acre - foot , some projects may not be cost competitive .

aging infrastructure represents a significant challenge for reclamation .

most of the bureau's facilities are 60-100 years old , and the total replacement value of these facilities as of 2015 was estimated to be $99 billion .

as these facilities age , the beneficiary - pays model poses a notable challenge for upkeep of reclamation facilities .

most reclamation contractors do not own the facilities from which they benefit and therefore may have difficulty financing their share of project repairs .

reclamation faces challenges not only in obtaining the requisite funding from congress for aging infrastructure projects but also in structuring repayment requirements in a way that will not be overly burdensome for its contractors .

congress has expressed interest both in how reclamation estimates and accounts for its infrastructure needs and in how it plans to address aging infrastructure in the future .

reclamation generally groups aging infrastructure and related needs into the overarching project category of m ajor r epair and r ehabilitation ( mr&r ) .

this category includes both dam safety needs and federal - and contractor - funded needs for upgrades to water and power infrastructure .

in early 2020 , reclamation estimated that its five - year extraordinary maintenance and rehabilitation needs were $3.8 billion .

this estimate includes dam safety appropriations and reserved works ( both of which are funded via discretionary appropriations ) and needs expected to be funded by water and power users and not by federal appropriations .

reclamation is also working on a broader strategy to estimate and account for its aging infrastructure needs , as required under the reclamation transparency act , enacted in subtitle g , title viii of p.l .

116-9 .

it impossible to predict what portion of reclamation's short - and long - term mr&r needs will go unmet .

however , recent experience indicates that reclamation will continue to request funding for a significant share of its mr&r needs , that unforeseen expenses are likely to arise , and that some contractors will have difficulty repaying their shares of some of these large rehabilitation expenses without federal aid .

some may question the prospect of additional federal spending for these projects and contractors .

at the same time , infrastructure failures could pose a significant threat to the public in the form of physical and / or economic damages .

recent congresses have introduced proposals that would attempt to address reclamation's aging infrastructure .

in the 116 th congress , both s. 2044 and h.r .

4659 would create a new account in the treasury , to be known as the aging infrastructure account , to receive appropriations for non - dam safety related extraordinary operations and maintenance work on reserved or transferred reclamation projects , as well as repayment by users for these costs .

congress first authorized federal assistance for these costs under sections 9603-9605 of p.l .

111-11 , but to date the bureau has not provided such assistance , in part due to lack of requests from users .

earlier in the 116 th congress , title viii , subtitle a of p.l .

116-9 authorized a new programmatic title transfer process , whereby reclamation is able to transfer ownership for certain facilities that have been repaid , without additional approvals from congress .

by facilitating transfer of ownership to nonfederal users , some hope this authority will aid these same users in obtaining financing for infrastructure upgrades .

indian water rights settlements have made up some of the largest new reclamation project authorizations in recent years .

congress authorized nine new settlements from 2010 to 2016 , and five of these settlements each authorized federal costs in excess of $100 million .

the reclamation water settlement fund , a fund containing mandatory appropriations authorized by congress in 2010 , is expected to make available $120 million per year from fy2020 to fy2029 ( to fund some of these costs ) .

the remainder of funds needed to complete new and ongoing settlements is assumed to come from discretionary appropriations .

in the 116 th congress , h.r .

1904 and s. 886 both would extend the aforementioned $120 million per year in mandatory funds for the reclamation water rights settlement fund .

h.r .

1904 would make these amounts available in perpetuity , whereas s. 886 would extend deposits to the fund through fy2039 ( i.e. , a 10-year extension ) and would provide that the secretary of the interior may not expend more than $90 million per year on a single settlement .

congress may weigh whether mandatory funding is the preferred long - term approach for funding these settlements and , if so , which settlements should be prioritized for funding .

although some might view this funding as a responsibility of the federal government that will continue in perpetuity , others may prefer that congressional oversight for these settlements be maintained through the annual discretionary appropriations process .

in addition to the status of the reclamation water settlements fund , congress continues to consider major new and amended indian water rights settlements that the administration has negotiated .

s. 3019 , the montana water rights protection action , would authorize one of the largest indian water rights settlements to date , the confederated salish and kootenai water compact in montana .

other legislation under consideration in the 116 th congress would authorize new settlements with the navajo utah ( s. 644 , s. 1207 ) and the hualapai tribe of arizona ( h.r .

2459 , s. 1277 ) , as well as amendments to the 2010 aamodt settlement litigation act ( h.r .

3292 , s. 1875 ) .

congress may debate the merits of each of these individual settlements , as well as the overall approach to authorizing new settlements .

some in congress have expressed interest in proposals to finance various priority reclamation activities .

in addition to regular funding through the annual discretionary appropriations process , some have proposed using additional reclamation fund revenues and "alternative finance" loan programs that would promote public - private - partnerships at reclamation projects .

a number of members have introduced proposals to use additional funding from the reclamation fund to fund priority reclamation activities .

the reclamation fund typically has had less than half of its incoming receipts appropriated as spending in recent years ( figure 4 ) , largely due to an increase in receipts from energy and natural resource royalties on western lands .

proposals for dedicated funding from the reclamation fund have taken the form of both mandatory and discretionary funding in several areas , including new water storage , aging infrastructure , and construction of new rural water and indian water rights settlements .

in the 116 th congress , h.r .

2473 , the securing access for the central valley and enhancing water resources act ( save act ) , proposes to annually redirect $300 million that otherwise would be credited to the reclamation fund , without further appropriation , from fy2030 to fy2060 .

this funding is to be made available for ( 1 ) authorized surface and groundwater storage projects , ( 2 ) authorized water reclamation and reuse projects , and ( 3 ) watersmart program water efficiency / conservation grants .

additionally , as noted , h.r .

1904 and s. 886 , both titled the indian water rights settlement extension act , would extend the $120 million per year in mandatory funding that was appropriated through fy2029 in p.l .

111-11 .

without this change , these funds accrue to the reclamation fund .

members have put forward other proposals for financing water supply projects that do not involve the reclamation fund in recent years .

dating to the 113 th congress , a number of bills have been proposed that would authorize reclamation to provide financing and encourage public - private partnerships ( sometimes referred to as alternative financing ) for western water resource infrastructure .

these proposals—which typically are referred to as reclamation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( rifia ) proposals—generally have been modeled after the environmental protection agency's water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) authority , enacted in section 5025 of the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-121 ) .

they typically propose a cap on competitively awarded federal project financing ( eg , up to 49% of project costs may be financed ) that must be repaid over time by project sponsors .

the arrangement is seen as particularly advantageous in a federal legislative context , because wifia loans provide a large amount of credit assistance relative to the amount of budget authority required in annual discretionary appropriations .

the current wifia authority authorizes a wide range of eligible projects , potentially including many of the water supply projects that would be most likely to pursue rifia financing .

however , a separate rifia program would focus more exclusively on western water supply projects and thus potentially would avoid competition for financing with municipal water supply projects that have more established creditworthiness .

in the 116 th congress , both s. 1932 and h.r .

2473 would authorize pilot rifia programs for reclamation .

the bills would authorize $150 million for rifia expenses from fy2021 to fy2025 .

depending on the credit subsidy cost assumed and assuming full appropriation and interest by borrowers , these funds could be leveraged into more than $1 billion in federal funding for projects .

