the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility criteria .

these benefits and services include , among other things , hospital and medical care ; disability compensation and pensions ; education ; vocational rehabilitation and employment services ; assistance to homeless veterans ; home loan guarantees ; administration of life insurance , as well as traumatic injury protection insurance for servicemembers ; and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the department carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical and prosthetic research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing disability compensation , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

in addition to providing health care services to veterans and certain eligible dependents , the vha must , by statute , serve as a contingency backup to the department of defense ( dod ) medical system during a national security emergency and provide support to the national disaster medical system and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) as necessary in response to national crises .

the department must also take appropriate actions to ensure va medical centers are prepared to protect veteran patients and staff during a public health emergency .

on december 31 , 2019 , the world health organization ( who ) learned of a cluster of pneumonia cases in wuhan city , hubei province of china .

the who has since linked these illnesses to a disease , called coronavirus disease 2019 or covid - 19 , caused by a previously unidentified strain of coronavirus , designated sars - cov - 2 .

on january 30 , 2020 , an emergency committee convened by the who director - general declared the covid - 19 outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern ( pheic ) .

on january 31 , the secretary of health and human services declared a public health emergency under section 319 of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

â§247d ) .

on march 11 , 2020 , the who characterized the covid - 19 outbreak as a pandemic .

two days later , on march 13 , the president declared the covid - 19 outbreak a national emergency , beginning march 1 , 2020 .

the vha plays a significant role in the domestic response to a pandemic .

the vha is one of the largest integrated direct health care delivery systems in the nation , caring for more than 7.1 million patients in fy2020 and providing 123.8 million outpatient visits at approximately 1,450 va sites of care .

the vha employs a workforce of 337,908 full - time equivalent employees ( ftes ) , largely composed of health care professionals .

in addition , the vha has a statutory mission to contribute to the overall federal emergency response capabilities .

this report provides an overview of va's and congress's response thus far to the rapidly evolving covid - 19 pandemic .

the report does not provide an exhaustive description of all of the department's activities , and it is based on publicly available information and daily updates provided from the va .

the report is organized as follows: first , it provides details on vha's , vba's , and nca's response activities ; second , it provides details on va's emergency preparedness ( "fourth mission" ) activities to provide support to the overall federal emergency response ; and third , it describes congressional activity related to va and veterans programs and services .

the covid - 19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving situation and information changes on a daily , or often hourly , basis .

the appendix provides a summary of vha's emergency authorities .

vha's provision of medical care to veterans in response to the covid - 19 outbreak includes implementing mitigation strategies at vha sites of care , as well as testing and treating veterans diagnosed with or suspected of having covid - 19 .

 ( a general description of medical care to veterans is provided in other crs reports. ) .

in late february 2020 , the va provided information to congressional oversight committees on the number of positive and presumptive positive cases of covid - 19 .

on march 13 , 2020 , the department began publishing this information publicly on its website , which it updates on a regular basis .

the va has been providing regular updates to congressional oversight committees since that time .

the va has published two public documents that provide valuable information to patients and the public regarding the response to covid - 19: ( 1 ) a covid - 19 response plan that provides operational details for both medical care for veterans , as well as other vha missions , and ( 2 ) coronavirus frequently asked questions ( faq ) for patients .

the va covid - 19 response plan is summarized in more detail in the " emergency preparedness ( "fourth mission" ) " section of this report .

this section describes current health system capacity ( including staffing changes ) , guidance for patients , mitigation at vha sites of care ( including limitations to community care ) , and testing and treatment for covid - 19 .

veterans experiencing homelessness live in conditions that could make them particularly vulnerable to covid - 19 .

those who are unsheltered lack access to sanitary facilities .

for those sleeping in emergency shelters , conditions may be crowded , with short distances between beds , and there may be limited facilities for washing and keeping clean .

the va administers programs to assist veterans experiencing homelessness and also manages several grant programs for nonprofit and public entities to provide housing and services to homeless veterans .

these include the homeless providers grant and per diem program ( gpd ) , for transitional housing and services ; the supportive services for veteran families program ( ssvf ) , for short - to medium - term rental assistance and services ; and contract residential services ( crs ) , for providing housing for veterans participating in va's health care for homeless veterans program .

in addition , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , together with va , administers the hud - va supportive housing program ( hud - vash ) , through which veterans who are homeless may receive section 8 vouchers to cover the costs of permanent housing and va provides case management services .

the veterans benefits administration has taken several actions to assure continued delivery of disability compensation , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration has provided information for the survivors and dependents of veterans who have passed away and are scheduled to be buried in a national cemetery during this national emergency .

effective march 23 , 2020 , the nca announced that all "committal services and the rendering of military funeral honors , whether by military personnel or volunteer organizations , will be discontinued until further notice at va national cemeteries. .

va national cemeteries will remain open to visitors and for interments , but visitors should follow their local communities' restrictions on visitations and travel .

in addition , visitors should be prepared for certain areas of the cemetery typically open to the public to be closed .

these areas include public information centers , visitor centers , and chapels .

for direct interments , the nca is limiting attendance to immediate family of deceased family members , up to 10 individuals .

in addition , the nca is to work with families to schedule a committal or memorial service at a later date .

on friday , march 27 , the nca informed funeral directors of a change in the floral arrangement policy , stating that national cemeteries will no longer accept floral arrangements with direct interments.â if families want to place a floral arrangement at the gravesite , they may do so after 4:30 pm on the day of interment or any time after .

in addition , the nca limited floral arrangements to two per gravesite .

the nca announced that the national cemetery scheduling office in st. louis will continue to provide scheduling services .

the nca has set up an "alerts" web page for the public to check cemetery operating status and is directing the public to its facebook and twitter pages for the most recent operating information .

in 1982 , the veterans administration and department of defense health resources sharing and emergency operations act ( p.l .

97-174 ) was enacted to serve as the primary health care backup to the military health care system during and immediately following an outbreak of war or a national emergency .

since then , congress has provided additional authorities to va to "use its vast infrastructure and resources , geographic reach , deployable assets , and health care expertise , to make significant contributions to the federal emergency response effort in times of emergencies and disasters. .

among other authorities , the vha may care for nonveterans , as well as veterans not enrolled in the va health care system .

the va also has authority to provide certain health services such as medical counter measures to va employees .

the authority to care for care for nonveterans , applies in situations where the president has declared a major disaster or emergency under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) , or where the hhs secretary has declared a disaster or emergency activating the national disaster medical system established pursuant to section 2811 ( b ) of the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c .

â§300hh - 11 ( b ) ) .

the president's march 13 , 2020 , declaration of a national emergency under section 501 ( b ) of the stafford act allows va to use this authority .

on march 27 , 2020 , the va released its covid - 19 response plan .

the plan defines the va's national level roles and responsibilities: vha will provide [personal protective equipment] ppe fit - testing , medical screening , and training for [emergency support function #8] esf #8 and other federal response personnel .

provide vha staff as esf #8 liaisons to [federal emergency management agency] fema the incident management assistance teams deploying to the state emergency operations center .

provide vha planners currently trained to support esf #8 teams .

vha provides vaccination services to va staff and va beneficiaries in order to minimize stress on local communities .

vha furnishes available va hospital care and medical services to individuals responding to a major disaster or emergency , including active duty members of the armed forces as well as national guard and military reserve members activated by state or federal authority for disaster response support .

vha provides ventilators , medical equipment and supplies , pharmaceuticals , and acquisition and logistical support through va national acquisition center .

[nca] provides burial services for eligible veterans and dependents and advises on methods for interment during national security emergencies .

vha designates and deploys available medical , surgical , mental health , and other health service support assets .

vha provides one representative to the national response coordination center ( nrcc ) during the operational period on a 24 / 7 basis .

according to the va , during declared major disasters and emergencies , service - connected veterans receive the highest priority for va care and services , followed by members of the armed forces receiving care under 38 u.s.c .

section 8111a , and then followed by individuals affected by a disaster or emergency described in 38 u.s.c .

section 1785 ( i.e. , individuals requiring care during a declared disaster or emergency or during activation of the national disaster medical system [ndms] ) .

in general , care is prioritized based on clinical needâ€”that is , urgent , life - threating medical conditions are treated before routine medical conditions ( see the appendix ) .

the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security act ( cares act ; p.l .

116-136 ) , provided funding for the public health and social services emergency fund to reimburse the vha to respond to covid - 19 and to provide medical care for nonveterans .

however , prior to reimbursing the vha , the hhs secretary is required to certify to congressional appropriations committees that funds available under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act are insufficient and that funds provided under the cares act are necessary to reimburse the vha for expenses incurred to provide health care to nonveterans .

generally , if a state , tribal , or territorial government needs resources , it can request assistance from the federal government through its local hhs regional emergency coordinator ( rec ) , which is a part of fema's nrcc .

the va cannot receive direct requests for assistance from state and local governments .

in addition , the va does not support providing va medical personnel to nondepartment facilities .

the vha has accepted several "fourth mission" assignments from fema / hhs .

for example , the vha has responded and provided assistance to new york and new jersey .

on march 29 , va new york harbor healthcare system's manhattan and brooklyn va medical centers admitted nonveteran , non - covid - 19 patients , and on april 1 , east orange , new jersey va medical center , admitted nonveteran critical and noncritical covid - 19 patients .

furthermore , the vha is providing laboratory services , pharmaceutical and medication supply through the national acquisition center ( nac ) , and mobile pharmacy units , among others , as requested by fema / hhs .

in response to the covid - 19 pandemic , congress passed several measures to provide the va with supplemental appropriations and provided temporary statutory changes to enhance veterans' benefits and services during this public health emergency .

on march 18 , 2020 , the president signed into law the families first coronavirus response act ( p.l .

116-127 ) .

the act provides $30 million for vha's medical services account to fund health services and related items pertaining to covid - 19 , and $30 million for vha's medical community care account ( see table 1 ) .

these funds are designated as emergency spending and are to remain available until september 30 , 2022 .

among other things , the act does not allow the va to charge any copayment or other cost - sharing payments for covid - 19 testing or medical visits during any period of this public health emergency .

p.l .

116-128 , as enacted on march 21 , 2020 , allows the va to continue to provide gi bill benefits from march 1 , 2020 , through december 21 , 2020 , for courses at educational institutions that are converted from in - residence to distance learning by reason of an emergency or health - related situation .

p.l .

116-128 further permits the va to pay the post - 9 / 11 gi bill housing allowance as if the courses were not offered through distance learning throughout the same period .

with the exception of those participants covered under this p.l .

116-128 exemption , post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants enrolled exclusively in distance education are eligible for no more than one - half the national average of the housing allowance .

on march 17 , 2020 , the administration submitted to congress a supplemental appropriations request .

the administration sought $16.6 billion for fy2020 for va's response to the covid - 19 outbreak .

this amount included $13.1 billion for the medical services account .

according to the request , this additional amount would provide funding for "healthcare treatment costs , testing kits , temporary intensive care unit bed conversion and expansion , and personal protective equipment. .

the request also included $2.1 billion for the medical community care account to provide three months of health care treatment provided in the community in response to covid - 19 .

the va assumes that about 20% of care for eligible veterans will be provided in the community , since community care facilities would be at full capacity with nonveteran patients .

furthermore , the emergency supplemental appropriations request included $100 million for the medical support and compliance account to provide 24-hour emergency management coordination overtime payments , to cover costs associated with travel and transport of materials , and to enable vha' s office of emergency management to manage its response to covid - 19 ; $175 million for the medical facilities account to upgrade va medical facilities to respond to the virus ; and $1.2 billion for the information technology systems account to upgrade telehealth and related internet technology to deliver more health care services remotely .

on march 27 , the president signed into law the cares act ( p.l .

116-136 ) .

division b of this act included an emergency supplemental appropriations measure .

title x of division b provides supplemental appropriations for fy2020 for certain va accounts totaling $19.6 billion , and is designated as emergency spending .

unless otherwise noted below , funds remain available until september 30 , 2021 .

funding provided in the cares act is broken down as follows ( see table 1 ) : vba , general operating expenses account , $13 million , for enhancing telework support for vba staff and for additional cleaning contracts .

vha , medical services account , $14.4 billion , for increased telehealth services ; purchasing of additional medical equipment and supplies , testing kits , and personal protective equipment ; and to provide additional support to homeless veterans , among other things .

vha , medical community care account , $2.1 billion , for increased emergency room and urgent care usage in the community .

vha , medical support and compliance account , $100 million , for the provision of 24-hour emergency management coordination overtime payments , and for costs associated with travel and transport of materials .

vha , medical facilities account , $606 million , for the procurement of mobile treatment facilities , improvements in security , and nonrecurring maintenance projects .

va , general administration account , $6.0 million , for maintaining 24-hour operations of crisis response and continuity of operations plans at va facilities , among other things .

va , information technology systems account , 2.2 billion , for increased telework capacity , purchasing additional laptops for telework and telehealth - enabled laptops for vha providers to work from home , and to increase bandwidth and it infrastructure needs , among other things .

va , office of inspector general account , $12.5 million , for increased oversight of va's preparation and response to covid - 19 ( funds remain available until september 30 , 2022 ) .

va , grants for construction of state extended care facilities account , $150 million , to assist state homes to renovate , alter , or repair facilities to respond to covid - 19 .

this section allows the va to transfer funds between the medical services , medical community care , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities accounts .

the va can make any transfer that is less than 2% of the total amount appropriated to an account and may follow after notifying the congressional appropriations committees .

any transfer that is greater than 2% of the total amount appropriated to an account or exceeding a cumulative 2% for all of the funds appropriated to the va in the cares act requires senate and house appropriations committee approval .

this section requires the va to provide monthly reports to the senate and house appropriations committees detailing obligations , expenditures , and planned activities for all the funds provided to the va in the cares act .

this section defines a public health emergency as an emergency with respect to covid - 19 declared by a federal , state , or local authority .

the vha provides telehealth services to veteran patients in their communities from any location in the united states , including u.s. territories , the district of columbia , and the commonwealth of puerto rico .

section 20004 defines telehealth as "the use of electronic information and telecommunications technologies to support and promote long - distance clinical health care , patient and professional health - related education , public health , and health administration. .

examples of telecommunications technologies include the internet , videoconferencing , streaming media , and terrestrial and wireless communications .

this section allows the va secretary to enter into short - term agreements or contracts with telecommunications companies to expand veteran patients' access to telemental health care services .

the goal of the short - term agreements and contracts is for the telecommunications companies to provide temporary , complimentary , or subsidized fixed and mobile broadband services to veteran patients .

the secretary is allowed to enter into short - term agreements or contracts with telecommunications companies only during the period of the covid - 19 outbreak .

during this period , covered veteran patients can assess va telemental health care services through telehealth and the va video connect ( vvc ) mobile application , which the act refers to as the va program that connects veteran patients with their health care teams using encryption .

veteran patients can access the vvc on their mobile devices , such as laptops and smartphones .

the short - term agreements or contracts with telecommunications companies must address the telemental health care needs of isolated veterans ; therefore , the va secretary must prioritize eligibility to veterans who either have low - incomes , live in unserved and underserved areas , reside in rural and highly rural areas , or are considered by the secretary as having a higher risk of committing suicide and mental health care needs while being isolated during the covid - 19 outbreak .

the va , however , may expand eligibility for telemental health care services to veteran patients who are currently receiving va care but who are ineligible to receive mental health care services and other health care services through telehealth and / or the vvc .

the state veterans' home program is a federal - state partnership to construct or acquire nursing home , domiciliary , and adult day health care facilities .

va provides assistance to states in three ways: first , va provides states with up to 65% of the cost to construct , acquire , remodel , or modify state homes .

second , va provides per diem payments to states for the care of eligible veterans in state homes .

va may adjust the per diem rates each year .

a state home is required to meet all va standards in order to continue to receive per diem payments .

third , va is required to support states financially to assist state homes in the hiring and retention of nurses to reduce nursing shortages at state veterans' homes .

this section modifies the treatment of state homes during the public health emergency by ( 1 ) waiving requirements for per diem reimbursements for state homes under the vha state home per diem program and ( 2 ) authorizing the secretary to provide equipment to state homes .

the section waives the occupancy rate requirement under 38 c.f.r .

section 51.40 ( c ) , authorizing a state home to receive per diem payments for veterans who are temporarily absent from nursing home care regardless of the state home's occupancy rate .

in addition , the section waives the requirement under 38 c.f.r .

section 51.210 ( d ) that a state home must maintain a certain percentage of veteran residents .

lastly , the section authorizes the secretary to provide state homes with medication , personal protective equipment , medical supplies , and any other equipment , supplies , and assistance available to va .

the personal protective equipment may be provided through the all hazards emergency cache in addition to any other source available .

the veteran directed care program helps isolated veterans who need assistance with activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living , and who are at high risk of nursing home placement , to live in their own homes .

veterans in this program are provided a budget for services that can be managed by the veteran or a family caregiver .

this section modifies the veterans directed care program during the public health emergency to require that the secretary ( 1 ) accept telephone or telehealth enrollments and renewals ; ( 2 ) stop all suspensions or disenrollments unless requested by a veteran or representative , or the veteran and provider make a mutual decision ; ( 3 ) waive paperwork requirements and penalties for late paperwork ; and ( 4 ) waive any requirement to stop payments under the program if the veteran or caregiver is out of state for more than 14 days .

in general , vha prosthetics staff are responsible for providing and fitting prosthetic appliances that meet the best medical needs of the veteran patient .

this provision requires the secretary to ensure that eligible veterans receiving or requiring prosthetic appliances and services are able to obtain them from contracted non - va providers during this emergency period .

under existing regulations , certain va employees may not receive any combination of premium pay , including overtime pay , that , when added to their base pay , results in total pay above the higher of two rates: gs - 15 , step 10 , or the rate payable for level v of the executive schedule on a biweekly basis .

this provision allows the secretary waive any limitation on pay for any employee of the va during a public health emergency for work done in support of the emergency .

the secretary is required to provide reports on a monthly basis to the senate and house committees on veterans' affairs detailing the waivers .

this section requires the secretary to provide va home health workers with personal protective equipment from the all hazards emergency cache or any other available source .

under ordinary circumstances , eligibility for a va pension is , in part , based upon the annual income of the individual .

generally , "all payments of any kind or from any source ( including salary , retirement or annuity payments , or similar income , which has been waived , irrespective of whether the waiver was made pursuant to statute , contract , or otherwise ) shall be included" when calculating a veteran's annual income .

this provision of the cares act excludes the recovery rebate from a veteran's annual income , thereby preventing it from counting towards the income limit associated with pension eligibility .

it explicitly states that the rebate "shall not be treated as income or resources for purposes of determining eligibility for pension under chapter 15 of title 38. .

consequently , the direct individual payment included in the cares act will not affect a veteran's eligibility for a va pension .

formerly homeless veterans participating in the hud - vash program are assigned va case managers to assist with their health and other needs .

this section requires the va to ensure that telehealth capabilities are available to veterans and case managers participating in hud - vash .

the ssvf program , which provides short - to medium - term rental assistance and supportive services to homeless veterans and their families , is authorized at $380 million through fy2021 .

without legislative authority , the va cannot obligate additional funding for the program .

this provision removes the ssvf funding limitation in cases of public health emergencies .

the homeless providers grant and per diem ( gpd ) program provides grants to public entities and private nonprofit organizations for the capital costs associated with developing facilities to serve homeless veterans and also makes per diem payments to grantees for the costs of providing housing and supportive services to homeless veterans .

together , grant and per diem funding is authorized at approximately $258 million per year .

in addition , grant costs are limited to 65% of the costs of acquisition , construction , expansion , or remodeling of facilities , and per diem payments are limited to the va domiciliary care per diem rate , which , for fy2020 , is $48.50 per day .

this section allows additional appropriations for the gpd program in cases of public health emergencies notwithstanding the fy2020 authorization level , and it also allows the secretary to waive statutory limitations on grant and per diem payments to grantees .

generally , va , under gpd guidance , requires providers to discharge veterans residing in gpd housing who are absent for more than 14 days .

in addition , va will not make per diem payments after a veteran has been absent for more than 72 consecutive hours .

this section requires the va secretary to waive the discharge requirement and allows the secretary to reimburse providers for veterans who have been absent for more than 72 hours .

the student veteran coronavirus response act of 2020 ( p.l .

116-140 ) , as enacted on april 28 , 2020 , responds to concerns that abrupt and temporary closures or suspensions of educational institutions , programs of education , and employment could negatively impact the short - term finances of eligible beneficiaries and their continued pursuit of educational programs .

eligible beneficiaries include participants in several va educational assistance programs and vocational rehabilitation and employment ( vr&e ) .

the act provides special authorities for the period beginning on march 1 , 2020 , and ending on december 21 , 2020 , including academic terms beginning prior to december 21 , 2020 .

selected sections of the bill are discussed below .

the veterans work - study program allows gi bill and vr&e participants to receive additional financial assistance through the va in exchange for employment .

provisions in this section permit work - study payments in accordance with an existing work - study agreement or at a lesser amount despite the participant's inability to perform work by reason of an emergency situation .

these provisions further require the va to extend an existing agreement for a subsequent period beginning during the covered period if requested by the work - study participant .

the va has authority under 38 u.s.c .

section 3680 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) to pay gi bill and vr&e allowances for up to four weeks when an educational institution temporarily closes under an established policy based on an executive order of the president or due to an emergency situation .

the provisions in this section permit gi bill and vr&e payments for up to four weeks , in addition to any payments under 38 u.s.c .

section 3680 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , if an educational institution closes or the program of education is suspended due to an emergency situation .

in general , the gi bills provide eligible persons a 36-month entitlement to educational assistance .

gi bill entitlement is restored in the following instances: for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time as a result of an educational institution closing ; for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time because the course or program is disapproved by a subsequently established or modified policy , regulation , or law ; and for the interim ( through the end of the academic term but no more than 120 days ) post - 9 / 11 gi bill housing allowance paid following either a closure or disapproval .

the provisions in this section require that the va restore entitlement for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time as a result of a temporary closure of an educational institution or the temporary termination of a course or program of education by reason of an emergency situation .

many gi bill participants must use their educational entitlement within a specified time period beginning upon discharge or release from active duty or eligibility .

there are notable exceptions to the time limitation .

for example , post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants whose last discharge or release from active duty was on or after january 1 , 2013 , are not subject to a time limitation .

the provisions in this section exempt from the time limitation , the period during which an individual is prevented from pursuing a program of education because the educational institution closed ( temporarily or permanently ) under an established policy based on an executive order of the president or due to an emergency situation until the individual is able to resume pursuit .

the provisions are applicable to the montgomery gi bill - active duty ( mgib - ad ) 10-year limitation , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill 15-year limitation and age limitation for children using transferred benefits , the vr&e 12-year limitation and the period of a veteran's vocational rehabilitation program , and the montgomery gi bill - selected reserve ( mgib - sr ) limitation .

typically , programs under vr&e are limited to 48 months of entitlement and veterans pursuing an education program under vr&e must be enrolled to receive a subsistence allowance .

for the covered period , the provisions in this section extend protections from entitlement charges following school closures that are established for the gi bills to veterans participating in education programs under the vr&e program .

the provisions further allow the va to ( 1 ) continue paying subsistence allowances to vr&e participants through the end of the academic term but no more than 120 days following either a closure or disapproval and ( 2 ) prohibits va from charging the impacted term against a veteran's vr&e entitlement if the veteran did not receive credit for classes .

the provisions in this section provide two additional months of subsistence allowance to veterans who were following a program of employment services under the vr&e program during the covered period .

