t he constitutional system of checks and balances and the separation of powers among the legislative , executive , and judicial branches is a cornerstone of the american system of government .

by separating and checking powers in this way , the framers hoped to prevent any person or group from seizing control over the nation's government .

for example , the framers checked congressional legislative power by providing the president the power to veto legislation and , in turn , checked the president's veto power by providing congress a means to override that veto .

over time , it has become clear that the presidential veto power , even when not formally exercised , provides the president with an important tool to engage in the legislative process .

most presidents have exercised their veto power in an effort to block legislation .

of 45 presidents , 37 have exercised their veto power .

as of the end of 2019 , presidents have issued 2,580 vetoes , and congress has overridden 111 .

president george w. bush vetoed 12 bills during his presidency .

congress attempted to override six of them and succeeded four times .

president barack obama also vetoed 12 bills during his presidency .

congress attempted to override six of them and succeeded once .

presidents have also attempted to influence the shape of legislation through the use of veto threats .

since the 1980s , formal , written statements of administration policy ( saps , pronounced "saps" ) have frequently been used to express the president's support for or opposition to particular pieces of legislation .

saps sometimes threaten to use the veto power if the legislation reviewed reaches the president's desk in its current form .

among the george w. bush administration ( 2001-2009 ) and the obama administration ( 2009-2017 ) saps examined later in this report , for example , 24% and 48% , respectively , contained a veto threat .

this report begins with a brief discussion of the veto power and congress's role in the veto process .

it then examines the ways presidents communicate their intention to veto , oppose , or support a bill .

the report then provides and discusses summary data on veto threats and vetoes during the bush and obama administrations .

as specified by the u.s. constitution ( article i , section 7 ) , the president has 10 days , sundays excepted , to act once he has been presented with legislation that has passed both houses of congress and either reject or accept the bill into law .

within those 10 days , administration officials consider various points of view from affected agencies ( as is the case throughout the legislative process ) and recommend a course of action to the president regarding whether or not to veto the presented bill .

the president has three general courses of action during the 10-day presentment period: the president may sign the legislation into law , take no action and allow the bill to become law without signature after the 10 days , or reject the legislation by exercising the office's veto authority .

the president may reject legislation in two ways .

the president may veto the bill and "return it , with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated. .

this action is called a "regular" or "return" veto ( hereinafter return veto ) .

congress typically receives the objections to the bill in a written veto message .

if congress has adjourned during the 10-day period , the president might also reject the legislation through a "pocket veto. .

this occurs when the president retains , but does not sign , presented legislation during the 10-day period , with the understanding that the president cannot return the bill to a congress that has adjourned .

under these circumstances , the bill will not become law .

a pocket veto is typically marked by a type of written veto message known as a "memorandum of disapproval. .

as discussed in greater detail below , this practice has sometimes been controversial , because arguably it prevents congress from attempting to override the president's veto .

a president's return veto may be overridden , or invalidated , by a process provided for in article 1 , section 7 , of the u.s. constitution .

to override a return veto , congress may choose to "proceed to reconsider" the bill .

passage by two - thirds of members in each chamber is required to override a veto before the end of the congress in which the veto is received .

neither chamber is under any constitutional , legal , or procedural obligation to conduct an override vote .

it is not unusual for either chamber of congress to make no effort to override the veto if congressional leaders do not believe they have sufficient votes to do so .

if a two - thirds vote is successful in both chambers , the president's return veto is overridden , and the bill becomes law .

if a two - thirds vote is unsuccessful in one or both chambers , the veto is sustained , and the bill does not become law .

in contrast , congress cannot override the president's pocket veto .

by definition , a pocket veto may occur only when a congressional adjournment prevents the return of the vetoed bill .

if a bill is pocket vetoed while congress is adjourned , the only way for congress to pass a version of the policy contained in the vetoed bill is to reintroduce the legislation as a new bill , pass it through both chambers , and present it to the president again for signature .

recent presidents and congresses have disagreed about what constitutes an adjournment that prevents the return of a bill such that a pocket veto may be used .

for purposes of the sections below concerning the use of veto threats , the unit of analysis is a veto .

the analysis does not distinguish between regular and pocket vetoes .

because congress faces a two - thirds majority threshold to override a president's veto , veto threats may deter congress from passing legislation that the president opposes .

the veto override threshold may also prompt congress to change a bill in response to a veto threat .

the framers of the u.s. constitution viewed the veto power as a way of reminding congress that the president also plays an important legislative role and that threatening to use the veto power can influence legislators into creating more amenable bills .

political scientist richard a. watson writes that "the veto is available to a president as a general weapon in his conflicts with congress: franklin roosevelt sometimes asked his aides for 'something i can veto' as a lesson and reminder to congressmen that they had to deal with a president. .

veto threats are , therefore , an important component in understanding the use of the president's veto power .

in recent presidencies , these threats have generally been expressed either through saps or verbally .

president trump has also used social media to communicate his intention to veto , oppose , or support a bill .

during both the obama and bush administrations , roughly three - quarters of saps issued were on non - appropriations bills , and roughly one - quarter concerned appropriations bills .

each sap signaled the administration's intent to veto , oppose , or support a bill .

there are fundamental differences between non - appropriations bill saps and appropriations bill saps .

non - appropriations bill saps typically involve specific policy objections , such as how a program operates or what constituency the program is designed to serve .

appropriations bill saps , in contrast , often involve more general budgetary policy objections , such as the perceived need to balance the budget or to reallocate resources for other purposes .

therefore , the president may generally support a particular provision in an appropriations bill on programmatic policy grounds but oppose it for budgetary reasons .

or the president may oppose a particular provision in an appropriations bill for both programmatic and budgetary reasons .

this report focuses on the impact of the president's veto threat in non - appropriations bill saps given their more targeted nature .

data in this report were compiled from saps located on the archived white house websites of the bush and obama administrations .

using the classification of saps on each website , analysis was conducted with only non - appropriations saps for reasons described above .

the analysis examined each sap and individually assessed whether the sap contained a veto threat , the type of threat ( presidential or senior advisor ) , and whether the veto threat concerned a part of the bill or the whole bill .

the analysis considers each sap to be an individual veto threat .

in instances where one bill received veto threats in multiple saps , veto threats were counted individually and not combined .

to assess the final outcome of bills , the analysis used information on bill statuses located at congress.gov and does not track whether bills that received a sap were later combined into other legislative vehicles .

the inherent limitations in this methodology make it difficult to determine direct effects of any veto threat on the final outcome of a bill .

however , in the aggregate , general trends may be observed .

the proportion of non - appropriation bill saps with veto threats steadily increased over the course of each of the two presidencies reviewed .

saps containing veto threats as a proportion of all saps was at its highest at the conclusion of both president bush's and president obama's second terms .

figure 1 illustrates this trend by showing sap veto threats as a percentage of issued saps .

crs analyzed all veto threats contained in saps on non - appropriations legislation across these two administrations and determined whether the veto threat was isolated to a provision of the bill ( a partial bill veto threat ) or if the veto threat was not particularized ( a whole bill veto threat ) .

president bush issued partial bill veto threats and whole bill veto threats an equal amount of the time .

however , the type of threat he used in each category varied .

of partial bill veto threats , 7% were presidential veto threats and the remaining 93% were senior advisors veto threats .

of whole bill veto threats , 34% were presidential veto threats and the remaining 66% were senior advisors veto threats .

in contrast , president obama issued partial bill veto threats more sparingly ( 8% versus 92% for whole bill veto threats ) .

similar to president bush , however , of partial bill veto threats , 6% were presidential veto threats and the remaining 94% were senior advisors veto threats .

of whole bill veto threats , 20% were presidential veto threats and the remaining 80% were senior advisors veto threats .

the difference in frequency of partial and whole bill veto threats across the administrations may suggest that the two presidents viewed the use of veto threats differently: one president may have used partial threats to negotiate more with congress , whereas another president preferred to threaten a veto only when he viewed an entire bill as unfavorable .

likewise , the increased frequency of partial bill senior advisors veto threats suggests that both presidents preferred to use presidential veto threats in rejecting an entire bill and leaving senior advisors veto threats for negotiations where only part of a bill is unfavorable .

during the bush and obama administrations , enrolled bills that passed both chambers and were met with a presidential veto threat sap were vetoed more often than were those that were met with a senior advisors threat .

figure 7 shows the outcomes of bills receiving veto threats that were passed by congress and sent to the president .

across both the bush and obama administrations , a bill that received a presidential veto threat and was passed was followed by a veto 70.6% of the time , whereas a bill that received a senior advisors veto threat was later vetoed 8.3% of the time .

when a president vetoes a bill , it marks the end of the president's ability to procedurally affect whether or not a bill becomes law .

whether or not that specific bill becomes law is no longer in the president's hands .

congress may or may not elect to attempt an override .

president bush exercised the veto power 12 times .

four of these vetoes were overridden .

six vetoed bills were forewarned with a written veto threat .

 ( four received a presidential threat , and two received senior advisors threats. ) .

three additional bills received statements noting the administration's opposition to the bill but did not include a veto threat .

none of the bills that congress later overrode were preceded by a presidential veto threat .

three - quarters of president bush's vetoes ( 9 of 12 ) were preceded by a written statement of opposition to the bill .

president bush also issued multiple written veto threats on four bills that would later receive a veto: three bills received two threats each , and one bill received two statements of opposition .

president obama vetoed 12 bills , and congress overrode his veto once .

as was true for president bush , six of president obama's vetoes were preceded by a written veto threat ( four presidential and two senior advisors threats ) .

unlike the patterns observed for the bush presidency , however , all of president obama's veto threats were whole bill veto threats .

whereas president bush also communicated in saps his opposition to three bills short of threatening a veto , president obama either did not issue a sap at all or issued one that contained a veto threat .

one of president obama's vetoed bills received two veto threats .

president obama's approach of issuing either no statement at all on a bill or a statement containing a veto threat marks a different approach from the one used by president bush .

