head start is a federal program that has provided comprehensive early childhood development services to low - income children and their families since 1965 .

the comprehensive nature of the program includes educational , health , nutritional , and social services .

these services are intended to prepare children to enter kindergarten and to improve the conditions necessary for their success in later school and life .

most children served in head start programs are three - and four - year olds , but in 1994 legislation expanded head start to include an early head start program , which serves children from birth to three years of age .

except as noted , the term head start in this report typically refers to both of these programs .

head start is administered by the office of head start ( ohs ) within the administration for children and families ( acf ) at the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , which provides grants directly from the federal government to local entities ( as opposed to providing funding through the state ) .

these entities are called "grantees" and may be public or private agencies , nonprofit or for - profit , faith - based or secular .

currently , roughly 1,600 agencies receive head start grants .

head start strongly emphasizes the involvement of families and the local community to assure that programs are responsive to the unique needs of each community .

flexibility in local program design and operation is encouraged , and there is wide variation across the country in how head start services are delivered ( eg , in head start centers , through home - based programs , or in some combination ) , as well as in local program costs , sponsoring agencies , and coordination arrangements with other social service programs .

head start operates both full - and part - day programs — most ( but not all ) are only during the school year .

some local head start programs do coordinate with other programs to lengthen the time of care , both in terms of hours and the year .

full - day enrollment in head start is defined as six or more hours per day .

part - day sessions must comply with a minimum class time requirement of 3.5 hours .

the head start program is currently due for reauthorization .

the head start act was last reauthorized in december 2007 , with the enactment of the improving head start for school readiness act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) .

this law reauthorized head start , which had been up for reauthorization since the end of fy2003 , through september 30 , 2012 .

the enactment of the 2007 reauthorization law followed unsuccessful reauthorization efforts during the 108 th and 109 th congresses .

a brief discussion of the legislative history related to the 2007 reauthorization ( including the efforts of the 108 th and 109 th congresses ) is included in appendix a .

early head start ( ehs ) was established in the 1994 head start reauthorization legislation ( p.l .

103-252 ) to serve infants and toddlers who are generally too young to participate in the regular head start program .

up until the passage of the 2007 reauthorization legislation , the law had required that a portion of head start's total appropriation be set aside to fund the ehs program .

for fy1998 , congress earmarked more than was required by law for ehs , and the statutory set - aside was increased in the 1998 amendments to head start .

one of the few legislative changes sought by the clinton administration during the 1998 debate on head start was an increase in the ehs program .

the ehs set - asides were 7.5% in fy1999 , 8% in fy2000 , 9% in fy2001 , and 10% in each of fy2002 and fy2003 .

the 10% set - aside for ehs was maintained up until the passage of the 2007 reauthorization ( p.l .

110-134 ) , when the funding allocation structure was changed to fund ehs in a manner that does not involve setting aside a designated percentage .

the new allocation formula provides base - level funding for current early head start grantees and allows for additional ehs expansion dollars only if sufficient funding remains following set - asides for training and technical assistance , cost - of - living increases , and expansion funding for american indian and alaskan native ( aian ) head start programs and migrant and seasonal head start ( mshs ) programs ( more on this can be found in the " allocation formula " section of this report ) .

in addition , the 2007 reauthorization law added a provision allowing existing head start grantees to convert some of their preschool slots to slots serving infants and toddlers ( i.e. , children under age three ) , provided hhs approves a program's written request to do so .

the first ehs grants , totaling $47 million , were awarded in september 1995 .

in fy2012 , nearly $1.268 billion was used to support ehs programs across the country .

these projects funded enrollment slots for roughly 113,566 low - income families with children under the age of three .

ehs grantees must design programs that respond to the strengths and needs of individual families with services including education ; home visits , especially for families with newborns and infants ; parent education , including parent - child activities ; comprehensive health services , including services to women during and after pregnancy ; and ongoing parental support through case management and peer groups .

all programs must conduct an assessment of community resources and needs and must ensure the recruitment and development of high - quality staff .

this section begins with a detailed head start funding history for fy2009-fy2012 .

this is followed by a discussion of supplemental head start appropriations provided in response to the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 .

the section concludes with an overview of other notable funding issues from 1990 forward .

table 3 shows head start funding levels for each of fy1990-fy2013 .

unlike some other federal social service programs that are funded through the states , hhs awards head start funds directly to local public and private nonprofit and for - profit grantees .

grantees must contribute a 20% non - federal match , which may be in cash or in - kind , unless they are granted a waiver .

no more than 15% of a grantee's total program costs may be for administration .

the 2007 reauthorization law significantly restructured the head start allocation formula , beginning in fy2008 .

the following three major steps ( illustrated in figure 3 ) summarize how head start appropriations are now to be allocated .

in september 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on fraud and abuse at selected head start centers .

the report expanded on testimony presented to the house committee on education and labor in may 2010 .

in response to allegations of fraud at two head start nonprofit grantees , gao attempted to register fictitious children as part of 15 undercover test scenarios at centers in six states and the district of columbia .

the majority of the undercover test scenarios involved fictitious families that exceeded head start's income eligibility levels .

in about 62% of these tests ( i.e. , 8 of 13 ) , the fictitious families were told they were eligible for the program .

in may 2010 , hhs issued a program instruction reminding head start employees of program requirements related to verifying an applicant's income eligibility .

separately , the secretary of hhs , kathleen sebelius , sent a letter to all head start grantees addressing the issue of fraud and articulating a number of steps being taken by hhs to strengthen program integrity .

the letter indicated that , among other things , hhs was in the process of developing new regulations to promote program integrity by addressing issues related to income verification requirements and staff training on eligibility criteria and procedures .

the discussion below covers current error rate reporting practices , the proposed rule on eligibility determination requirements , and compliance issues with health and safety requirements identified by the hhs office of the inspector general .

despite its federal - to - local program structure , the head start community has long recognized that the states play an important role in the formulation and implementation of policies and initiatives that affect low - income children and their families .

rules and regulations related to child care providers , for instance , are largely dictated and enforced by state entities .

the 1998 head start reauthorization law encouraged collaboration between child care and head start , and promoted the development of unified early education and child care plans that would increase the availability of full - time services .

the 1998 amendments also directed the secretary of hhs to identify barriers to collaboration and to develop a mechanism for resolving programmatic conflicts , and to provide technical assistance related to the provision of full - day , full - year services .

in addition , factors to be considered in awarding head start expansion grants , under the 1998 amendments , included the applicant's ability to coordinate with other community child care providers and preschool programs to provide full - day , full - year services .

moreover , the law authorized head start agencies to charge fees for extended - day services provided to children , if necessary , as part of a collaboration with another agency .

the 2007 reauthorization law authorized the secretary of hhs to establish a program to designate up to 200 exemplary head start agencies ( including early head start , as well as aian and mshs programs ) as centers of excellence in early childhood , commonly referred to as "centers of excellence. .

agencies designated by the secretary as centers of excellence are eligible to receive bonus grants of at least $200,000 a year for a five - year term , subject to the availability of funds .

the designated centers of excellence must use at least 15% of their bonus grant to disseminate information on best practices throughout the state .

remaining funds may be used for a variety of activities , such as providing head start services to additional children , offering professional development , increasing coordination across programs , or smoothing transitions between head start programs and elementary schools .

the centers of excellence designation process is competitive .

in order for an agency to be considered , it must first be nominated by the governor of a state or , in the case of aian and mshs programs , by the head of the appropriate regional hhs office .

implementation of the centers of excellence program is subject to availability of funds .

the fy2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) included $2 million for this program .

to date , this is the only time funds have been appropriated for this purpose .

the fy2009 omnibus made these funds available for obligation through september 30 , 2010 .

applications were due to hhs by july 12 , 2010 .

on september 21 , 2010 , hhs issued a press release announcing that 10 programs had been selected to receive funding as centers of excellence .

the following year , on september 30 , 2011 , hhs issued a press release announcing 10 new centers of excellence .

unlike the centers of excellence announced in 2010 , these new centers did not receive special funding .

see table 6 for a list of the centers of excellence designated in 2010 and 2011 .

two comprehensive head start evaluation studies , the family and children experiences survey ( faces ) and the national impact study , are designed to measure the effectiveness of the head start program .

at the federal level , head start is administered by hhs .

however , there has been some interest in transferring federal administration of the head start program to the u.s. department of education .

in 1978 , for instance , president carter proposed to transfer head start to the department of education .

although the reagan administration tried to include head start in a block grant , president george w. bush is the only president since carter to have recommended a transfer of head start to the department of education .

he did so in his fy2004 president's budget , contending that it was necessary "in order to improve coordination between head start and other federal , state , and local programs affecting pre - school children. .

however , such a transition would have required a change to the head start statute and congress chose not to act on this proposal .

the fy2005 president's budget did not re - propose the plan to transfer the head start program from hhs , nor have any subsequent budgets .

during his 2000 presidential campaign , george w. bush proposed moving the head start program from hhs to the department of education as part of an effort to prioritize the education ( school - readiness ) component of head start over the health , nutrition , and social service components of the program .

president bush proposed a reading first reform agenda aimed at making pre - reading and numeracy skills head start's top priority .

by also supporting an early childhood reading initiative in the department of education , along with a reading program focused on children in kindergarten through 2 nd grade who are at risk of falling behind , the president's goal was to ensure that young children participating in existing preschool and head start programs would be able to read by the time they reach 3 rd grade .

by contrast , many head start advocates believed that the head start program should remain in hhs .

because head start offers a wide variety of services beyond traditional education , there was concern that transferring the program to the department of education could restrict head start to a narrow , classroom program without the broad array of human services currently provided .

opponents of the shift further suggested that moving the program from an agency where children receive comprehensive services to one focused on education would compromise the parental and community action strengths of head start .

when promoting the proposal in the fy2004 president's budget , an aide to president bush offered assurances that the proposed move was not intended to interrupt any of the social service components but rather to stress the most important part of head start , which the president believed was literacy development .

the president described the proposed transfer as consistent with his priorities and expressed his hope that moving the program to the department of education would increase the chances of making every child a proficient reader by 3 rd grade .

some of those in favor of keeping head start in hhs argued that head start currently focuses on getting children ready for school , including readiness in language and early literacy .

on october 4 , 2006 , a final rule was published in the federal register authorizing hhs to issue waivers to head start grantees from two of the provisions of the head start transportation regulation ( 45 c.f.r .

part 1310 ) , effective november 1 , 2006 .

these two requirements are that children be secured in age - and weight - appropriate child restraint systems and that at least one monitor be onboard any bus transporting head start children .

on june 15 , 2006 , president george w. bush signed legislation ( p.l .

109-234 ) that included a provision extending the deadline ( from june 30 to december 30 , 2006 ) for head start grantees to comply with requirements included in the head start transportation regulations ( 45 c.f.r .

part 1310.12 ) , namely , equipping allowable head start vehicles with child safety restraints .

the national reporting system ( nrs ) , implemented for the first time in fall 2003 , was designed to assess head start four - and five - year - olds twice a year on educational performance measures that were included in legislation as part of the 1998 reauthorization of head start ( p.l .

105-285 , §108 ( b ) ( 5 ) ) .

a may 2005 report from the government accountability office ( gao ) provided recommendations for improving the implementation of the system .

on february 12 , 2007 , hhs released a report from the advisory committee on head start accountability and educational performance measures , a group established by the secretary in 2004 .

that report provided recommendations for the integration of the nrs with other ongoing assessments .

however , the 2007 reauthorization law instructed the secretary of hhs to suspend implementation and terminate further development and use of the nrs .

appendix a .

legislative history: path to the 2007 reauthorization the improving head start for school readiness act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) marks the most recent reauthorization of the head start program since legislation in 1998 ( p.l .

105-285 ) authorized the program for fy1998-fy2003 .

during the intervening years between fy2003 and fy2008 , head start continued to receive funding , even though attempts in the 108 th and 109 th congresses to reauthorize it were not successful .

reauthorization efforts during the 108 th congress efforts to pass reauthorization legislation in the 108 th congress were not fully successful , as the house narrowly passed its bill ( h.r .

2210 , 108 th congress ) by one vote , and a markedly different bill emerged out of committee in the senate ( s. 1940 , 108 th congress ) , but was never brought to the floor .

the house bill's passage followed a heated debate over proposals to allow state administration of head start in up to eight qualifying states , and to allow discrimination in employment of head start staff based on religion .

the senate bill contained neither of those controversial provisions .

both bills proposed to increase competition for head start grants and also to foster greater collaboration between head start and other entities providing early childhood services at the state and local level .

likewise , both bills proposed to increase staff qualifications beyond the levels required by the legislation enacted in 1998 .

the school readiness act of 2003 ( h.r .

2210 ) h.r .

2210 , as amended by the full committee on education and the workforce on june 19 , 2003 , included two titles ; the first would have amended sections of the 1998 head start law , and the second would have introduced a new option for eight qualifying states to administer their own federal head start funds .

 ( the bill as originally introduced would have provided this option to all qualifying states but as amended would have limited the option to eight qualifying states over the five - year period of the legislation. ) .

h.r .

2210 was reported from the full committee on education and the workforce with a vote of 27 ( republicans ) to 20 ( democrats ) , and subsequently was passed by the house by a one - vote margin of 217-216 .

prior to passage , representative george miller offered a substitute bill on the floor that proposed to retain the changes to title i as included in h.r .

2210 , with the exception of the bill language allowing discrimination in employment based on religion .

the substitute bill would have struck title ii ( the section proposing state demonstration projects ) .

the miller amendment failed by a vote of 200-229 .

major features of the bill's title i ( "program improvements" ) included increased credentials for head start teachers ; a 2% cap on the percentage of funds to be reserved for training and technical assistance ( 1998 law set the floor at 2% ) ; increased requirements to promote collaboration and coordination among early childhood programs ; a 60% set - aside of excess appropriation funds for quality improvement ; a requirement that at least 10% of the total head start appropriation be reserved for early head start ; and new language that would explicitly allow faith - based head start programs to discriminate in hiring , based on religion ( §116 ) .

title ii ( "state demonstration program" ) of the bill contained provisions that would have allowed up to eight qualifying states to participate in "state demonstration programs" in which their allocation of federal head start funding would be administered by the state .

to qualify , a state would have had to have an existing state - supported system of public - pre - kindergarten ; standards for school readiness that are aligned with state kindergarten through grade 12 ; prior - year state and local spending at a level of at least 50% of the federal head start funds to be allocated to the state ; and an established "means" for interagency coordination and collaboration .

states would have been required to demonstrate that their standards "generally meet or exceed the standards that ensure the quality and effectiveness of programs operated by head start agencies. .

state pilot program resembled administration proposal the house proposal to allow up to eight states to administer their head start programs closely resembled an administration proposal advanced in president george w. bush's fy2005 budget request , which would have allowed up to nine states to serve in this capacity .

president george w. bush's nine - state pilot project proposal , first introduced in the fy2005 budget , was preceded by his more expansive proposal for fy2004 , which would have allowed all states the option to administer head start , provided they fulfilled certain criteria .

that initial proposal , issued on february 3 , 2003 , alongside release of the president's fy2004 budget , was included in a press release announcing the president's proposal to make changes to the head start program .

this was followed by a white house document outlining the administration's assessment of the status of the head start program and its plans for the program in the future .

the administration stated that the top goal of the head start reauthorization should be to improve both head start and other preschool programs to ensure that children are prepared to enter kindergarten .

the president asserted that states should have the opportunity to administer the program , provided they demonstrate how head start will be coordinated with other preschool programs and services to emphasize developing skills and behaviors including language development , pre - reading skills , numeracy , and social and emotional competence , while meeting state - established accountability standards .

under the president's proposal , interested states would have submitted a plan for the approval of both hhs and the department of education , in which they would outline state preschool goals and activities ; a state accountability program ; an explanation of how the current level of enrollment of head start - eligible three - and four - year - olds would be maintained ( if not exceeded ) ; information regarding the most recent year's spending on head start and state preschool programs , and assurances that this level would be at a minimum maintained ; plans for assuring professional development for staff ; and the plans for coordination of programs and funding ( state and federal ) for the purpose of promoting school readiness .

programs specifically mentioned were head start , early head start , title i preschool , the special education preschool program ( idea ) , state - funded preschool , and the child care and development block grant .

in his fy2006 budget , the president requested $45 million to support his initiative to improve head start by funding a nine - state pilot project to coordinate head start , state preschool programs , and federal child care grants into a comprehensive system of early childhood programs .

according to the administration's budget documents , coordination is a means of improving preschool programs in general , to help ensure that children enter school prepared to succeed .

the nine - state pilot project was intended to assist states with implementing reforms that promote better coordination , and in turn , school readiness .

head start improvements for school readiness act ( s. 1940 ) this bill to reauthorize head start was introduced and reported by chairman gregg of the senate health , education , labor and pensions committee on november 24 , 2003 .

there were significant differences between the house bill ( h.r .

2210 ) and the bill reported by the help committee .

most notably , s. 1940 ( s.rept .

108-208 ) , unlike the house - passed h.r .

2210 , would not have provided any state the option to administer the head start program ( nor would it have changed the law with respect to the non - discrimination in hiring provision ) .

a summary of many of the bill's provisions follows .

the bill would have changed the way in which head start funds are allocated , allowing not less than 4% to american indian and alaskan native head start programs and not less than 5% to migrant and seasonal head start programs ( provided this could be done without reducing the total number of children funded by head start ) .

the bill would also have changed the way in which remaining funds ( after the set - asides included in the 1998 law , including exactly 2% for training and technical assistance ) would be allocated , giving priority to grantees in states serving the smallest percentages of eligible children , and distributing a portion of the funds on a competitive basis .

the bill would have provided a 60% set - aside of excess appropriation funds for quality improvement .

the percentage of funds allotted for the early head start program would have been maintained at 10% in fy2004 and would have gradually increased to 18% in fy2009 .

collaboration grants would have been awarded to each state by the secretary , and each state's governor would have designated a state advisory council to advise states on collaboration between head start and other entities involved with early child care and education .

the bill would have authorized $90 million for the secretary to make a maximum of 200 grants ( of at least $100,000 per year for five years ) to head start agencies nominated by governors as "centers of excellence" in early childhood .

grants could have been used for purposes such as furthering best practices , serving more children , and providing additional training for staff .

the bill would have also addressed the population of children eligible for head start services by increasing the eligibility level to 130% of the poverty line .

programs would also have been required to keep an active waiting list at all times .

s. 1940 would have required monthly enrollment reporting to the secretary , and if actual enrollment were found to be lower than 95% of funded enrollment for a period of a year , technical assistance would have been required to be provided to alleviate chronic underenrollment .

if the underenrollment were to persist after 18 months of technical assistance , the bill would have allowed for the grantee's base grant to be reduced by a percentage reflecting the underenrollment .

the bill would have provided for the secretary to make training and technical assistance funds available to support a regional or state system of early childhood education and training and technical assistance .

the bill also outlined a variety of uses for those funds .

other provisions in the bill included increasing head start staff qualifications and requirements ; requiring that school readiness - related goals be established by a head start agency before designating it as such ; commissioning a national academy of sciences panel to review a range of issues related to early childhood care and education ( including assessments ) ; and authorizing $10 million for fy2004 to award grants for tribal college ( or university ) head start partnerships .

reauthorization efforts during the 109 th congress as was the case in the 108 th congress , the head start program was not reauthorized by the 109 th congress , despite legislative efforts .

in the house , a bill ( h.r .

2123 ) was introduced , amended , and approved by the full house .

one of the amendments offered and accepted on the house floor ( 220-196 ) was the hotly debated provision to allow faith - based head start providers to discriminate in hiring , based on religion .

on the senate side , another bill ( s. 1107 ) was approved ( by voice vote ) by the full health , education , labor and pensions committee , but did not reach the floor .

the house bill would have designated that specified percentages of the total appropriation be reserved for american indian and alaskan native head start programs , as well as migrant and seasonal programs , and the set - aside for training and technical assistance would be changed from at least 2% to "equal to 2%. .

funding for early head start would have been maintained at 10% for each of fy2006-fy2011 .

this house bill would have increased competition for head start grants , requiring recompetition every five years for grantees shown to have a deficiency .

grantees without deficiencies would have been designated as priority grantees and would not have been subject to recompetition ( in that five - year cycle ) .

priority grantees would have earned that designation in part by demonstrating active partnerships and collaboration with local educational agencies .

the bill would also have required that to be designated as a head start grantee , the head start agency must establish an independent board of directors , which would have oversight responsibility for all program activities and finances .

although the board would have been required to consult with its policy council ( of whom a majority of members must be parents of enrolled or recently enrolled children ) , policy councils would not have retained their regulatory authority to jointly approve or disapprove of many budget , program , and hiring policies .

they would have instead served in an advisory capacity .

 ( on the house floor , representative souder offered an amendment that would have maintained the policy councils' decision - making authority , but it failed by a vote of 153-266. ) .

h.r .

2123 would have put into law the requirement that each head start agency establish procedures for evaluating its delegate agencies , and procedures for , when necessary , defunding them .

the bill also would have added to law new provisions regarding reduction of funding for grantees that exhibit chronic underenrollment .

reduction and redistribution of funds would occur only if actual enrollment still failed to reach 95% of funded enrollment after receiving technical assistance attempting to remedy the situation .

the house bill also would have made changes to a grantee's rights with respect to appealing any suspension or termination .

under h.r .

2123 , a grantee would have no longer received reimbursement ( with federal head start funds ) for legal fees and other costs associated with waging an appeal .

as a means of improving coordination among head start and other state and local early childhood education programs , h.r .

2123 would have required that head start agencies enter into a memorandum of understanding with those state and local entities , and align all program activities , curricula , and instruction with state - developed k - 12 academic standards .

new standards with respect to staff qualifications and degree requirements were also included in h.r .

2123 .

this bill would have required that by the end of fy2011 , at least 50% of all head start teachers in center - based programs have a bachelor of arts or advanced degree in early childhood education ; or a b.a .

or advanced degree in a related field , with preschool teaching experience .

the bill also adopted the provision to commission a national academy of sciences panel to review a range of issues related to early childhood care and education .

the panel would have been required to complete its recommendations within 18 months of convening .

the head start improvements for school readiness act ( s. 1107 ) this bill to reauthorize the head start act was introduced by help committee chairman enzi on may 23 , 2005 , and approved by voice vote with no amendments two days later by the help committee .

under s. 1107 , changes would have been made to the way funds are allotted among programs: tribal programs would receive 4% of the entire head start appropriation , and migrant and seasonal programs 5% ( provided that doing so would not reduce the total number of children served by head start programs ) ; exactly 2% of funds would be reserved for training and technical assistance ; and state allotments would be based on amounts received in fy2005 ( updating the "hold harmless" from fy1998 ) with any remaining funds distributed not by the share of poor children under age five , but instead by apportioning 65% of the remainder among states giving priority to those whose programs serve the lowest percentage of eligible children , and awarding 35% of the remainder on a competitive basis .

the percentage of funding reserved for early head start programs would have been increased .

like the house bill , s. 1107 would have increased competition for grant funds , by requiring grantees to recompete for funding every five years .

the bill would have required agencies designated as head start grantees to assemble a governing body , which would have been required to receive regular and accurate information about program planning , finances , and performance data , and to work with the grantee's policy council and committee .

like the house bill , s. 1107 would have put into law the requirement that each head start agency establish procedures for evaluating its delegate agencies and procedures for , when necessary , defunding them .

the bill also would have added to law new provisions regarding reduction of funding for grantees that exhibit chronic underenrollment .

reduction and redistribution of funds would occur only if actual enrollment still fails to reach 95% of funded enrollment after receiving technical assistance attempting to remedy the situation .

similar to the bill introduced in the senate during the 108 th congress , s. 1107 would have authorized $90 million for the secretary to make a maximum of 200 grants to head start agencies nominated by governors as "centers of excellence" in early childhood .

staff qualifications and degree requirements for head start teachers were also addressed by s. 1107 .

among other provisions to increase staff qualifications , the bill would have required ( except in cases where a waiver could be granted ) that by the end of fy2010 , all head start teachers in center - based programs have at least an associate degree relating to early childhood ( or a related educational area , with coursework relating to early childhood ) .

in states that have established state teacher requirements for their pre - k programs , all head start teachers would have been required ( by the end of fy2011 ) to meet those requirements ( provided they are not lower than head start requirements ) .

for states without established pre - k staff requirements , 50% of head start teachers in those states' programs would have been required to have a b.a .

degree relating to early childhood by the end of fy2011 .

all head start teachers would have been required to attend an average of at least 15 hours of professional development a year .

also adopted from the 108 th congress' senate committee bill was the provision increasing income eligibility for head start from the poverty line up to 130% of the poverty guideline .

moreover , any homeless child would have been deemed eligible for the program .

the bill also adopted the provision to commission a national academy of sciences panel to review a range of issues related to early childhood care and education — including assessments .

 ( during the brief discussion of s. 1107 prior to a voice vote passage , a few democratic members of the committee did express concern regarding use of the national reporting system , noting that a may 17 , 2005 , gao report called the effectiveness of the assessment system into question. ) .

reauthorization achieved in the 110 th congress following the unsuccessful efforts by the 108 th and 109 th congresses to pass head start reauthorization , the 110 th congress embarked on the task .

on december 12 , 2007 , these efforts reached fruition when president george w. bush signed h.r .

1429 into law as p.l .

110-134 .

the original version of h.r .

1429 was introduced in the house by representative kildee on march 9 , 2007 .

it was amended in committee ( education and labor committee ) on march 14 , 2007 .

amendments rejected by the committee included two controversial ( yet familiar ) provisions from previous congresses' reauthorization debates .

representative fortuño offered the amendment proposing to allow faith - based head start agencies to discriminate in hiring based on religion , and after vigorous debate , it failed by a vote of 19-26 .

representative price offered the amendment proposing state pilot projects for up to eight states , and it too failed , by a vote of 18-27 .

the bill passed the house on may 2 , 2007 , by a vote of 365-48 .

twelve amendments to the committee - reported version of the bill were offered on the house floor , and nine were accepted .

the proposal to establish a demonstration program allowing eight states to administer the head start program was again offered as an amendment ( by representative price ) but failed 165-254 .

one amendment that was frequently referenced during consideration of h.r .

1429 , but that had been rejected by the rules committee for floor consideration , was the amendment pertaining to faith - based providers' ability to discriminate in hiring .

the amendment , submitted by representative fortuño , would have allowed faith - based head start providers to discriminate in their hiring of head start employees , based on religion — overriding a provision in head start law that bars this .

it also would have stipulated that ( 1 ) religious organizations be considered as head start providers on the same basis as other nongovernmental organizations and not be discriminated against because of their religious character , ( 2 ) faith - based providers can retain their religious character and control of their internal governance , ( 3 ) religious providers cannot be required to remove religious symbols and art , ( 4 ) federal head start funds cannot be used for sectarian worship , instruction , or proselytization , and ( 5 ) federal audits of faith - based head start providers be limited to federal funds they receive .

although representative fortuño's amendment was not approved for floor consideration , a motion was made ( by representative mckeon ) during floor debate to return h.r .

1429 to the education and labor committee for further consideration of the provisions in this amendment .

the motion failed by a vote of 195-222 .

the reauthorization measure , h.r .

1429 as amended , subsequently passed the house by a vote of 365-48 .

on the senate side , a head start reauthorization bill ( s. 556 ) was originally introduced by senator kennedy in february 2007 and was approved and reported by the senate help committee ( s.rept .

110-49 ) .

on june 19 , 2007 , the full senate passed this bill ( with technical changes ) under the house bill's number , h.r .

1429 , by voice vote ( under unanimous consent ) .

on november 9 , 2007 , house and senate conferees filed a conference report accompanying h.r .

1429 ( h.rept .

110-439 ) resolving differences between the house - and senate - passed versions of a reauthorization measure .

the conference report was agreed to on november 14 , 2007 , and was later signed by the president on december 12 , 2007 .

appendix b. arra implementation of the $2.1 billion in head start funding appropriated by the arra , $1.1 billion was explicitly directed toward the expansion of early head start programs .

the remainder of the appropriation ( $1.0 billion ) was to be distributed through the regular head start formula .

table b - 1 displays how these funds were allocated , by category .

because the fy2009 omnibus also provided an increase over fy2009 funding levels , this table displays categorical increases in fy2009 funding by specific appropriation source ( eg , arra and omnibus ) .

the arra gave hhs until the end of fy2010 to obligate these funds and hhs reported obligating roughly $2.1 billion by that deadline ( $577 million in fy2009 and $1.523 billion in fy2010 ) .

according to hhs data , arra funds supported 61,078 new enrollment slots for head start children ( including 48,041 in early head start programs ) in 3,516 new classrooms over the course of fy2010 .

arra expansion funds were not awarded to applicants until the end of fy2009 ( at the earliest ) , so arra - funded slots were not filled until fy2010 .

allocations table b - 2 shows allocation amounts available for head start grantees in each state , as well as the allocation for aian and mshs programs .

allocations are displayed based on funding made available by the fy2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) , the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) , and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

arra funds were made available for obligation by hhs through the end of fy2010 ; hhs obligated only a portion of those funds in fy2009 .

