atpa was created as part of a broader andean initiative to address the growing drug trade fromlatin america .

it provided zero or reduced tariffs on certain u.s. imports from bolivia , colombia,ecuador , and peru ( see appendix 1 for program details ) to complement crop eradication,interdiction , military training , and other counternarcotics efforts .

in 1992 , when the program wasimplemented , supporters expected that atpa - induced export diversification and growth wouldencourage economic alternatives to coca production and other drug - related activity , with oneestimate projecting as much as a three - fold increase in u.s. imports from atpa countries over adecade .

 ( 1 ) trade data alone , however , do not provide adequate measures of success , which should link a decline in drug activity with the expansion of atpa supported industries .

indeed , there was somemovement on the drug front .

for example , total coca cultivation fell by 13% from 1992 to 2000 .

this represented significant declines in bolivia ( 68% ) and peru ( 74% ) , but an offsetting largeincrease in colombia ( 267% ) .

little coca is grown in ecuador .

 ( 2 ) determining the role of atpatariff preferences in this trend , however , presents a difficult challenge because their effects must beisolated from other counternarcotics and economic development efforts .

studies by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) of atpa's trade effects suggest that overall , the program had a positive , but small influence on the volume and composition of u.s.imports from atpa countries .

for example , although total u.s. imports from atpa countries ona dollar - value basis grew 85% through the decade 1990-99 , this was much less than some had hopedfor and represented no growth of atpa imports relative to u.s. import growth worldwide .

further,the composition of u.s. imports from andean countries changed only slightly in favor of productsthat were atpa eligible .

this suggests that there was no major change in the production structureof atpa economies , particularly in the biggest atpa beneficiary , colombia , which actuallyexperienced a large increase in coca production in the 1990s .

one of the most telling indicators of atpa's limited influence was that u.s. imports given preferential treatment exclusively under atpa represented only 10% of total imports from the foureligible countries .

 ( 3 ) this constituted a smallpercentage of trade and did not grow through the lifeof the atpa program .

without legislative change to the atpa program , a larger response wasthought to be limited in the short run by the andean export sector's dependence on a fewnatural - resource based products and simple manufactures , atpa's program exclusion of manymajor andean products ( e.g .

petroleum products , textiles , certain leather goods ) , and the fact thatmany products were already eligible for duty - free or preferential treatment under other tradearrangements .

in short , as elaborated below , although there was a positive response to the atpa preferential tariff provisions , the overall impact was small and operated at the margin of andean trade .

similarly , the tariff preferences had little effect on the united states economy , suggesting the costof these preferences was low .

colombia and bolivia qualified as atpa first beneficiaries in mid - 1992 , with ecuador andperu following one year later .

despite atpa , aggregate u.s. trade with beneficiary countriesremained small and grew in line , more or less , with the average for u.s. trade worldwide .

for thedecade 1990 to 2000 , u.s. exports to atpa countries rose by 84% , less than total export growth ( see appendix 2 for aggregate trade data. ) .

relative to the rest of the world , u.s. exports to atpacountries declined slightly to less than 1% of total exports , although there was an upward trend inthe mid - 1990s .

u.s. imports from atpa countries , although rising by 105% in dollar terms from1990 to 2000 , also declined slightly on a relative basis to less than 1% of total u.s. imports from theworld .

in addition to trade volume , another indicator of atpa's possible effects is change in the composition of atpa imports .

figure 1 contrasts the composition of u.s. imports from atpacountries between 1994 and 2000 .

because 1994 was the first full year all four countriesparticipated , it provides a base for comparison since it is unlikely to reflect large changes in the tradecomposition due to atpa given that insufficient time had passed for industries to have respondedfully .

 ( 4 ) a comparison of the two years suggests that on a broad product category basis , the composition of u.s. imports from eligible countries changed only marginally during the time thatthe original atpa program operated .

most notable was the addition of peru's refined coppercathode imports , which began in 1995 and were atpa eligible .

petroleum products , which werenot eligible for atpa tariff preferences , remained a large portion of imports , but camepredominantly from colombia .

there was a contrasting relative decline in seafood and coffeeimports .

in general , the minimal change in u.s. import composition during this time period reflected three factors .

first , most u.s. imports from atpa countries were natural - resource based products ( petroleum , gold , fish , coffee , bananas , cut flowers ) or simple manufactures ( knit apparel , sweaters,shirts , suits , copper cathodes ) , many of which were not atpa eligible .

this trend is likely tocontinue regardless of atpa reauthorization .

second , the continuing large portion of oil importson a dollar - value basis in 2000 continued to skew import figures , reflecting in part the worldwidesurge in oil prices .

third , colombia stands out as the dominant atpa trade partner , accounting for62% of total u.s. imports from the group in 2000 , followed by peru and ecuador , both with 18%,and bolivia trailing with only 2% .

 ( 5 ) given that the relative size and composition of atpa imports , variables expected to reflect the program's effects , did not change during the course of the program , little trade effect seemsattributable to the atpa provisions .

a closer look at the trade data at the sectoral level supports thisconclusion , until the data are further disaggregated by duty treatment and product type .

these trendsare in keeping with economic reasoning that would suggest a program such as atpa would notaffect the overall structure of trade , but might alter the composition of atpa imports at the marginand within very specific product categories .

an evaluation of atpa should indicate how any changes in trade patterns affect the economiesof the andean countries and the united states .

two studies required by the atpa legislationtackled these questions .

first , the u.s. international trade commission atpa report evaluated boththe andean and u.s. responses to atpa .

the u.s. department of labor produced a separatetargeted evaluation of atpa's effects on u.s. workers .

both pointed to the marginal effects ofatpa on the economies of participating countries and the united states .

atpa was only a small part of the larger andean counternarcotics effort .

coca production wasthe primary target of these efforts and because it is a highly profitable undertaking and particularlyenticing for poor areas of the world , a key element of the strategy was supporting the cultivation ofalternative cash crops .

 ( 22 ) atpa's supportersargued that reduced tariffs conceivably played a partof the "alternative development" strategy by providing an additional financial incentive to substitutelegal crops for coca cultivation .

the increase in non - agricultural exports ( e.g .

copper cathodes ) , itwas argued , may also have reflected , in part , atpa's preferential tariff treatment .

testimony before congressional committees expressed the desire by groups in the united states and the andean countries to reauthorize atpa and consider expanding the tariff preferences to moreproducts and countries .

these views were summarized before congress by representatives of thebush administration as well , who stated that atpa was achieving its goal of promoting "exportdiversification and broad - based economic development that provides sustainable economicalternatives to drug - crop production in the andean region. .

 ( 23 ) in considering the merits of atpa , it is important to understand that the benefits it provided were quantitatively small .

atpa's influence should have been visible in the changing compositionof u.s. imports , which was marginal .

because many imports were not eligible by law for atpaduty - free treatment or entered the united states under other preferential trade arrangements , only10% of atpa country imports entered the united states exclusively under the atpa provisions .

this did not change over time , suggesting that atpa's effect on trade was unlikely to increase,unless the program's parameters were modified .

because the trade response has been small , so too have been atpa's likely effects on the andean economies .

still , indirect evidence suggests that it may have supported economicdiversification into products such as copper cathodes and asparagus .

asparagus , for example , hasbeen cultivated in larger quantities near traditional coca producing regions .

although anencouraging sign , given the high profitability of coca and active resistence by both armed guerrillagroups and peasants , there were limits to what atpa may have been expected to accomplish andit was not clear that there is a strong direct link between increased atpa - eligible exports and anyverifiable diminished drug - related activity .

in addition to the economic analysis , the debate over atpa considered more intangible policy benefits .

for example , supporters argued that atpa was an expression of direct u.s. support forthe regional counternarcotics efforts with potentially positive side benefits in the area of economicdevelopment .

they also noted that it was a less expensive and invasive counter - drug optioncompared to the large financial and military commitment of plan colombia .

supporters of atpa proposed at least three program initiatives .

first , reauthorize atpa for an extended period of time to reinforce the u.s. commitment to the alternative developmentcounternarcotics strategy .

second , extend duty - free treatment to other andean exports , such astextile and apparel products , to broaden the program effects , particularly in colombia , which remainsthe most problematic country .

third , include venezuela as a beneficiary country , which althoughnot currently a major coca producer , is part of the larger drug trafficking problem .

on december 4 , 2001 , atpa expired and u.s. tariffs were reimposed on affected andeanexports .

on february 15 , 2002 , the bush administration deferred collection of these tariffs for 90days in expectation that the 107th congress would either reauthorize atpa or provide a short - termextension of its trade preferences .

in part because the atpa legislation was eventually linked to thelarger debate on trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , congress was unable to complete work on the billbefore the deferral expired .

the atpa program was reauthorized in the andean trade promotionand drug eradication act ( atpdea ) , title xxxi of the trade act of 2002 ( h.r .

3009 ) , which was signed into law by president bush on august 6 , 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

all dutyreductions that were in place prior to atpa's expiration were made retroactive to december 4 , 2001and presumably all those duties collected are reimbursable .

the original atpa program had two major facets .

first , each nation had to be designated a"beneficiary country" by meeting legislated standards .

 ( 28 ) beneficiary status could be denied if acountry: 1 ) is a communist country ; 2 ) unfairly nationalizes or expropriates u.s. property , tangibleor intellectual , without due recourse or commitment for compensation ; 3 ) fails to act in good faithin recognizing arbitral awards in favor of u.s. citizens or companies ; 4 ) affords preferentialtreatment to products from other developed countries that may have a significant impact on u.s.commerce ; 5 ) has a government entity that fails to follow copyright agreements for broadcastmaterials ; 6 ) is not a signatory to an agreement providing for the extradition of u.s. citizens ; or 7 ) is not taking steps to afford internationally recognized workers rights as in the trade act of 1974 .

all conditions , except 4 and 6 , may be waived by the president if conferring beneficiary status isdeemed in the economic or security interests of the united states .

the president is also required toconsider other factors , among them the prospective beneficiary country's: 1 ) interest in atpa ; 2 ) economic conditions and development policies ; 3 ) trade policies and practices complying with rulesdefined in the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement ; and 4 ) efforts to meet the narcoticscooperation certification criteria .

second , eligible articles must be imported directly from a beneficiary country .

the content of materials and processing costs originating in cbtpa or atpa beneficiary countries , puerto rico,the virgin islands and up to 15 percentage points of u.s. origin value must sum to at least 35% ofthe value of the article when it enters the united states .

many products are denied duty - freetreatment , including textile and apparel products subject to textile agreements , crude and refinedpetroleum products , canned tuna , and certain footwear , watches , sugars , syrups , molasses , and rumproducts .

selected import sensitive products are eligible for only a 20-percent reduction in duties,including certain handbags , luggage , flat goods , work gloves , and leather wearing apparel .

thepresident may suspend duty - free treatment under title ii of the trade act of 1974 ( safeguard actions ) or the national security provision ( sec .

232 ) of the trade expansion act of 1962 , as amended ( 19u.s.c .

1862 ) .

other trade regulations apply , such as quotas and food - safety requirements .

 ( 29 ) atpa operated in addition to the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , a program in place since 1976 giving duty - free treatment to certain developing country imports to promote economicdevelopment .

where the two programs overlap , many andean exporters preferred to use atpabecause it covered more tariff categories , tended to be more liberal and easier to qualify under , andhad a ten - year authorization and so until recently , had not expired as had the gsp multiple times inthe 1990s .

 ( 30 ) .

