foreign ballistic and cruise missiles pose a potential threat to the national security interestsof the united states .

while weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) can be delivered by a variety ofmeans including aircraft , artillery , and asymmetric means , it is missile - delivered wmds that garnerthe most domestic and international attention .

countries with a wmd missile capability have thepotential to influence the actions of other countries in their regions or even countries on anothercontinent and , in some cases , destroy population centers and national infrastructure .

at the presenttime , the united states is within range of the ballistic missiles of russia , china , and perhaps northkorea , as well as france and the united kingdom .

several other countries have missiles withinrange of u.s. overseas facilities and interests .

a number of countries are attempting to eitherprocure or develop longer - range ballistic missiles to accurately deliver wmds over great distancesand many fear that one day such an attack may be launched against the united states by a regionalpower or rogue state where stringent political and military controls over these weapons are notexercised .

estimates of the missile threat to the united states continue to be controversial for a numberof reasons .

one is that many missile programs have moved underground and can also be hidden ina country's civilian space or aerospace industry , making it much harder for intelligence organizationsto track development .

there is also some controversy still surrounding the 1995 nationalintelligence estimate and 1998's report of the commission to assess the ballistic missile threatto the united states ( p.l .

104-201 ) also known as the rumsfeld commission report .

despitenumerous recent developments in missile programs world - wide , the rumsfeld commission reportcontinues in 2005 to be the open source benchmark for missile proliferation .

while there is stilldisagreement about the extent of the missile threat , the bush administration's unwaveringcommitment to ballistic missile defense has resulted in the deployment of ballistic missileinterceptors at ft. greely , alaska and vandenberg air force base in california .

 ( 1 ) estimates released by the u.s. intelligence community vary little from those issued in thelate 1990s by the rumsfeld committee .

iran is still assessed as being capable of developing anintercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) ( 2 ) capable of reaching the united states by 2015 ( 3 ) although in the1995 nationalintelligence estimate ( nie ) most intelligence agencies believed that this could happen before 2015 .

the nie also cites north korea as posing an icbm threat to the united states before 2015 .

likewise , north korea's ballistic missile development time lines may need to be re - evaluated as newmissile programs are apparently underway .

while not posing a direct threat to the united states , theproliferation of shorter range ballistic missiles and cruise missiles has resulted in heightened regionaltensions in the middle east , between india and pakistan , and between china and taiwan .

about three dozen countries have been publicly identified as having ballistic missiles , andhalf of those countries are in asia and the middle east ( see table 1 ) .

about 30 of these countrieshave , or are developing , ballistic missiles that can deliver a 500-kilogram warhead 300 kilometersor further .

 ( 14 ) of thenon - european countries , fourteen have produced ballistic missiles ( argentina , china , egypt , india,iran , iraq , israel , north korea , pakistan , south korea , syria , taiwan , ukraine , and south africawhich no longer produces missiles ) .

in addition to these regional powers , which are often discussedas missile proliferators , several western and eastern european countries and republics of the formersoviet union have missiles .

international pressures and domestic policy decisions have eliminated certain missileprograms in brazil , egypt , south africa , poland , hungary , and former soviet republics .

while thelong - standing missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) is credited with slowing missileproliferation , it is not known what effect - - if any - - the international code of conduct againstballistic missile proliferation ( icoc ) will have on proliferators .

 ( 15 ) mtcr .

the united states , canada , france , germany,italy , japan , and the united kingdom established the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) on april 16 , 1987 .

the mtcr was designed to slow the proliferation of ballistic and cruise missiles,rockets , and unmanned air vehicles ( uav ) capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction .

itis an informal arrangement , not a treaty , consisting of guidelines for transfers of missiles and relatedtechnology , and an annex listing items to be controlled .

the regime is based on the premise thatforeign acquisition or development of delivery systems can be delayed and made more difficult andexpensive if major producers restrict exports .

the mtcr has no independent means to monitor orenforce its guidelines .

nations adopt the guidelines as national policy and are responsible forrestraining their own missile - related transfers .

icoc .

on november 25 , 2002 , icoc wasinaugurated at the hague , the netherlands .

the icoc , like the mtcr , is not a treaty but instead aset of "fundamental behavioral norms and a framework for cooperation to address missileproliferation. .

the icoc focuses on addressing the demand side of proliferation and is viewed ascomplementing the supply side oriented mtcr .

it seeks to achieve transparency by usingconfidence building measures , such as information transfer on ballistic missile programs .

it alsocalls for pre - launch notification of ballistic missile flight tests .

unlike the mtcr , the icoc intendsto establish a formal standing organization to collect information and oversee the development ofits confidence building measures and information control mechanisms .

table 1 .

missiles by categories of range note: see the missile inventory appendix at the end of this report for a listing of each missileprogram by country .

based on reported program progress , it is reasonable to conclude that the development andacquisition of ballistic and cruise missiles continues to remain a central security goal for a numberof countries of concern to the united states .

while shorter - range ballistic missiles are of concern,particularly in terms of their use on the battlefield , a number of combat proven and developmentalballistic missile defense systems - - such as the u.s. patriot and the israeli arrow - - provide a meansto counter these systems .

china , a country that has had long - range ballistic missiles and nuclearwarheads for a number of decades , appears to be modernizing and upgrading its capability , notnecessarily to directly rival or surpass the united states but , as some suggest , as a means to obtaineven greater strategic "freedom of action. .

some speculate that iran and north korea - - countrieswith a significant u.s. military presence near their borders - - are attempting to achieve a basicnuclear missile capability in order to deter u.s. military action .

some believe that these countriesin various stages of nuclear missile development can be deterred from further progress , eitherthrough diplomacy or some form of coercion .

others say that , short of physical destruction of theirprograms , countries like north korea and iran will eventually achieve the capability to delivernuclear weapons to various ranges with ballistic missiles .

cruise missile programs are far morewidespread than ballistic missile programs , largely due to their relative affordability and the dual usenature of their technology .

while cruise missiles may not be able to deliver significant payloads overgreat distances , their stealth and accuracy afford their possessors a potential asymmetric advantage .

in order to address the implications of progressively improving and diversified ballistic andcruise missile threats , the united states has relied on nonproliferation and counterproliferationactivities in various combinations and in varied degrees of application .

some analysts contend thatpast administrations relied too heavily on nonproliferation activities ( which are considerably lessexpensive and controversial than many counterproliferation programs ) and blame this imbalance forthe current state of missile proliferation .

the current bush administration is accused by otherexperts as being too heavily skewed in the direction of counterproliferation , as witnessed by thenational missile defense program and the proliferation security initiative , but still other expertsnote that much of the emphasis on counterproliferation is an inevitable result of the events ofseptember 11 , 2001 .

the national security strategy of the united states of america published in september 2002calls for "proactive counterproliferation efforts" and "strengthened nonproliferation efforts" againstterrorist and hostile states .

 ( 129 ) while missiles are not singled out in the strategy , they areimplicitly part of the administration's definition of wmd .

the december 2002 national strategyto combat weapons of mass destruction goes into far greater detail on how the threat of wmds andmissiles will be dealt with .

 ( 130 ) this strategy explicitly states that "the united states , ourfriends and allies , and the broader international community must undertake every effort to preventstates and terrorists from acquiring wmd and missiles. .

the primary means by which this goal isto be achieved is through counterproliferation and nonproliferation activities .

the strategy states that"effective interdiction is a critical part of the u.s. strategy to combat wmd and their deliverymeans. .

another approach is the widely publicized concept of preemption .

while preemption hasbeen an underlying assumption in previous national security strategies , it has assumed a prominentrole in the current strategy .

some have called for preempting wmd and missile programs in northkorea and iran , but the use of eliminating iraq's wmds as the basis for going to war in iraq in 2003and the subsequent revelation that iraq had previously eliminated these programs , has likelyeliminated preemption from further practical consideration .

in the area of nonproliferation , the strategy calls for the "strengthening of the missiletechnology control regime ( mtcr ) , including the support for universal adherence to theinternational code of conduct against ballistic missile proliferation. .

also part of this strategy isthe implementation of bilateral and multilateral agreements to stop the spread of missileproliferation .

the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) , announced by president bush on may 31 , 2003,is an international initiative which focuses on the interdiction of shipment of wmd and associateddelivery systems and technology .

 ( 131 ) more than 60 countries currently support the psi and whiledetails surrounding its implementation are few - - largely attributed to intelligence and securityconsiderations - - u.s. secretary of state rice noted that the psi was responsible for stopping 11wmd - related transfers since 2004 - although it is unclear how many of these transfers weremissile - related .

on june 29 , 2005 , president bush issued an unclassified executive order titled "blockingproperty of weapons of mass destruction proliferators and their supporters" ( 132 ) intended to freezeassets of individuals or companies in the united states that are doing business with entities in iran,north korea , an syria suspected to be involved in wmd proliferation .

the executive order annexcontains the name of eight companies and freezes their u.s. assets and prohibits u.s. citizens orcompanies from conducting business transactions with them .

while there appears to be little emphasis placed on the mtcr and code of conduct by theadministration , the psi and moves to freeze assets of companies involved in wmd proliferationsuggest that the administration is embarking on a more aggressive form of nonproliferation .

whilesome may consider these moves confrontational and , in the case of the psi , somewhat questionablefrom a legal perspective , others suggest that traditional treaties and agreements - - which generallyare not subscribed to by nations of concern - - have done little to deter more aggressive countries suchas north korea and iran from advancing their missile programs .

 ( see footnote 3 on page crs - 2 for abbreviations - blank spaces indicate data unknown ) .

