in the mid - 1990s , the primary threat posed by nbc weapons to the united states shifted from an all - out u.s. - russian strategic exchange to less overwhelming , but more numerous and perhaps less predictable threats .

the dissolution of the soviet union had turned some russian weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) strengths into weaknesses and the fear of "loose nukes"prompted the u.s. government to help shore up the safety and security of russian wmd infrastructure .

around the same time , u.n. inspections uncovered iraq's massive nbc weapons programs and a crisis erupted over the north korean nuclear weapons program .

it could no longer be assumed that the united states would face symmetric or parallel threats .

a "paradox of the new strategic environment," according to then - secretary of defense william cohen , was that "american [conventional] military superiority actually increases the threat of nuclear , biological and chemical attack against us by creating incentives for adversaries to challenge us asymmetrically. .

accordingly , congress has been concerned about the countries and groups that have nuclear , biological and chemical ( nbc ) weapons , are developing or trying to acquire them , and about those who have or seek missile delivery systems .

the heightened sense of vulnerability to terrorism since the attacks in september 2001 , coupled with reports of al qaeda pursuing research on chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear weapons , has focused attention on the connection between terrorism and wmd .

in march 2002 , president bush stated that "... every nation in our coalition must take seriously the growing threat of terror on a catastrophic scale — terror armed with biological , chemical , or nuclear weapons. .

the unpredictability of terrorist efforts to acquire nbc weapons and a potentially higher probability of use pose a serious challenge to global stability and security .

in particular , the bush administration has singled out state sponsors of terrorism with nbc weapons programs as particular security threats .

u.s. and allied leaders and analysts continue to debate the exact nature and extent of the wmd threat .

the status of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons worldwide has changed only slowly over time .

in absolute numbers , stockpiles are actually decreasing .

some u.s. and foreign analysts emphasize the positive impact of the demise of the soviet union and progress made in u.s. - russian arms control and international arms control .

others emphasize the negative impact of the nuclear tests by india , pakistan and north korea ; missile tests by north korea , iran , india , and pakistan ; continuing transfers of dangerous technology by states such as china , russia , and north korea ; the activities of clandestine procurement networks ; and a growing interest in nbc weapons among terrorists .

this report focuses on the current threat and trends in nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons and missiles .

potential nbc weapons threats to u.s. security interests affect important national security and foreign policy decisions , including: the size and nature of the u.s. military force structure u.s. weapons and equipment acquisition u.s. doctrine and strategy for homeland defense and military operations abroad , including u.s. training for nbc environments foreign policy and economic policy toward countries of proliferation concern and their neighbors .

in addition , the status and trends of these weapons are key factors in national and international debates regarding: the character of the threat to u.s. security posed by nuclear , chemical and biological weapons delivered by terrorists , missiles , aircraft , or ships whether states or groups are acquiring nbc weapons and missiles to deter or to attack regional powers or the united states whether intelligence estimates should be based on the capability and / or intent of countries and terrorist groups to use nbc weapons and missiles whether u.s. intelligence collection and analysis resources are adequate whether the united states should emphasize a strategy of deterrence , preemption , or national defense the appropriate mix of defense ( active and passive ) , export control , assistance , and arms control the appropriate mix of unilateral , bilateral , and multilateral approaches .

in the last decade , the u.s. government has taken many steps to address nbc weapons proliferation .

for example , in december 2002 , the white house released the "national strategy to combat weapons of mass destruction," which divided relevant policy into three pillars: counterproliferation to combat wmd use ; strengthened nonproliferation to combat wmd proliferation ; and consequence management to respond to wmd use. .

counterproliferation efforts include interdicting wmd materials , expertise and technology to hostile states and terrorist organizations , as well as deterrence , defense and mitigation .

according to the 2002 strategy , these efforts also include preemptive actions to "detect and destroy an adversary's wmd assets before these weapons are used. .

strengthened nonproliferation includes active diplomacy , multilateral regimes , threat reduction assistance , nuclear material and export controls , and nonproliferation sanctions .

finally , consequence management entails homeland defense against wmd threats .

several factors appear to facilitate the spread of dangerous technology to additional countries and groups .

these same factors also might increase the likelihood that nbc weapons will be used ( either militarily or for blackmail ) : technological developments ( in nbc , computer , and production technology ) .

increasingly free flow of information , people and goods .

growing disparities in conventional military capabilities .

growing disparities in strategic defenses .

continued prestige of nuclear power .

growing prestige of missile capabilities .

perceived utility of nbc threats to deter u.s. intervention .

perceived disdain by major powers for certain arms control agreements and international cooperation on nonproliferation .

threat assessments are highly debated exercises and necessarily subjective because they must assess not only technical capabilities ( quantity and quality of weapons and control thereof ) but also the intentions of the state or group that possesses the weapons ( including options and thresholds for use ) .

the connection between the existence of the technology or weapon and risk of use is not always clear .

one school of thought is that the risk of use is directly proportional to the size of stockpiles or diffusion of technology or material .

an opposing view is that the weapons themselves are manageable on a case - by - case basis .

in general terms , the reduction of global and regional tension helps reduce the perceived need for weapons of mass destruction .

economic and political integration are also thought to reduce incentives for proliferation .

the strong and credible u.s. deterrent capability might weaken the likelihood that some hostile countries will acquire or use wmd .

analysts debate whether u.s. development of a national missile defense system would deter the proliferation and use of wmd or would incite further proliferation .

the nbc threat emanating from terrorist groups is even more complicated to assess .

it is frequently argued that terrorist groups will find it easier to cross thresholds of nbc use than even some rogue states and that they will not adhere to traditional notions of deterrence .

president bush stated in a march 11 , 2002 , speech , "some states that sponsor terror are seeking or already possess weapons of mass destruction ; terrorist groups are hungry for these weapons , and would use them without a hint of conscience .

and we know that these weapons , in the hands of terrorists , would unleash blackmail and genocide and chaos. .

the strong connection between the further spread of nbc capabilities to states and potential availability of technology to terrorists is not new .

in the national security strategy for a new century ( 2000 ) , the clinton administration noted that the "proliferation of advanced weapons and technologies threatens to provide rogue states , terrorists and international crime organizations with the means to inflict terrible damage on the united states , our allies , and u.s. citizens and troops abroad. .

two years later , the u.s. special representative for nuclear nonproliferation remarked to the npt preparatory committee that "the spread of nuclear weapons to additional states not only increases the risk of nuclear war among nations , but also increases the risk of nuclear terrorism .

the nuclear weapon program of a proliferating state , from the design of a weapon to its assembly , offers new opportunities for exploitation by terrorists .

new stockpiles of weapons - grade nuclear material present a tempting target .

nations seeking nuclear weapons who also harbor terrorists represent a particularly severe threat to the civilized world. .

on the other hand , analysts debate whether rogue states themselves plan to use wmd against the united states .

some analysts doubt these countries would overtly attack the united states with wmd because of the u.s. ability to conduct an overwhelming counterattack .

but others contend nbc weapons might nevertheless be seen by these countries as useful to limit u.s. military options and as a weapon of last resort , particularly where regime survival is at stake .

the united states government works hard to decrease the risk of wmd use , the spread of such weapons and capabilities , and the u.s. vulnerability to the weapons .

u.s. leadership has been critical for the npt , the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , the nuclear suppliers group , zangger committee , a fissile material production moratorium , the chemical weapons convention , australia group , missile technology control regime , wassenaar arrangement , start i , ii , and iii , and bilateral efforts with numerous countries to discourage the spread of weapons technology and the acquisition , deployment , or use of wmd .

but various constituencies have criticized some recent u.s. actions for what they see as stimulating , as well as weakening the norms against , wmd proliferation: policies such as the development of a national missile defense ; potential development of new nuclear weapons ; withdrawing from the anti - ballistic missile treaty ; discussions of regional missile defense systems in asia and the middle east ; and refusal to consent to ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty .

some critics are concerned that broader nonproliferation objectives will fall prey to shorter term goals in the war on terrorism .

abroad , observers have expressed concern that the united states is abandoning its arms control and nonproliferation leadership and that the u.s. emphasis on freedom of action will translate into other states seeking the same ( eg , russia ) , to the detriment of the international nonproliferation regime .

missile defense advocates argue that missile defense strengthens deterrence and "keeps rogue states from being able to blackmail the united states , its friends or allies by threatening a missile attack. .

additionally , they note that missile defense weakens the incentive to develop , test , produce and deploy missiles by states like iran and north korea .

about twenty - five countries , according to various u.s. government sources , are suspected of having nuclear , biological , or chemical ( nbc ) weapons programs or stockpiles .

table 1 lists those countries that have , or may have had nbc weapon programs and missile capabilities within the last several years .

table 1 distinguishes between stages of development — from a research and development ( r&d ) program , to acquiring components for weapons , to an actual stockpile .

most of these capabilities have been developed covertly .

u.s. intelligence on foreign wmd programs can vary dramatically not just among countries , but also among such programs for a single country .

in general , nuclear and ballistic missile programs are more easily detectable than biological and chemical weapons programs because the former often have specific characteristics ( eg , flight tests , reactor operations ) which are more easily observed .

table 1 does not attempt to portray a country's intent — how serious its pursuit of nbc weapons capability is , or what its ultimate objectives might be .

these variables would have a significant impact on threat assessments of wmd capability .

in numerical terms , nbc weapons , missiles and programs have not grown much in the last decade , as proliferation by a few countries has been offset by reductions in weapons by others .

however , some countries are actively building nbc weapon stockpiles and they are improving capabilities to deliver these weapons , taking advantage of increasingly available missile technology .

these states are seeking or have developed indigenous production capabilities , and some have themselves become suppliers of nbc weapon or missile technologies .

some of these new suppliers either support terrorism or have terrorist activities on their soil .

the potential for additional countries , or possibly terrorist groups , to produce nbc weapons using available technology , has become a greater concern in recent years .

despite increasingly available technology , states are not driven inexorably toward acquiring nbc weapons and missiles , as is apparent in table 1 .

political and economic trends can yield incentives or disincentives for states ( and , perhaps , terrorist organizations ) to develop , maintain , or abandon nbc weapon or missile capabilities .

some developments in the last ten to fifteen years that have helped shape the international environment for nonproliferation are listed below .

table 2 ( page 22 ) shows membership in international control regimes .

the risk of a massive exchange of nuclear weapons , and of massive biological or chemical attacks , has decreased in the last decade .

the reduction of nuclear weapons under start and the moscow treaty , continuing unilateral reductions , and improved safeguarding of nuclear weapons and materials continue to decrease the risk of nuclear war in europe and north america , an accidental launch , and the proliferation of nuclear weapons .

more recently , the united states has established several vehicles to improve cooperation with allies on controlling the transfer of sensitive technologies , particularly to combat terrorist acquisition of nbc weapons and related materials .

these include the g - 8 global partnership , the proliferation security initiative , and passage of u.n. security resolution 1540 .

however , nuclear weapons threats obviously persist .

russia has thousands of nuclear weapons , a military doctrine that calls for the use of nuclear weapons to prevent defeat on the battlefield , and large stockpiles of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons material .

several russian organizations have provided wmd technology to iran , north korea , and other potentially hostile countries .

russian scientists reportedly have aided other states' wmd programs .

additionally , there is the possibility that , in the near future , there will be no u.s. - russian strategic nuclear arms control agreements .

the start treaty expires in december 2009 .

russia and the united states could extend the treaty for another five years .

the two governments have held some preliminary discussions about start's future , but have not reached agreement .

the moscow treaty , which entered into force in 2003 , has no verification regime and expires at the end of 2012 .

china has joined the npt and nsg , ratified the cwc , stopped nuclear tests , halted fissile material production , and signed the ctbt .

it also agreed not to export complete missiles controlled by the mtcr guidelines ( category i ) .

but china is modernizing its nuclear missile force ( though its size is not expected to approach that of the united states or russia ) ; maintains cw and possibly bw stocks and provides missile technology to iran , pakistan , north korea , and syria ; and has adopted a threatening posture toward taiwan .

states adopted export controls and joined and strengthened multilateral control regimes in the 1990s in the areas of nuclear weapons , missile technology , and chemical weapons .

some developments were: indefinite extension of the npt in 1995 and 1998 additional protocol for strengthened nuclear safeguards .

comprehensive test ban treaty was signed by many countries and may reduce the likelihood that some additional countries will develop , test , and deploy nuclear weapons .

mtcr created ( 1987 ) , since strengthened and expanded to control missile technology .

chemical weapons convention entered into force ( 1997 ) , decreasing the likelihood of large - scale cw production and use .

nevertheless , the future of multilateral arms control appears dim , with no plans for the united states to approve ratification of the ctbt , no plans to create a workable verification protocol under the bwc and little movement forward in crafting a treaty to end fissile material production for use in nuclear weapons .

former director of national intelligence , john negroponte , told congress in february 2006 that technologies , often dual - use , move freely in our globalized economy , as do the scientific personnel who design them .

so it is more difficult for us to track efforts to acquire those components and production technologies that are so widely available...we also are focused on the potential acquisition of such nuclear , chemical , and / or biological weapons — or the production technologies and materials necessary to produce them — by states that do not now have such programs , terrorist organizations like al - qa'ida and by criminal organizations , alone or via middlemen .

elements in countries such as north korea , china , and russia continue to be primary suppliers of nbc weapons - related technology .

but u.s. intelligence officials have expressed concern in recent years about a second tier of suppliers .

then - dci tenet testified in 2002 that it's important to focus on the totality of what's going on , it's the combination of the russian assistance , the chinese assistance , the north korean assistance that allows people to mix and match , create an indigenous capability that then threatens us that becomes available for secondary proliferation .

tenet further warned in 2003 that "[w]ith the assistance of proliferators , a potentially wider range of countries may be able to develop nuclear weapons by "leapfrogging" the incremental pace of weapons programs in other countries. .

he also noted that bw and cw programs in "countries of concern are becoming less reliant on foreign suppliers — which complicates our ability to monitor programs via their acquisition activities. .

as negroponte suggested , non - state actors could well continue to play an important role in proliferation .

tenet was more emphatic in 2003 , asserting that we have entered a new world of proliferation .

in the vanguard of this new world are knowledgeable non - state purveyors of wmd materials and technology .

such non - state outlets are increasingly capable of providing technology and equipment that previously could only be supplied by countries with established capabilities .

[emphasis in original. .

the khan network has probably been damaged considerably , but some elements of it may still exist .

additionally , other similar networks could take its place .

the risk of nuclear weapons use can be roughly estimated using such factors as: the existence of nuclear weapons and delivery systems in various countries information on the readiness of those weapons for use ( weaponization , deployment , alert status ) evidence indicating that the conditions for using nuclear weapons in a country's strategy and doctrine were close to being met the level of conflict between a nuclear - armed state and its adversary ( ies ) the level of frustration with a long confrontation that was inflicting heavy casualties , draining national resources and patience , and challenging the leader's credibility , even if not threatening national integrity .

it is possible that as more countries acquire nuclear weapons or expand their nuclear arsenals , the likelihood they will use nuclear weapons will increase .

the acquisition of nuclear weapons by countries with inadequate command and control systems , vague strategic doctrine ( or aggressive operational doctrine ) , and poor intelligence on enemy capabilities and intentions could particularly increase the risk of nuclear warfare .

table a - 1 highlights some key events since the development of nuclear weapons that analysts use to assess the risk of nuclear warfare .

many national security analysts agree that the risk of nuclear warfare rose in the early 1950s and probably peaked during the cuban missile crisis .

tensions remained relatively high through the 1960s , leading to a high risk of sino - soviet confrontation in 1969 .

the early 1980s saw renewed risk of us - ussr nuclear warfare , but that risk declined precipitously with gorbachev's opening of the ussr .

with the addition of new , de facto nuclear weapon states , new risks have emerged in the middle east , south asia , and on the korean peninsula .

the clash in kargil and ongoing indian and pakistani tensions probably present the greatest risk of nuclear war since the end of the cold war .

several european and canadian defense experts expressed the view in 2000 that the threat of nuclear war has diminished substantially over the past decade and their feeling of safety has increased .

views that the threat has diminished may reflect the probability that a future nuclear war is more likely to occur in asia or the middle east .

although the nuclear arsenals of china , india , and pakistan are now considered primarily to be deterrent forces , some analysts are concerned these countries may be adopting doctrine calling for the tactical use of nuclear weapons under dire circumstances in regional conflicts .

others worry that the very existence of nuclear weapons in the arsenals of antagonist countries raises the probability of nuclear war through miscalculation or desperation , if not in response to national doctrine .

other analysts contend the possession of nuclear weapons by one country in a conflict is likely to deter other countries from using their own nuclear weapons or , generally , attempting to conquer the nuclear - armed country .

the tense situation along the line of control in kashmir has generated significant media coverage about what might trigger a nuclear war in south asia .

in addition , the fact that a future nuclear attack may consist of a small number of detonations rather than a catastrophic exchange of hundreds or thousands of nuclear warheads may lead some to feel the threat is reduced .

other observers regard any developments that make nuclear weapons more usable ( i.e. , smaller yields , less radiation fallout , or tailored for specific missions ) as potentially destabilizing .

this perspective underlined much of the recent criticism of leaks surrounding the new u.s. nuclear posture review .

a resumption of nuclear testing would probably also be viewed by observers in that camp as destabilizing .

