retirement experts generally argue that there are three pillars to retirement income security: social security , employer - provided pensions , and private savings .

coverage by social security is nearly universal , but its benefits are limited , and many workers reach retirement with small pensions and little savings .

over the past few decades , congress and the president have offered tax incentives to encourage businesses to offer pensions and workers to save .

the joint committee on taxation estimates that tax incentives to encourage retirement saving could cost the u.s. treasury $714 billion between 2013 and 2017 .

an increasingly important retirement saving vehicle is the individual retirement account ( ira ) .

iras were created by erisa , the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( p.l .

93 - 406 ) , which was signed into law by president ford on labor day .

erisa was passed to protect the interests of pension plan participants and pension beneficiaries .

iras were originally designed to give individuals not covered by an employer pension plan a chance to save in a tax advantaged retirement account .

since erisa was passed in 1974 , the law has been amended several times to change the tax treatment of iras and create new types of iras .

currently , nearly everyone is eligible to contribute to at least one type of ira .

ira savings is encouraged by two mechanisms — a carrot and a stick approach .

first , tax provisions allow individuals to defer taxes on ira contributions and investment earnings or to accumulate investment earnings tax free , effectively raising the rate of return on ira contributions .

second , nonqualified withdrawals before the age of 59½ are subject to a 10% penalty tax in addition to regular taxes .

several times during his administration , president bush had proposed that all iras be combined into a single roth - style ira .

the obama administration appears to be taking a different tack by proposing additional incentives to saving in existing retirement saving accounts that have proven effective in evaluations .

this report provides background information on iras , including a description of current law and the tax benefits of iras .

in addition , the effects of iras on saving and other national objectives are discussed .

a final section describes and analyzes recent ira reform proposals .

the appendix contains a history of the development of iras .

although iras have been around for over 30 years , the rules regarding iras have changed several times ( see the appendix for a brief history of iras ) .

the current rules were set in the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( p.l .

107 - 16 ) .

for 2013 , both the traditional and roth iras have an annual contribution limit of $5,500 , which is adjusted to inflation ( in $500 blocks ) .

individuals 50 years or older may make additional annual "catch - up" contributions of $1,000 .

the provisions of the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act ( egtrra ) would have expired after 2010 , but the pension protection act of 2006 made the pension and ira provisions of egtrra permanent .

the main tax advantages of a traditional ira are the deductibility of contributions for some individuals and the tax deferment of investment returns on ira assets .

the advantages are due to ( 1 ) tax - deferred compounding of interest , and ( 2 ) the possibility of postponing tax liability from a time when income is high and the individual is in a high tax bracket , to a time when income may be lower and the individual is in a lower tax bracket .

however , there is no guarantee that income will be lower after retirement than before , or that the tax brackets will be the same after retirement as before .

contributions to a roth ira are taxable , but the returns earned on roth ira assets are not taxable .

consequently , in this important respect , roth iras are like a tax - exempt bond .

very - high - income individuals and families , however , are not eligible to establish and contribute to a roth ira .

losses on both traditional and roth ira investments can be included on an individual's tax return .

the loss , however , can only be included if the individual itemizes , and after all the amounts in the ira have been distributed with the total distributions being less than total nondeductible contributions .

individual retirement accounts held $873 billion in assets in 1992 , which was equivalent to almost 14% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

by the end of 2011 , iras held $4.9 trillion in assets , or the equivalent of 32% of gdp ( see figure 1 ) .

iras held almost $1 of every $3 in retirement assets in 2011 .

ira assets grew between 1992 and 1999 , fueled by the rising stock market and the introduction of roth iras in 1997 .

after the stock market bubble burst , total ira assets remained fairly constant at about $2.6 trillion .

after the stock market recovered somewhat in 2002 , ira assets began to increase .

the value of ira assets fell in 2008 during the recession , but have since recovered as the stock market recovered .

iras have effects on the federal budget .

on the one hand , certain ira contributions are tax deductible , which will reduce income tax revenues .

between 1993 and 2006 , annual ira income tax deductions varied between $7.4 billion and $12.5 billion ( see figure 2 ) .

after roth iras were introduced in 1997 ( which are not deductible ) , ira deductions fell from $8.7 billion in 1997 to $7.4 billion by 2001 .

after 2001 , ira deductions increased , reaching $12.8 billion in 2007 and then fell slightly during the 2007-2009 recession .

on the other hand , certain ira distributions are taxable , which will increase income tax revenues .

taxable ira distributions amounted to $27.1 billion in 1993 and grew to almost $100 billion by 2000 ( see figure 3 ) .

after 2000 , taxable ira distributions fell slightly until 2003 and then increased , amounting to $162.2 billion by 2008 .

distributions fell in 2009 to $135.2 billion ( a 17% reduction ) possibly due to the fall in asset values in 2008 .

however , taxable distributions from iras increased by 44% between 2009 and 2010 as all taxpayers were allowed to convert traditional iras to roth iras .

the cost to the government of the tax - favored treatment of iras can be measured by the concept of tax expenditures .

tax expenditures are defined as "revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws that allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or a deferral of tax liability. .

the joint committee on taxation estimates that the tax expenditures of individual retirement plans will be $16.3 billion in fy2008 and will amount to $98.3 billion between 2008 and 2012 .

higher savings rates can lead to faster wealth and capital accumulation , which can boost future national income .

an important question is whether or not the ira tax incentives increase saving .

the broadest measure of saving is national saving which consists of saving by households ( personal saving ) , businesses , and the government through the budget surplus ( public saving ) .

ira tax incentives ( and many other retirement income tax incentives ) can affect both personal and public saving .

the tax expenditures for iras ( discussed in the previous section ) will lower public saving by reducing the budget surplus or increasing the budget deficit .

conventional economic theory and empirical analysis do not offer unambiguous evidence that these tax incentives have increased personal or national saving .

from a theoretical perspective , the effect of a tax reduction on savings is ambiguous because of offsetting income and substitution effects .

the increased rate of return may cause individuals to substitute future consumption for current consumption and save more ( a substitution effect ) , but , at the same time , the higher rate of return will allow individuals to save less and still obtain their target amount of savings ( an income effect ) .

the overall consequence for savings depends on the relative magnitude of these two effects .

empirical evidence on the relationship of the rate of return to the saving rate is mixed but indicates mostly small effects of uncertain direction .

recent evidence of the uncertainty of increasing savings with a higher rate of return is the juxtaposition of high returns in the stock market in the mid - to late 1990s with a dramatic reduction in the personal savings rate .

this fall in the savings rate in the face of high returns provides some evidence that expanded tax incentives for iras will not be successful in increasing savings rates .

the increasing individual contributions to iras may simply have resulted from shifting existing assets into iras or diverting savings , which would otherwise have occurred , into iras .

iras are unlikely to increase savings because most tax benefits were provided to individuals who contributed the maximum amount , which eliminates any substitution effect .

for these individuals , the effect on savings is unambiguously negative , with one exception .

in the case of the front - loaded deductible traditional ira , savings could increase to offset part of the up - front tax deduction , but only if individuals recognize that their ira accounts will involve a tax liability upon withdrawal .

the share of iras that were new savings would depend on the tax rate — with a 28% tax rate , one would expect that 28% would be saved for this reason ; with a 15% tax rate , 15% would be saved for this reason .

this effect does not occur with a back - loaded roth ira or a nondeductible traditional ira .

thus , conventional economic analysis suggests that private savings would be more likely to increase with a front - loaded rather than a back - loaded ira .

despite this conventional analysis , some economists have argued that ira contributions were largely new savings .

theoretical arguments have been made that iras increase savings because of psychological , "mental accounting," or advertising reasons .

individuals may need the attraction of a large initial tax break ; they may need to set aside funds in accounts that are restricted to discipline themselves to maintain retirement funds ; or they may need the impetus of an advertising campaign to remind them to save .

there has also been some empirical evidence presented to suggest that iras increase savings .

this evidence consists of ( 1 ) some simple observations that individuals who invested in iras did not reduce their non - ira assets , and ( 2 ) a statistical estimate by venti and wise that showed that ira contributions were primarily new savings .

the fact that individuals with iras do not decrease their other assets does not prove that ira contributions were new savings ; it may simply mean that individuals who were planning to save in any case chose the tax - favored ira mechanism .

the venti and wise estimate has been criticized on theoretical grounds , and an empirical study by gale and scholz using similar data found no evidence of a savings effect .

a study by joines and manegold comparing savings behavior of those newly eligible for iras and those already eligible for iras found no evidence of an overall effect on savings , although increases were found for some individuals and decreases for others ; a study by attanasio and deleire using this approach also found little evidence of an overall savings effect .

and , while one must be careful in making observations from a single episode , there was no overall increase in the savings rate during the period that iras were universally available , despite large contributions into iras .

similarly , the household savings rate continued ( and actually accelerated ) its decline after the expansion of iras in 1997 .

it is important to recognize that this debate on the effects of iras on savings concerned the effects of front - loaded deductible iras .

many of the arguments that suggest iras would increase savings do not apply to back - loaded roth iras .

for example , back - loaded iras do not involve the future tax liability that , in conventional analysis , should cause people to save for it .

indeed , based on conventional economic theory , there are two reasons that the introduction of back - loaded roth iras may decrease savings .

first , those who are newly eligible for the benefits should , in theory , reduce their savings , because these individuals are higher - income individuals who are more likely to save at the limit .

the closer substitutability of roth iras with savings for other purposes would also increase the possibility that ira contributions up to the limit could be made from existing savings .

secondly , those who are currently eligible for iras , who are switching funds from front - loaded traditional iras , or who are now choosing back - loaded roth iras as a substitute for front - loaded ones should reduce their savings because they are reducing their future tax liabilities .

also , many of the "psychological" arguments made for iras increasing savings do not apply to the back - loaded ira .

there is no large initial tax break associated with these provisions , and the funds are less likely to be locked up in the first few years because the penalty applying to early withdrawals is much smaller .

in addition , funds are not as illiquid or tied up because of the possibility of withdrawing them penalty - free for special purposes , including medical expenses .

overall , the existing body of economic theory and empirical research does not make a convincing case that the expansion of individual retirement accounts , particularly the back - loaded accounts which were included in the 1997 legislation , will increase savings .

who benefitted from the expansion of iras ? .

in general , any subsidy to savings tends to benefit higher - income individuals who are more likely to save .

the benefits of iras for high - income individuals are limited , however , compared to many other savings incentives because of the dollar and income limits .

nevertheless , the benefits of iras when universally allowed tended to go to higher - income individuals .

in 1986 , 82% of ira deductions were taken by the upper third of individuals filing tax returns ( based on adjusted gross income ) ; since these higher - income individuals had higher marginal tax rates , their share of the tax savings would also be larger .

in addition , when universal iras were available from 1981-1986 , they were nevertheless not that popular .

in 1986 , only 15% of tax returns reported contributions to iras .

participation rates were lower in the bottom and middle of the income distribution: only 2% of taxpayers in the bottom third of tax returns and only 9% of individuals in the middle third contributed to iras .

participation rose with income: 33% of the upper third contributed , 54% of taxpayers in the top 10% contributed , and 70% of taxpayers in the top 1% contributed .

ownership of iras has increased substantially since 1986 , however .

in 2004 , the investment company institute estimates that 40% of u.s. households owned an ira .

not surprisingly , households that own iras have higher income and more wealth than households not owning iras .

although there are income limits on the deductibility of ira contributions , a disproportionate share of the tax benefits accrue to upper - income taxpayers .

in 2003 , tax returns reporting $75,000 or more in adjusted gross income accounted for 23.5% of all taxable returns .

while only 4.5% of these higher - income returns reported a tax - deductible ira contribution , they accounted for 40% of all reported deductible ira contributions .

overall , as one might expect , the expansion of iras tends to benefit higher - income individuals , although the benefits are constrained for very - high - income individuals because of the contribution and income limits .

an expansion in contribution limits ( as occurred in 2003 ) would be more focused , however , on higher - income individuals who are more likely to be contributing at the limit and more likely to take full advantage of higher limits .

the more types of iras that are available , the larger the administrative costs associated with them .

with the introduction of back - loaded roth accounts in 1997 , three types of iras now exist: the front - loaded that have been available since 1974 ( and universally available in 1981-1986 ) , the non - deductible tax - deferred accounts , and the back - loaded roth accounts .

treatment on withdrawal will also be more complex , since some are fully taxable , some partially taxable , and some not taxable at all .

another administrative complexity that arises is the possibility of penalty - free withdrawals prior to retirement for special purposes .

these special purposes include using the distribution for unreimbursed medical expenses , buying or building a first home , and higher - education expenses .

each special purpose has separate conditions placed on the distribution .

for example , the first - time - homebuyer early distribution is limited to $10,000 , and the medical expenses early distribution can occur only if unreimbursed medical expenses exceed 7.5% of adjusted gross income .

many individuals now have a choice between a front - loaded deductible traditional ira and a back - loaded roth ira .

an earlier section discussed the relative tax benefits of the alternatives to the individual .

this section discusses the relative advantages and disadvantages to these different approaches in achieving national policy objectives .

these objectives include reducing the federal budget deficit and federal debt , increasing national savings , and increasing retirement savings .

from a budgetary standpoint , the short - run estimated cost of the front - loaded deductible traditional ira will better reflect the eventual long - run budgetary costs of iras than does the back - loaded roth ira .

roth iras have probably made it harder to meet long - run budgetary goals because the budget cost is incurred in the future as the nontaxed account earnings grow and budget targets do not take into account the out - year costs ( that is , the costs beyond the five - or 10-year budget window ) .

this issue can be important if the long - term objective is balancing the budget or generating surpluses .

achieving this goal can be compromised if the costs of iras are rising .

in addition , if distributional tables are based on cash flow measures , as in the case of the joint tax committee distributional estimates , a more realistic picture of the contribution of ira provisions to the total distributional effect of the tax package will emerge with the front - loaded ira .

the deductible traditional ira is more likely to result in more private savings than the roth ira , from the perspective of either conventional economic theory or the "psychological" theories advanced by some .

in fact , roth iras may not have contributed to private savings .

of course , a traditional ira also has a revenue cost which offsets any positive private savings effect .

the ultimate impact of traditional iras on national saving depends on the relative magnitudes of the revenue costs and the private saving effect .

while the ira tax incentives may not have appreciably increased national savings , they have probably increased retirement savings by individuals .

the severe penalties for early withdrawals increase the likelihood these funds will be available at retirement .

the increase in retirement savings is becoming more important as the old - style defined benefit pension plans are either eliminated or replaced by less generous and riskier defined contribution plans such as 401 ( k ) plans .

there are , however , some policy advantages of roth iras .

the roth ira avoids one planning problem associated with deductible traditional iras: individuals may fail to recognize the tax burden associated with accumulated ira assets .

if this is the case , the deductible ira would leave them with less after - tax assets in retirement than they had planned for , a problem that would not arise with the roth ira , in which no taxes are paid at retirement .

another possible advantage of roth iras is that the effective tax rate is always known ( zero ) , unlike the front - loaded ira where the effective tax rate depends on the tax rate today vs. the tax rate in retirement .

in 2005 , the president's advisory panel on federal tax reform proposed consolidating the traditional and roth iras .

this plan would create save for retirement accounts ( sras ) to replace traditional and roth iras .

contributions up to $10,000 annually could be made regardless of adjusted gross income .

the contribution limit would be indexed to inflation .

contributions would not be tax deductible but investment earnings would accumulate tax free .

early distribution exceeding the value of contributions would be subject to regular and penalty taxes .

the advisory panel also proposed the creation of save for family accounts ( sfas ) to replace existing education and medical savings accounts .

this proposal would allow every taxpayer to contribute up to $10,000 each year to an sfa on an after - tax basis .

the earnings would accumulate tax free in the same way as in the current roth ira .

tax - free withdrawals would be allowed at any time for qualified educational and medical costs , or to purchase a primary residence .

in addition , taxpayers would be able to withdraw up to $1,000 tax free each year for any purpose .

nonqualified distributions in excess of the $1,000 limit would be subject to income taxes and a 10% penalty tax , similar to the penalty paid on nonqualified distributions from the current roth ira .

for the same reasons that apply to roth iras , none of these proposals would appreciably increase national saving .

furthermore , it is unlikely that these proposals would appreciably increase retirement saving .

the sfa is probably more attractive savings vehicles for workers than the sra because they have the same tax advantages as the retirement accounts , but can be accessed penalty - free before retirement .

because less than a third of u.s. families report that retirement is the most important reason for saving , it seems likely most workers would save in the nonretirement accounts before saving in the retirement accounts .

with no income limits on owning any of these accounts , it also seems likely that a considerable amount of existing savings would be transferred to these accounts .

consequently , tax expenditures would increase , especially beyond the typical budget 5- or 10-year horizon .

this could dramatically increase future budget pressures .

although 60% of u.s. families saved in 2000 , there are income disparities: 30% of the poorest 20% of families saved while over 80% of the richest 10% of families saved .

these proposals would predominantly benefit higher - income individuals and families who are the ones likely to save .

the obama administration is taking a different tack on incentives to encourage retirement saving .

the administration has proposed incentives to save in traditional and roth iras rather than creating new savings accounts .

one proposal would require employers that do not offer a retirement plan to offer employees automatic enrollment in a roth ira ( that is , all employees would be enrolled in an ira but would have the option to opt out of the plan or enroll in a traditional ira ) .

evaluations of automatic enrollment in voluntary retirement plans ( with the option to opt out ) show that participation is significantly increased .

another administration proposal would increase the tax credit to small business for adopting a new qualified retirement plan or simple ira .

the proposal is to increase the credit from $500 to $1,000 per year for three years .

lastly , the administration has proposed expanding the saver's credit .

the proposal would essentially convert the credit to a 50% match on the first $500 contributed to a qualified retirement plan and would make the credit refundable .

evidence from the current saver's credit suggests that many eligible taxpayers are unable to receive the full benefit of the credit because of insufficient tax liability .

furthermore , the saver's credit appears to be substantially less effective in boosting retirement saving than a simple matching contribution because of the complexity of the credit .

research has shown that small matching contributions increase employee's contributions to retirement plans .

making the saver's credit refundable and simplifying the rules may contribute to increasing retirement saving .

the initial purpose of iras in 1974 was to extend the tax advantages allowed to employees with pension plans to individuals with no pension coverage .

the major focus of iras today is generally to encourage savings , especially for retirement .

if the main objective of individual retirement accounts is to encourage private and national savings , the analysis in this study suggests that this objective has not been achieved .

moreover , the back - loaded roth approach is less likely to induce savings than the traditional form of iras .

however , iras have undoubtedly increased longer - term saving for retirement .

but , the ability to withdraw amounts for purposes other than retirement somewhat dilutes this focus on preparing for retirement .

the recent and planned expansions in the ira limit may make the provisions more likely to provide a marginal incentive , but will also direct the benefits towards higher - income individuals .

iras have often been differentiated from other tax benefits for capital income as the plan focused on moderate income or middle class individuals .

the ira has been successful to the extent that more of the benefits are targeted to moderate - income individuals than is the case for many other tax benefits for capital ( eg , capital gains tax reductions ) .

nevertheless , data on participation and usage of iras suggest that the benefits still accrue primarily to higher - income individuals .

individual retirement accounts of the traditional type ( front - loaded ) were first allowed in 1974 ( up to $1500 or 15% of earnings ) to extend some of the tax benefits of employer pension plans to those whose employers did not have such plans .

iras were made universally available in 1981 ( and the limits increased to $2000 ) as a general savings incentive .

in 1986 , iras were restricted for higher - income individuals already covered by employer pension plans , as part of the general base broadening needed to reach the distributional and revenue neutrality goals of the tax reform act of 1986 .

those covered by employer plans with incomes less than $50,000 for married individuals and $35,000 for single individuals were not eligible .

there was a $10,000 phaseout range ( i.e. , $40,000 to $50,000 ) where partial benefits were allowed .

deductible contributions were limited to $2,000 or total earnings , whichever was less ; contributions could also be made for a non - working spouse ( but total contributions for a married couple could not exceed total earnings ) .

individuals above the income limits could make nondeductible contributions and take advantage of tax deferral on investment earnings .

in the 101 st congress ( 1989-1990 ) several proposals to restore ira benefits were made: the super ira , the ira - plus , and the family savings account ( fsa ) .

the super - ira proposal , suggested by senator bentsen and approved by the senate finance committee in 1989 ( s. 1750 ) , would have allowed one half of ira contributions to be deducted and would have eliminated penalties for "special purpose" withdrawals ( for first time home purchase , education , and catastrophic medical expenses ) .

the ira proposal was advanced as an alternative to the capital gains tax benefits proposed on the house side .

the ira - plus proposal ( s. 1771 ) , sponsored by senators packwood , roth , and others , proposed an ira with the tax benefits granted in a different fashion from the traditional ira .

rather than allowing a deduction for contributions and taxing all withdrawals similar to the treatment of a pension , this approach simply eliminated the tax on earnings , like a tax - exempt bond .

 ( this type of ira is commonly referred to as a back - loaded ira. ) .

the ira - plus would also be limited to a $2,000 contribution per year .

amounts in current iras could have been rolled over and would not have been subject to tax on earnings ( only on original contributions ) ; there were also special purpose withdrawals with a five - year holding period .

the administration's proposal in 1990 for fsas also used a back - loaded approach with contributions allowed up to $2500 .

no tax would have been imposed on withdrawals if held for seven years , and no penalty ( only a tax on earnings ) if held for three years .

there was also no penalty if funds were withdrawn to purchase a home .

those with incomes below $60,000 , $100,000 , and $120,000 ( single , head of household , joint ) would have been eligible .

in 1991 , s. 612 ( senators bentsen , roth , and others ) would have restored deductible iras , and also allowed an option for a nondeductible or back - loaded "special ira. .

no tax would have been applied if funds had been held for five years and no penalties would have applied if used for "special purpose withdrawals. .

in 1992 , the president proposed a new ira termed a fira ( flexible individual retirement account ) , which would have allowed individuals to establish back - loaded individual retirement accounts in amounts up to $2,500 ( $5,000 for joint returns ) with the same income limits as proposed in the 101 st congress .

no penalty would have been applied for funds held for seven years .

also in 1992 , the house passed a limited provision ( in h.r .

4210 ) to allow penalty - free withdrawals from existing iras for "special purposes. .

the senate finance committee proposed , for the same bill , an option to choose between back - loaded iras and front - loaded ones , with a five - year period for the back - loaded plans to be tax free and allowing "special purpose" withdrawals .

this provision was included in conference , but the bill was vetoed by the president for unrelated reasons .

a similar proposal was included in h.r .

11 ( the urban aid bill ) but only allowed iras to be expanded to those earning $120,000 for married couples and $80,000 for individuals ( this was a senate floor amendment that modified a finance committee provision ) .

that bill was also vetoed by the president for other reasons .

the contract with america and the 1995 budget reconciliation proposal included proposed ira expansions similar to the 1997 proposals ( discussed below ) , but this package was not adopted .

the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 allowed penalty - free withdrawals from iras for medical costs .

in 1997 , the president proposed to increase the adjusted gross income limits for the current iras to $100,000 for married couples ( with a phaseout beginning at $80,000 ) , and to $70,000 for individuals ( with a phaseout beginning at $50,000 ) .

part of this expansion would have occurred in 1997-1999 ( a joint phaseout between $70,000 and $90,000 and a single phaseout between $45,000 and $65,000 ) .

such a proposal would have extended individual retirement account eligibility to the vast majority of taxpayers .

taxpayers would have had the option of choosing instead special , nondeductible iras , with no taxes applying if the funds are held in the account for at least five years .

the 10% penalty would not have been due for withdrawals during that period for post - secondary education , first - home purchase , or unemployment spells of 12 weeks or more .

existing deductible iras could have been rolled over into nondeductible accounts with the payment of tax on withdrawals .

the house - proposed revisions were generally the same as those proposed in the house republican contract with america and included in the 1995 budget reconciliation proposal , and as those reported out of the ways and means committee .

this change would have allowed individuals to contribute up to $2,000 to a nondeductible or "back - loaded" ira regardless of income , termed the american dream savings ( ads ) account .

the back - loaded ira did not provide a tax deduction up front , and did not impose taxes on qualified withdrawals .

the $2,000 would have been indexed for inflation after 1998 .

this provision would have been in addition to deductible iras ( but would have replaced the current nondeductible accounts ) ; earnings on withdrawals would not have been be taxed if held for at least five years and used for qualified purposes: withdrawals after the age of 59½ , left in the estate , attributable to being disabled , or withdrawn for down payment on a first home .

a 10% early withdrawal penalty would have continued to apply to nonqualified withdrawals , but withdrawals to pay for higher - education expenses would not have been subject to the penalty tax .

no minimum distribution requirements would have applied .

taxes and penalties would not have applied until the original contribution was recovered , and all iras would be aggregated for this purpose .

amounts in current iras could have been withdrawn and placed into the nondeductible iras without penalty prior to 1999 .

amounts rolled over must have been included in income in equal increments over four years .

the senate 1997 version would have raised the income limits on deductible iras from $50,000 to $60,000 for single returns and $80,000 to $100,000 for joint returns by 2004 .

these limits would have been phased in: $30,000 to $40,000 for single and $50,000 to $60,000 for joint in 1998-1989 ; $35,000 to $45,000 for single and $60,000 to $70,000 for joint 2000-2001 ; $40,000 to $50,000 for single and $70,000 to $80,000 for joint in 2002-2003 .

individuals whose spouses were participants in an employer plan would have been eligible regardless of the income limit .

this proposal would also have introduced back - loaded accounts as a substitute for nondeductible accounts ; individuals would have had to reduce the contributions to these accounts by the amounts deductible from front - loaded accounts .

these accounts were called ira plus accounts .

the rules regarding withdrawals and penalties were similar to those in the house bill , except that withdrawals without penalty were also allowed for long - term unemployment .

there were no income limits for back - loaded iras .

the final bill followed the senate version , with some alterations to the phaseouts .

the provision allowing exemption from withdrawal penalties for long - term unemployment was dropped .

the senate version of taxpayer refund and relief act of 1999 would have increased contribution limits to $5,000 , increased income limits for deductible iras , and eliminated income limits for roth iras .

the house bill's provisions were much more limited: roth ira limits would have been increased .

the final bill more closely followed the senate version , although the income limits for roth iras were to have been increased with no change for deductible iras .

the president vetoed the tax cut because of its large revenue cost .

several bills including ira provisions saw some legislative action in 2000 , but not one was enacted .

the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ) gradually increases the contribution limits to iras .

ira limits increased to $3,000 in 2002-2004 , to $4,000 in 2005-2007 , and $5,000 in 2008 .

the limits will then be indexed for inflation in $500 increments .

limits for catch - up contributions by individuals over 50 years of age were $500 in 2002-2005 and $1,000 in 2006 .

a nonrefundable tax credit for contributions to a qualified retirement plan including iras beginning at 50% , but phasing down , is allowed for lower - income individuals .

many of the provisions in egtrra would have expired in 2010 , but the pension protection act of 2006 made those expansions permanent .

