individuals and businesses lend their accumulated savings to borrowers .

in exchange , borrowers give lenders a debt instrument .

these debt instruments , typically called bonds , represent a promise by borrowers to pay interest income to lenders on the principal ( the amount of money borrowed ) until the principal is repaid to the lenders .

when a municipal ( state or local ) government issues bonds , the principal ( or proceeds ) is typically used to finance the construction of capital facilities , but may also be used for cash management purposes when revenue collections do not match spending needs during the fiscal year .

since public capital facilities provide services over a long period of time , it makes financial and economic sense to pay for the facilities over a similarly long period of time .

this is particularly true for state and local governments , whose taxpayers lay claim to the benefits from these facilities by dint of residency and relinquish their claim to benefits when they move .

given the demands a market - oriented society places on labor mobility , taxpayers are reluctant to pay today for state and local capital services to be received in the future .

the state or local official concerned with satisfying the preferences of constituents may therefore elect to match the timing of the payments to the flow of services , precisely the function served by long - term bond financing .

an attempt to pay for capital facilities "up front" is likely to result in a less than optimal rate of public capital formation .

state and local governments are also faced with the necessity of planning their budget one to two years in advance .

this requires a balancing of revenue forecasts against forecasts of the demand for services and spending .

not infrequently , unforeseen circumstances can undermine the forecast and cause a revenue shortfall , which must be financed with short - term borrowing , or "notes. .

in addition , even when the forecasts are met , the timing of expenditures may precede the arrival of revenues , creating the necessity to borrow within an otherwise balanced fiscal year .

finally , temporarily high interest rates that prevail at the time bonds are issued to finance a capital project may induce short - term borrowing in anticipation of a drop in rates .

the federal government intervenes in the public capital market by granting the debt instruments of state and local governments a unique privilege — the exemption of interest income earned on these bonds from federal income tax .

the tax exemption lowers the cost of capital for state and local governments , which should then induce an increase in state and local capital formation .

the lower cost of capital arises because in most cases investors would be indifferent between taxable bonds ( eg , corporate bonds ) that yield a 10% rate of return before taxes and tax - exempt bonds of equivalent risk that yield a 6.5% return .

the taxable bond interest earnings carry a tax liability ( 35% of the interest income in most cases ) , making the after - tax return on the two bonds identical at 6.5% .

thus , state and local governments could raise capital from investors at an interest cost 3.5 percentage points ( 350 basis points ) lower than a borrower issuing taxable debt .

generally , the degree to which tax - exempt debt is favored is measured in a variety of ways .

two are fairly common: the yield spread and the yield ratio .

the yield spread is the difference between the interest rate on taxable bonds ( corporate bonds or u.s. treasury bonds ) and the interest rate on tax - exempt municipal bonds of equivalent risk .

in recent decades , the spread between tax - exempt and taxable bonds has declined as underlying interest rates have declined .

the greater the yield spread , the greater are the nominal savings to state and local governments as measured by the interest rates they would have to pay if they financed with taxable debt .

the yield ratio ( which is an average rate on tax - exempt bonds divided by an average rate on a taxable bond of like term and risk ) adjusts the spread for the level of interest rates .

a lower ratio implies a greater savings to state and local governments relative to taxable debt .

as the ratio approaches one , however , tax - exempt borrowing approaches that of taxable borrowing .

variation in the cost of state and local borrowing relative to the cost of taxable borrowing arises from changes in the demand for and supply of both tax - exempt and taxable bonds .

demand for tax - exempt bonds depends upon the number of investors , their wealth , statutory tax rates , and alternative investment opportunities .

supply depends upon the desire of the state and local sector for capital facilities and their ability to engage in conduit financing ( issuing state or local government bonds and passing the proceeds through to businesses or individuals for their private use ) .

almost all of the factors which influence demand and supply are affected by federal tax policy and fiscal policy .

the direct cost to the federal government of this interest exclusion is the individual and corporate income tax revenue forgone .

consider the aforementioned case where a 35% marginal tax rate corporate investor who purchases a 6.5% tax - exempt bond with principal of $1,000 that is to be repaid after 20 years .

each year for 20 years this taxpayer receives $65 in tax - exempt interest income .

each year the federal government forgoes collecting $35 of revenue because the revenue loss is based upon the yield the taxpayer forgoes .

for example , if the investor had purchased a taxable bond carrying a 10% interest rate , he would have received $100 in interest income and paid $35 in income taxes on that income .

the annual federal revenue loss ( or tax expenditure ) on the outstanding stock of tax - exempt bonds issued for public purposes is reported in the analytical perspectives section of the budget every year .

the estimates since 1994 are displayed in table 1 .

because they are based upon the outstanding stock of public - purpose tax - exempt bonds , it takes time for some legislative changes to show up in these data .

the amount of forgone tax revenue from the exclusion of interest income on public - purpose tax - exempt bonds is substantial ; $20.5 billion in 2016 .

over the 2017 to 2026 budget window , the estimated loss of revenue is expected to be $422.8 billion , or the 15 th - largest tax expenditure .

when first introduced in 1913 , the federal income tax excluded the interest income earned by holders of the debt obligations of states and their political subdivisions from taxable income .

it was asserted by many that any taxation of this interest income would be unconstitutional because the exemption was protected by the tenth amendment and the doctrine of intergovernmental tax immunity .

the u.s. supreme court rejected this claim of constitutional protection in 1988 in south carolina v. baker ( 485 u.s. 505 ) .

although the legal basis for the subsidy is statutory rather than constitutional , the subsidy may be justified on economic grounds .

economic theory suggests that certain types of goods and services , such as a street light , will not be provided in the "optimal" amounts by the private sector because some of the benefits are consumed collectively .

the nation's welfare can be increased by public provision of these goods and services , some of which are best provided by state or local governments .

certain goods and services provided by state or local governments , however , benefit both residents , who pay local taxes , and nonresidents , who pay minimal if any local taxes .

since state and local taxpayers are likely to be unwilling to provide these services to nonresidents without compensation , it is probable that state and local services will be under provided .

in theory , the cost reduction provided by the exemption of interest income compensates state and local taxpayers for benefits provided to nonresidents .

this encourages the governments to provide the optimal amount of public services .

state and local debt can be classified based on ( 1 ) the maturity ( or term ) , which is the length of time before the principal is repaid ; ( 2 ) the type of security , which is the financial backing for the debt ; ( 3 ) the use of the proceeds for either new facilities or to refinance previously issued bonds ; and ( 4 ) whether the type of activity being financed has a public or a private purpose .

the risk associated with a bond is also an important factor , as nearly every bond issued by a state or local government is rated based on the probability of default .

the privately managed rating agencies incorporate all of the above factors as well as the financial health of the entity issuing the bonds when arriving upon a bond rating .

the higher the default risk , the lower the rating .

many individuals and businesses make money by engaging in arbitrage , borrowing money at one interest rate and lending that borrowed money to others at a higher interest rate .

the difference between the rate at which one borrows and the rate at which one lends produces arbitrage earnings .

at its most basic level , it is the primary activity of commercial banks — pay depositors an interest rate of "x" and use the deposits to make commercial , automobile , and home loans at "x + y" interest rate .

in this context , arbitrage is a time - honored and appropriate financial market activity .

that is not the case in the tax - exempt bond market .

state and local governments do not pay federal income tax , and absent federal constraint , have unlimited capacity to issue debt at low interest rates and reinvest the bond proceeds in higher - yielding taxable debt instruments , thereby earning arbitrage profits .

unchecked , state and local governments could substitute arbitrage earnings for a substantial portion of their own citizens' tax effort .

congress has decided that such arbitrage should be limited , and that tax - exempt bond proceeds must be used as quickly as possible to pay contractors for the construction of the capital facilities for which the bonds were issued .

since it is impossible for bonds to be issued precisely when contractors must be paid for their expenses incurred in building public capital facilities , the tax law provides a three - year period to spend an increasing share of the bond proceeds .

bond issues that have unspent proceeds in excess of the allowed amounts during this three - year spend - down schedule must rebate any arbitrage earnings to the department of the treasury .

bond issues are considered to be taxable arbitrage bonds if a governmental unit , in violation of the arbitrage restriction in the tax code , invested a substantial portion of the proceeds "to acquire higher yielding investments , or to replace funds which were used directly or indirectly to acquire higher yielding investments. .

tax credit bonds ( tcbs ) are an alternative to tax - exempt bonds that offer investors a federal tax credit or the issuer a direct payment proportional to the bond's value in lieu of a federal tax exemption .

most tcbs currently in circulation were designated for a specific purpose , location , or project .

tcb issuers use the proceeds for public school construction and renovation ; clean renewable energy projects ; refinancing of outstanding government debt in regions affected by natural disasters ; conservation of forest land ; investment in energy conservation ; and for economic development purposes .

the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) repealed the authority to issue new tcbs after december 31 , 2017 .

tcbs that provided for new issuances in 2017 include qualified zone academy bonds ( qzabs ) and qualified school construction bonds ( qscbs ) ; the authority to issue other tcbs had expired prior to the 2017 tax revision .

bonds that are no longer issued may still be held by the public and thus receive a federal tax credit or direct payment .

for more information on tax credit bonds , see crs report r40523 , tax credit bonds: overview and analysis .

legislative interest has typically focused on altering the tax treatment of state and local debt to provide a more economically efficient subsidy with a lower federal revenue cost .

there are three primary types of proposals that include changes to state and local government bonds — capping the preference , eliminating the preference , and changing the preference to a direct issuer subsidy .

these three types have each featured in legislative proposals from recent years .

an early version of the 2017 tax revision ( h.r .

1 ) that was passed in the house included provisions that would repeal authority to issue pabs and eliminate the use of tax - exempt bonds to fund professional sports stadiums .

p.l .

115-97 as enacted did not include those provisions , however .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) "revenue options" report proposed eliminating the tax exemption for new qualified private activity bonds which would generate a budget savings of $28 billion over the 2017 to 2026 budget window .

the direction of future changes to the federal tax code will likely dictate which modifications , if any , are made to the tax treatment of state and local government debt .

hilhouse , albert m. municipal bonds: a century of experience ( new york: prentice - hall , 1936 ) .

the classic history of the use and development of municipal bonds from their introduction in the 19 th century .

u.s. senate .

committee on the budget .

tax expenditures: compendium of background material on individual provisions .

s.prt .

113-32 .

113 th congress , 2 nd session , december 2014 .

provides description , revenue loss estimate , and economic analysis of the effects of governmental bonds and each major category of private - activity bond .

zimmerman , dennis .

the private use of tax - exempt bonds: controlling public subsidy of private activity ( washington: the urban institute press , 1991 ) .

provides institutional background: history , legal framework , and industry characteristics .

provides discussion of tax - exempt bonds as an economic policy tool affecting: intergovernmental fiscal relations , the federal budget deficit , efficient resource allocation , and tax equity .

provides a history and economic analysis of tax - exempt bond legislation from 1968 to 1989 .

auction rate securities ( arss ) are long - term debt obligations with the unique feature of adjustable or variable interest rates .

in contrast to long - term , fixed rate securities , issuers go to auction periodically ( anywhere from every 7 to 35 days ) to reset the interest rate on the debt outstanding .

the auction mechanism and interest rate parameters vary by issuer ( and issue ) , though most use what is termed a "dutch auction" where each bidder submits a bid for the amount they are willing to purchase at a given interest rate .

all bids are ordered from lowest interest rate to highest interest rate and the rate where the market clears , that is , where all bonds would be purchased , establishes the new ars rate received by all bidders .

arss typically have a "call option" where the issuer can buy the ars back at par ( face value ) at any scheduled auction and then retire the debt .

most arss are insured by the issuer because they do not carry a "put" option that would allow bondholders to sell the bonds at a specified price to the issuer or a designated third party .

the bond insurance reduces risk and thus interest rate , making the bonds less costly to issuers .

for this reason , arss are heavily influenced by credit ratings , and typically require bond insurance to make them marketable .

the existing holders of arss offer bids as well as new bidders .

if all bids of both existing bond holders and new participants fail to clear the market , the auction is termed a "failed auction. .

in this scenario , the original agreement with the bondholder stipulates a "reservation" interest rate the issuer must pay in the event of a failed auction at least until the next successful auction .

because the reservation rate is typically higher than market interest rates , issuers of arss would prefer to avoid paying the reservation rate .

the issuance of arss grew considerably from 1988 through 2007 .

in 1988 , the bond buyer identified one ars issue valued at $25 million ; none were issued in 1987 .

in 2004 , the peak year , 438 ars bonds valued at $42.5 billion were issued .

no arss have been issued since 2007 , roughly corresponding to the beginning of the financial crisis , when 322 were sold for a total value of $38.7 billion .

