technology using electrical energy to power automobiles has been in existence for over a century .

however , for a number of reasons , including the energy density of petroleum fuels , the internal combustion engine has been the power source of choice for automobiles and most other vehicles .

however , with the oil shocks of the past few decades , as well as an increasing awareness of the emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases from cars and trucks , interest in the use of electrical power train systems has grown .

while there are other potential replacements for the internal combustion engine , such as compressed air , these other technologies have not been the subject of much interest scientifically or politically .

much of the federal advanced vehicle research has come through the partnership for a new generation of vehicles ( pngv ) and the freedomcar program , consortia of the federal government and the "big three" american automobile manufacturers .

pngv focused on near - term goals and the development of hybrid electric vehicles , while freedomcar , which replaced pngv in 2002 , focuses on long - term research on fuel cells and hydrogen fuel .

the united states is not alone in pursuing these new technologies .

japanese manufacturers were the first to introduce high - efficiency gasoline - electric hybrid vehicles in the u.s. market .

the development of these vehicles is a response to global pressures to lower emissions and improve fuel economy .

in that context , it is worth noting that in most developed countries , gasoline and diesel fuel prices are considerably higher than they are in the united states .

four advanced propulsion technologies of key interest are electric vehicles , hybrid vehicles , plug - in hybrids , and fuel cell vehicles .

in an electric vehicle , the vehicle runs exclusively on electricity that is supplied from an electric utility provider , eliminating combustion on - board the vehicle .

a hybrid vehicle integrates an electrical system with an internal combustion engine to utilize the benefits of each system .

a plug - in hybrid system allows a vehicle to be charged in the same manner as a pure electric vehicle , allowing an all - electric range .

the additional hybrid system allows for the vehicle to use a combustion engine when the batteries are depleted .

in a fuel cell vehicle , instead of combustion , a chemical conversion process is used , leading to higher levels of efficiency .

in addition to altering the propulsion system , many other efficiency - related technologies , such as improved aerodynamics and low - resistance tires can be incorporated into both new and conventional vehicles .

while these various technologies are promising , they must overcome certain obstacles before they will be competitive in the marketplace .

there are three main barriers to their widespread use: cost , infrastructure , and performance .

cost is a factor since without subsidies , consumers are unlikely to purchase new vehicles in large numbers if the new vehicles are not cost - competitive with conventional vehicles .

also , convenient infrastructure must exist for both fueling and maintenance of these vehicles .

finally , the performance of the new vehicles must be comparable to that of conventional vehicles .

an electric vehicle ( ev ) is powered by an electric motor , as opposed to a gasoline or diesel engine .

power is supplied to the motor by batteries , which are charged through a central charging station ( which can be installed in the owner's garage ) or through a portable charger on board the vehicle , which is plugged into an electrical outlet .

because no fuel is consumed in evs , and the vehicles therefore do not produce emissions , they are considered to be zero emission vehicles ( zevs ) in certain air quality control regions .

although there are emissions attributable to the production of electricity to charge the vehicles , the overall fuel - cycle of evs tends to lead to lower levels of toxic and ozone - forming emissions — as well as greenhouse gases — than those of conventional vehicles .

also , since pollution attributable to electric vehicles occurs at power plants , it is generally emitted in areas with relatively low population density .

another potential public policy benefit of electric vehicles is that they can reduce u.s. dependence on foreign oil , since only about 3% of electricity in the united states is generated from petroleum .

furthermore , transportation dependence on all forms of fossil fuels can be reduced , since approximately 30 to 35% of electricity in the u.s. is generated from non - fossil fuels .

however , high electricity costs in recent years have led to questions about the long - term viability of evs .

commercially , these vehicles have not been well - received by consumers .

by 1998 , only about 4,200 evs were on the road , mainly in california .

by 2005 , this number had increased to roughly 51,000 .

however , only a few car companies currently produce electric vehicles , and most of those are only available for lease by large fleets .

evs for personal use have declined as automakers have taken most personal evs off the market .

while the number of evs has increased , the amount of fuel used per vehicle has decreased , as have , presumably , miles traveled per vehicle .

between 1998 and 2005 , while the number of evs increased more than 10-fold , electricity for vehicle fuel increased only about five - fold .

a type of vehicle that can address some of the problems associated with electric vehicles is a hybrid electric vehicle ( hev ) .

hevs combine an electric motor and battery pack with an internal combustion engine to improve efficiency .

in current hevs , the batteries are recharged during operation , eliminating the need for an external charger .

in development are plug - in hybrids ( phevs ) that combine some of the benefits of hevs and pure evs ( see the next section ) .

either way , range and performance can be significantly improved over electric vehicles .

the combustion and electric systems of hevs are combined in various configurations .

in one configuration ( series hybrid ) , the electric motor supplies power to move the wheels , while the combustion engine is connected to a generator that powers the motor and recharges the batteries .

in another configuration ( parallel hybrid ) , the combustion engine provides primary power , while the electric motor adds extra power for acceleration and climbing , or the electric motor is the primary power source , with extra power provided by the engine .

in some parallel hybrid systems , the engine and electric motor work in tandem , with either system providing primary or secondary power depending on driving conditions .

the hybrid drive train allows the combustion engine to operate at or near peak efficiency most of the time .

this can lead to significantly higher levels of overall vehicle system efficiency .

the higher efficiency of these vehicles allows them to achieve very high fuel economy and lower emissions .

for example , the hybrid honda civic is rated at 40 miles per gallon ( mpg ) in the city , and 45 mpg on the highway .

a gasoline - fueled honda civic sedan , by comparison , achieves a rating of 25 mpg city and 36 mpg highway .

fuel economy improvements can help cut demand for foreign petroleum , and the higher efficiency enables hybrid vehicles to attain , and even surpass , the range of conventional vehicles , even with a smaller fuel tank .

furthermore , since these vehicles utilize conventional fuel , the fueling infrastructure problems associated with electric vehicles can be eliminated .

hev sales have increased significantly over the past several years .

from the introduction of the honda insight in the united states in 1999 through the end of 2006 , approximately 650,000 hevs were sold in the united states .

several hybrid vehicles are currently available in the u.s. market , and most major manufacturers have introduced hybrid models or plan to do so over the next few years .

currently , purchasers of an hev may qualify for a tax credit .

the credit , established in the energy policy act of 2005 , is based on the fuel economy and projected fuel savings compared to a baseline conventional vehicle .

the value of the tax credit is up to $3,400 , depending on those factors .

the number of vehicles produced by a single manufacturer eligible for the tax credit is limited .

once an automaker produces 60,000 vehicles , the credit begins to phase out .

toyota reached the limit in 2006 , and tax credits for toyota hybrids were completely phased out october 1 , 2007 .

a recent development in advanced vehicle technologies is the expected introduction in the next few years of plug - in hybrid electric vehicles ( phevs ) .

a phev uses a much higher - capacity battery pack than a typical hybrid , and adds the ability to charge the vehicle on grid power .

with the larger batteries , an all - electric range of 20 to 40 miles ( or more ) could be achieved .

in this way , most commuters might be able to travel to and from work solely on electrical grid power .

only when traveling long distances might the combustion engine be necessary .

potential advantages include the ability to use electric power , which tends to be less expensive per mile than gasoline .

thus , some of the increased purchase cost of a phev over a conventional vehicle could be made up in future fuel savings .

in addition , phevs could provide some of the environmental benefits of pure electric vehicles , including lower fuel - cycle pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions , without some of the performance drawbacks .

an advanced vehicle further from commercialization is a fuel cell vehicle ( fcv ) .

a fuel cell can be likened to a "chemical battery. .

unlike a battery , however , a fuel cell can run continuously , as long as the fuel supply is not exhausted .

in a fuel cell , hydrogen reacts with oxygen to generate an electric current .

hydrogen is supplied to the fuel cell as either pure hydrogen or a through hydrogen - rich fuel ( such as methanol , natural gas , or gasoline ) that is processed ( reformed ) on - board the vehicle .

there is a physical limit to the voltage that one fuel cell can provide , so fuel cells are arranged in "stacks" to generate a high voltage that is used to power an electric motor .

this chemical process eliminates the need for charging a battery , which is necessary with electric vehicles , while producing much lower emissions than combustion vehicles .

in fact , if pure hydrogen fuel is used , the only product from the reaction will be water .

with hydrogen fuel , an fcv would qualify as a zero emission vehicle .

using other fuels , while the vehicle is no longer a zev , emissions would still be drastically cut as compared to conventional vehicles .

furthermore , because potential fuel supplies for fcvs include natural gas , methanol , or pure hydrogen — the latter two produced from natural gas — another potential benefit from fuel cells will be their ability to reduce the transportation demand for foreign petroleum .

while currently available only to a few consumers ( on a demonstration basis ) , fuel cells have been touted as likely to be one of the most important technologies in the history of the automobile .

they are currently very expensive , and thus there has been a great deal of interest in research and development to improve their marketability .

because of their potential to revolutionize the automotive industry , all major manufacturers are working to develop fuel cell vehicles , and some manufacturers have introduced a limited number of vehicles for lease ; others intend to introduce vehicles for limited leases in the near future .

demonstration projects are ongoing with fuel cell passenger cars , sport utility vehicles , and transit buses .

many of these demonstrations are in conjunction with the california fuel cell partnership , a consortium of auto manufacturers , fuel providers , fuel cell developers , and state and federal agencies .

another way to improve the fuel economy and emissions characteristics of vehicles is to use advanced components that reduce friction , decrease vehicle weight , or improve system efficiency .

many high - technology vehicles that are available to the public utilize these technologies , but some of these technologies could also be incorporated into the design of conventional vehicles .

the use of advanced vehicle technologies can help curb consumption of fossil fuels , especially petroleum , and reduce emissions of toxic and ozone - forming pollutants , as well as greenhouse gases .

in general , the most promising current technologies incorporate electric motors and batteries in their design , while all take advantage of new design techniques and advanced materials to reduce resistance , cut vehicle weight , and better conserve energy .

however , most of these technologies are still in various stages of development and have not yet proven marketable to most consumers .

the three key issues for the marketability of advanced technology vehicles are cost , infrastructure , and performance .

consumers must be willing and able to purchase the vehicles , so purchase cost and overall life - cycle cost of these vehicles must be competitive .

in addition , consumers must be able to expect that refueling and servicing these vehicles will be relatively convenient .

finally , the overall performance of the vehicles — in terms of fuel economy , range , driveability , safety , and emissions — must be acceptable .

while most advanced vehicles meet some of these requirements , no new vehicle has yet met all of them .

therefore , research and development has been a key issue in the discussion of these vehicles , as have efforts to make the vehicles more affordable and the infrastructure more accessible .

these vehicles may help the federal government in its role of promoting energy security and environmental protection if research and development can bring them to a point where they can be successfully marketed to american consumers .

