the tax reform act of 1986 set up a depreciation system designed to equalize tax burdens on different types of assets .

the recovery period for nonresidential structures was , however , lengthened in 1993 .

economic conditions and practices that may bear on this issue have also changed .

lately , there has been some interest in reexamining this depreciation structure .

for example , h.r .

4328 , the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act of 1998 , mandated the treasury department to study current tax depreciation rules and how they relate to tax burdens .

this report provides background information relating to tax depreciation of structures , including a discussion of the methods of measuring economic depreciation .

the first section of this report provides a description and history of the treatment of structures under the depreciation system .

the second section discusses the very complex problems associated with estimating economic depreciation rates and reviews the evidence from the economics literature on these rates .

the third section compares , in light of evidence on economic depreciation , the tax burdens on equipment and alternative types of structures , how that tax burden has changed , and what changes , given economic depreciation estimates , would be necessary to restore equal tax burdens across basic asset categories .

the fourth section of the paper discusses whether leverage should be taken into account in setting up depreciation rules ( an argument which has been made in the past ) and the evidence on leveraging rates across assets .

the final section presents a brief conclusion .

under current law , nonresidential structures ( such as stores and office buildings ) are depreciated at a straight - line rate ( equal amounts of the cost of acquiring or constructing the structure deducted in each period ) over a period of 39 years .

that is , for a building that costs $100,000 , $2,564 ( or 1 / 39 th ) is written off in each of the following 39 years .

residential structures are depreciated over 27.5 years .

in both cases , the write - off periods are relatively long and the methods relatively slow by historical standards .

although the depreciable life for new properties was 40 years prior to 1971 , during most of that period rapid methods of depreciation were available .

these methods included sum - of - years - digits ( syd ) and various declining balance ( db ) methods .

double declining balance ( ddb ) , for example , allows a first year writeoff that is twice as large as straight line .

this same rate is applied to the undepreciated balance ( rather than the original cost , as in the case of straight line methods ) so that depreciation amounts decline over time .

this method would never allow the complete writeoff of assets , and taxpayers were allowed to switch to a straight - line writeoff ( of the remaining balance over the remaining years ) .

it was optimal to make this switch at the half - way point for ddb , and earlier for slower db methods .

sum - of - years digits ( where the share written off is the number of years of life remaining divided by the sum of the years in the life ) is similar to double declining balance with a switch to straight - line in its pattern .

the value of a depreciation allowance depends on how quickly deductions are made because payments in the future must be discounted to reflect the fact that a payment in the future is less valuable than one currently ( since the current payment can be invested at interest ) .

one can compare the value of depreciation allowances with different write - off periods and methods by summing up the present values of all of the payments .

these present values depend on the interest rate .

table 1 shows the historical methods , tax lives ( either prescribed or based on survey data ) , and present values of depreciation deductions as a share of investment , at a constant 10% discount rate .

in the case of commercial real estate , the present values are smaller and the depreciation lives and methods produce writeoffs that are smaller than any time since 1954 .

a similar results is found for residential real estate .

although tax lives for residential structures tend to be shorter than other periods ( except for 1981-86 ) , the straight line method used is less beneficial to owners than previous methods .

this assessment of history is somewhat over - simplified .

since buildings are sold from time to time , the treatment of capital gains and the rules for used buildings also have an effect on the level of tax burden assigned to buildings .

for example , under current law , used assets are treated the same as newly constructed buildings , which was not always the case in the past .

component depreciation , which allows different elements of a building to be depreciated over different periods of time made assessment of depreciation rules in the past more difficult .

finally , the value of depreciation depends on the discount rate , which in turn depends on the level of inflation ; during periods of high inflation , such as the late seventies and beginning of the 1980s , depreciation tended to be understated , other things equal .

 ( as will be discussed subsequently , however , the effect of inflation on the tax burden on real estate tends to be smaller than the effect on shorter lived assets ) .

economic depreciation deductions reflect the part of the gross flow of income from an asset that represents the return of principal ( since the asset is deteriorating ) .

economic depreciation also reflects that change in the market value of the asset due to the decline in productivity and / or remaining useful life of the asset .

finally , if tax deductions match economic depreciation deductions ( either in each year or in total present value ) , the effective tax burden on an asset's returns is equal to the statutory tax rate .

determining the tax burden therefore requires an empirical estimate economic depreciation .

no empirical method is entirely satisfactory .

however , the following discussion outlines three major empirical approaches: vintage price comparisons , comparisons of rents , and perpetual inventory methods .

there is also the approach taken by the bureau of economic analysis in the national income accounts , which estimates useful life , with a distribution of retirement ages and with each set of assets within that distribution depreciated at a straight line rate .

this method has components that are not based on empirical evidence , such as the depreciation method .

note that economic depreciation only fulfills its function of correctly measuring income if it is indexed for inflation .

to compare effective tax rates across assets , estimates of economic depreciation rates for equipment as well as structures are needed .

for obvious reasons , it is difficult to rely on either rental data or benchmark asset data .

most machinery is not rented and an independent aggregate source of asset value is not available .

thus , these depreciation estimates tend to be based on the vintage price approach .

the most extensive study of equipment depreciation was made by hulten and wykoff .

estimates by oliner of machine tools depreciation tend to be generally compatible with hulten and wykoff's estimates , although somewhat lower .

estimates by beidleman for capital used in the machine tool industry , which mostly included machine tools , were higher .

there are alternative approaches that rely on observations of investment combined with output ( rather than benchmark assets ) .

these are generally in broad aggregates , for either investment as a whole or a particular industry .

thus , these measures ( which are summarized by jorgenson ) are conceptually similar to studies of depreciation rates for structures based on rents .

they are not very useful for identifying depreciation rates for particular assets , however .

while recognizing the uncertainty attached to depreciation estimates , it is still useful to compare effective tax rates on structures and equipment .

in the tax reform act of 1986 , efforts were made , within the limits of current information about economic depreciation rates and the practicalities of tax administration , to set economic and tax depreciation roughly equal .

the methods adopted were accelerated ( based on empirical evidence ) , but depreciation was not indexed for inflation .

these tax benefits and penalties for most assets were roughly offsetting .

since 1986 , several changes have altered those relationships .

in 1993 , the depreciation life for nonresidential structures was lengthened from 31.5 to 39 years .

this increase was adopted in part to finance revenue losses associated with liberalizing passive loss restrictions for certain investors .

tax rates were also increased at that time , for corporations and for high income individuals .

these changes had the effect of raising tax burdens .

at the same time , the expected inflation rate fell , changes that had the effect of lowering tax burdens .

the net results of these effects did not have equal effects on all assets , as demonstrated in table 2 , which reports effective tax rates .

these calculations suggest that while equipment had a somewhat more favorable treatment in 1986 than structures , the gap between the two has widened .

this effect is only partly due to an explicitly longer depreciation period as can be seen from comparing the effects for apartment buildings where depreciation did not change .

it also reflects the effects of lower inflation .

inflation , other things equal , tends to penalize short lived assets more than long lived ones .

to offset this effect required more accelerated depreciation , and equipment was given relatively short lives and more rapid methods of depreciation ( generally 150% declining balance ) .

structures were subject to relatively long periods .

when inflation fell , the tax burdens on equipment fell more than on structures , and that effect is responsible for more than half the change in the difference between tax burdens on equipment versus structures .

note that the effective tax rate could be different based on the estimates of deloitte and touche , which found lower depreciation rates for industrial structures , higher rates on other structures and also considerably higher rates for a new category , retail structures .

table 3 reports the effective tax rates using these depreciation rates .

if effective tax rates on structures were to be brought into line with those on equipment , one could either raise the tax burden on equipment by lengthening lives or lower the tax rate on structures by shortening lives .

for example , using the economic depreciation numbers in table 2 , if the 7 year life that is most typical for equipment were increased by one year — to 8 years — and all other lives subject to the same percentage increase , the tax burden would rise by two percentage points , from 27 % to 29% .

if the life were increased by 2 years , to 9 years , the tax burden would rise to 31% ; if the life were increased by 3 years , to 10 years , the tax burden would rise to 33% ; if the life were increased by 4 years to 11 years , the burden would rise to 35% .

because of the smaller present values and depreciation methods , it would take a much larger absolute change to lower the tax burden on structures to 27% .

in the case of office buildings and apartments , a life of 20 years would be required .

in the case of factory buildings , a life of 17 years would be required .

changes in effective tax rates could also be achieved by changing the method .

for example , substituting double declining balance methods for straight - line would cause effective tax rates on factory buildings to fall from 38% to 34% , on office buildings to fall from 35% to 31% , and on apartments to fall from 31% to 28% .

this change would bring apartment tax rates in line with equipment , but not accomplish the full effect for other structures .

if all structures were given a tax life of 27.5 years ( with double declining balance methods ) , tax burdens on office buildings would fall to 28% , and tax burdens on factories to 30% .

to further lower the tax burdens to 27 % for factories , not only would double declining balance be needed but the recovery period would need to be shortened to about 21 years ; the recovery period for apartments and office buildings would need to be about 26 years .

of course , there are many other types of structures , and there would still be some equipment assets that are taxed more heavily than structures and some less heavily because many equipment assets that vary somewhat in durability are placed in the same tax depreciation category , for purposes of simplicity .

moreover , there is still considerable uncertainty about many aspects of this issue , in particular , economic depreciation rates .

as a general rule , however , depreciable lives for structures would need to be reduced .

shortening tax lives for structures to 20 years , or perhaps a little less , or adopting double declining balance and shortening all tax lives to the current life allowed for residential structures ( or perhaps a little less ) would bring effective tax rates on structures and equipment into line , based on the hulten and wykoff depreciation rates .

when the treasury studied tax reform in 1984 , one of the criticisms it made of the current tax structure was that the system favored equipment over structures .

the argument has been made , however , that structures are favored because it is easier to obtain financing for a structure than for other assets , and debt finance is favored over equity finance .

this type of argument can be challenged for several reasons .

the first is that altering depreciation practices is an inefficient way to address other tax distortions that exist , particularly since there are an array of problems .

it is true that our tax system favors debt finance and individual investment over corporate equity investment .

it may also favor debt finance for individual investments when the borrower is in a high tax bracket and the lender in a low one , because of inflation ( although that effect is probably relatively modest with current inflation rates ) .

but the primary favoritism is towards investments outside the corporate sector , not investments in interest bearing assets .

any investment in the noncorporate sector is favored over corporate investment , but does that mean that we should apply less beneficial depreciation to all assets owned by proprietorships and partnerships ? .

a more appropriate method would be to relieve the double taxation of corporate equity income .

one could also argue that structures should be given beneficial treatment , because they are more likely to be subject to local property taxes than is the case with equipment and inventories .

finally , the use of debt finance has been constrained through the passive loss rules and other restrictions aimed at tax shelters in the 1986 tax reform act .

a more straightforward objection to this argument is that there is no evidence that structures are more leveraged than other assets ; this notion appears to be a perception that originates from an error in earlier studies .

while some initial mortgages are large relative to asset value , the debt to asset value declines over time as the mortgage is paid off ; moreover , the property may appreciate in nominal value because of inflation or because of a real appreciation in land value .

the only way to compare assets is to look not at initial borrowing rates but at the average debt - to - asset ratio .

data exists for residential rental structures from the housing census , and are shown in table 3 .

these debt to asset shares can be compared with data from the federal reserve flow of fund accounts .

it is not always clear how a comparable debt - to - asset ratio should be calculated , since firms have financial assets and financial liabilities that include items ( such as accounts payable and receivable ) which are incidental to business rather than explicit borrowing or acquisition of financial assets .

two measures are shown in table 4 : total liabilities divided by total assets ( physical and financial ) and credit market liabilities as a percent of tangible physical assets .

because there is only a single year benchmark for residential rental properties , table 4 reports these ratios for the most recent year , for the year comparable to the data in table 3 ( 1991 ) , and for 10 years ago .

regardless of the measure used , these data indicate that the debt to asset ratio for residential rental real estate is not above that for the corporate sector in general .

finally , comparisons of debt to asset ratios from the corporate tax statistics tend to confirm this impression .

lessors of buildings have a total liabilities divided by total assets share of 61% , while all nonfinancial corporations have a share of 66 % ( internal revenue service statistics of income , corporate source book 1995 ) .

both of these debt shares are overstated , because assets are valued at historical prices and subject to accelerated depreciation .

structures tend to be understated because they are longer lived and their historical values are more understated ; equipment is not as affected by historical costs but may be understated due to accelerated depreciation ; inventories tend to be accurately stated .

however , even when assets are measured by adding back depreciation , the debt to asset ratios remain lower for lessors of buildings than for other assets — 47% compared to 54% .

this evidence , therefore , suggests that debt to asset ratios for structures are not higher than for owners of other assets .

measuring economic depreciation is a difficult task , and our information on economic depreciation rates will always be somewhat imperfect .

nevertheless , based on the evidence available on economic depreciation , structures appear to be overtaxed relative to equipment .

either a lengthening of equipment lives or a shortening of structures lives would be required to bring the effective tax rates back into line .

arguments that structures should be taxed more heavily because they can more easily be measured , in addition to being questionable on conceptual grounds , are inconsistent with the evidence on leveraging .

