the no child left behind act ( p.l .

107-110 ) amended and reauthorized the safe and drug - free schools and communities act ( sdfsca ) within the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) as part a of title iv — 21 st century schools .

this program will again be considered for reauthorization in the 110 th congress .

sdfsca is administered by the department of education ( ed ) .

grants are awarded to states and at the national level for programs to promote school safety and assist in preventing drug abuse .

although the sdfsc program is the primary federal government program targeted to reduce drug use and violence through educational and prevention methods in the nation's schools , it is one of several substance abuse and violence prevention programs funded by the federal government .

in a 1997 report , the general accounting office ( gao ) identified 70 federal programs authorized to provide services for either substance abuse prevention or violence prevention .

ed , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of justice ( doj ) administered 48 of the programs .

for fy2006 , congress appropriated $568.8 million for the program .

for fy2007 , the president requested $216.0 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended $526.0 million for the sdfsc program ( $310 million more than requested ) , and the senate appropriations committee recommended $492.5 million ( $276.5 million more than requested ) .

the program continues to operate at fy2006 levels under a continuing resolution through february 15 , 2007 .

for information about reauthorization and appropriations for the sdfsc program , see crs report rl33870 , the safe and drug - free schools and communities act: reauthorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] .

since 1986 , when a crack cocaine crisis appeared to be developing among older youth and adults in the nation , drug abuse among students in school has been a congressional concern .

in response to the growing concern about crack cocaine and drug abuse in general , congress passed the anti - drug abuse act of 1986 .

in 1994 , this legislation was expanded ( as discussed below ) to include violence occurring in and around schools .

gao stated that in 1994 , about 3 million violent crimes and thefts occurred annually in or near schools , which equaled almost 16,000 incidents per school day .

the schools and staffing survey ( sass ) conducted by the national center for education statistics ( nces ) indicated that in the 1993-1994 school year , violence in public schools was on the rise and schools appeared less safe than in the 1987-1988 school year .

from the 1987-1988 school year to the 1993-1994 school year , an increasing percentage of public elementary and secondary school teachers reported that physical conflict and weapon possession among students were moderate to serious problems in schools .

similarly , between 1992 and 1995 , drug use rates among school - aged youth increased for over 10 different drugs , particularly marijuana , after declining in the 1980s .

to address those concerns , on october 20 , 1994 , president clinton signed into law the improving america's school act ( p.l .

103-382 ) , which reauthorized esea , and created sdfsca as title iv .

the 1994 legislation extended , amended , and renamed the drug - free schools and communities act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-297 , dfsca ) .

violence prevention was added to dfsca's original drug abuse - prevention purpose by incorporating the safe schools act .

consequently , sdfsca was intended to help deter violence and promote school safety as well as discourage drug use in and around the nation's schools .

funding was authorized for federal , state , and local programs to assist schools in providing a disciplined learning environment free of violence and drug use , including alcohol and tobacco .

this report provides background information about the school safety and drug abuse issues , presents a detailed overview of the various aspects of the sdfsc program as it exists under current law , and discusses an evaluation of the sdfsc program .

indicators of school crime and safety: 2006 ( indicators study ) , a joint publication by ed and doj , provides the most recent federal data on school crime and student safety .

the report states that "it is difficult to gauge the scope of crime and violence in schools given the large amount of attention devoted to isolated incidents of extreme school violence. .

the authors note that the aim of the study is to create good indicators of the current state of school crime and safety across the nation and to periodically monitor and update those indicators , which they believe is required to ensure safer schools .

the indicators study draws information from a variety of independent data sources , which include national representative sample surveys of students , teachers , and principals , and a complete array of data collected from federal departments and agencies including doj's bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) and the federal bureau of investigation , nces , and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

each data source has its own separate sample design , method of collecting data , and questionnaire design or results from a universe of data collection .

the national representative sample surveys used in the report were the national crime victimization survey ( ncvs ) and school crime supplement to ncvs , sponsored by bjs and nces , respectively , nces's schools and staffing survey and the school survey on crime and safety , and cdc's youth risk behavior survey .

the indicators study noted that in the 2004-2005 school year , an estimated 54.9 million students were enrolled in elementary and secondary schools in the nation .

the study showed that violent crime victimization rates of 12- to 18-year - old students at school actually declined from 73 victimizations per 1,000 students in 2003 to 55 such occurrences in 2004 .

the study observed that despite such a decline , violence , theft , drugs , and weapons continued to pose problems in schools .

preliminary data revealed that 28 youth ages 5 to 18 were victims of school - associated violent deaths from july 1 , 2004 , through june 30 , 2005 — that is , 21 homicides and 7 suicides .

those figures translated to about one homicide or suicide of school - aged students at school per 2 million students enrolled during the 2004-05 school year .

in 2005 , 36% of 9 th through 12 th - grade students reported being in a fight anywhere , while 14% stated that they had been in a fight on school property during the previous year .

also in 2005 , the report noted that 28% of 12- to 18-year - old students stated that they had been bullied within the last six months .

males were more likely than females to report being injured as a result of a bullying incident .

furthermore , 24% of such students reported sustaining an injury as a result of bullying incidents .

the presence of gangs in schools was reported by 24% of 12- to 18-year - old students in 2005 , with a larger percentage of such reports from urban school students than suburban students .

this is an increase from the 21% of students who reported the presence of gangs in schools in 2003 .

in 2004 , 12-to - 18-year - old students were victims of about 1.4 million nonfatal crimes at school .

the incidence of thefts at school was 33 per 1,000 students , compared with 27 thefts per 1,000 students that occurred away from school .

the study noted that students were more likely to be victims of theft at school than away from school .

in 2005 , 43% of students in the 9 th through 12 th grades reported drinking at least one alcoholic beverage anywhere , while 4% drank at least one such beverage at school within the previous month .

also in 2005 , 20% of 9 th through 12 th grade students reported using marijuana anywhere within the previous month , while 5% stated that they used the drug on school property during the same time period .

furthermore , in 2005 , 19% of such students stated that they had carried a weapon anywhere , while about 6% reported carrying a weapon on school property within the previous month .

hispanic students were more likely to report being threatened or injured with a weapon at school than white students .

the indicators study stated that "our nation's schools should be safe havens for teaching and learning , free of crime and violence. .

it noted , however , that any instance of crime or violence at school might broadly affect not only the persons involved but also might cause disorder in the educational process and the school itself , as well as affect bystanders and the adjacent community .

also , the report found that in 2005 , as in both 1999 and 2001 , students were more likely to be afraid of being harmed at school than while away from school .

in 2005 , as grade levels increased , it was found that the percentage of students who reported fearing an attack at school or on the way to or from school declined .

the study revealed that feelings regarding safety at school depended on the racial and / or ethnic group , grade level , and school location of the students .

in 2005 , larger percentages of black and hispanic students feared attack or harm at school , or on the way to and from school , than white students , regardless of location .

furthermore , students in lower grades generally were more fearful of harm at school , en route to or from school , or away from school , than students in higher grades .

students in urban schools were more likely than those in suburban or rural schools to fear attack both at school or on the way to and from school .

similarly , students in public schools were more fearful of harm than those in private schools .

in 2005 , 11% of 12- to 18-year - old students revealed that someone at school used hate - related words against them ( that is , a derogatory word having to do with race , religion , ethnicity , disability , gender , or sexual orientation ) .

also , 38% of students reported seeing hate - related graffiti at school ( that is , such words or symbols written in classrooms , bathrooms , hallways , or on the outside of the school building ) .

in 2005 , females were more likely to report gender - related hate words than males , while males were more likely than female students to report hate words related to both race and ethnicity .

blacks , hispanics , and students of other races were more likely to report race - related hate words than white students .

furthermore , students in urban schools were more likely than students in suburban or rural schools to be called a hate - related word .

students in public schools were more likely than private school students to report being called a hate - related word and to see hate - related graffiti .

some other significant findings involved threats and attacks on teachers .

in the 2003-04 school year ( the most recent data available ) , a smaller percentage of teachers reported that they had been threatened with injury by a student in their school within the previous year than in the 1993-94 and 1999-2000 school years .

also , in 2003-04 , teachers were less likely to report being physically attacked than in 1993-94 .

between 1993-94 and 2003-04 , teachers in central city schools were more likely to be threatened with injury or physically attacked than those who worked in urban fringe areas or in rural schools .

furthermore , in 2003-04 , a larger percentage of male teachers than female teachers reported being threatened with injury , while female teachers were more likely to have been physically attacked than their male counterparts .

secondary school teachers were more likely to have been threatened with injury by a student than elementary school teachers , while elementary school teachers were more likely to have reported being physically attacked .

since 1975 , the university of michigan's institute for social research has conducted the monitoring the future ( mtf ) study , funded by the national institute on drug abuse at the national institutes of health of hhs .

high school seniors and , since 1991 , 8 th and 10 th grade youth have been canvassed annually about their behavior , attitudes , values in general , and substance use .

at each grade level , responses of students surveyed were used to represent all students nationwide in public and private secondary schools .

for the 2006 mtf study , 48,460 students in 410 secondary schools were surveyed about their use of illicit drugs , alcohol , cigarettes and smokeless tobacco within three prevalence periods , that is , lifetime , annual ( or 12 months ) , past month ( or 30-day ) , and daily use .

overall , for 2006 , illicit drug use and alcohol consumption continued a decade - long decline .

decreases since 2005 , however , were relatively small and , while statistically significant for all grades combined , were not for any one individual grade .

lloyd johnston , mtf's principal investigator , noted that the "youngest students that we survey — the 8 th graders — have shown the largest proportional drop in their use of nearly all of the illicit drugs since the recent peak rates of the mid to late 1990s... , but their improvements now seem near an end .

the older teens , on the other hand , are showing a continuation of their decreases , as they catch up with the progress of the younger age groups .

we believe that this reflects what social scientists call a 'cohort effect'...." a cohort effect refers to teens who were previously in lower grades who have entered the upper grades .

in 2006 , as in 2005 , researchers reported that survey results revealed high rates of prescription painkillers use , such as vicodin and oxycontin , and in abuse of sedatives / barbiturates , especially among 12 th graders .

oxycontin use increased among 8 th and 10 th graders , but slightly declined among 12 th graders .

although relatively few youth are using oxycontin , johnston observed , given the addictive potential of this narcotic drug , there still should be concern about its rates of use among teens .

vicodin use slightly increased among all three grades in 2006 , but since 2002 , when rates were first measured , its use has remained relatively stable .

the use of sedatives , including barbituates , showed a steady increase over a period of years among 12 th graders , whose yearly use of such drugs increased from 1993 to 2005 .

in 2006 , however , such use declined , marking what researchers called "the end of a long rise , but ... still near its recent peak in teen - age use. .

furthermore , johnston noted that "because most of the illegal drugs like lsd , ecstasy , cocaine , and heroin have shown considerable declines in recent years , while the misuse of prescription - type drugs has been growing , the latter have become a more important part of the country's drug problem. .

also , he observed that marijuana is still the most widely used among all illicit drugs and recently , its use has gradually decreased .

among the class of prescribed psychotherapeutic drugs used for purposes other than a medical regimen , researchers found that amphetamines constituted the only drug in this class that had not shown a recent increase in use among teens .

a new question was added to the study in 2006 regarding the use of over - the - counter cough and cold medications for the sole purpose of getting high .

the street names for those drugs include "dxm," "dex," and "skittles. .

the proportion of 8 th , 10 th , and 12 th grade students who reported using such drugs to get high translated to one in every 25 students in 8 th grade and one in 14 high school seniors .

because these types of drugs are sold over - the - counter , researchers noted , most students might not fully understand the dangers in using them .

johnston observed , "if the dangers of using these drugs receive more attention in the media i would expect that their popularity to fade somewhat" ( sic ) .

in general , mtf researchers noted that alcohol use has been in decline among teens for many years and continued in all three grades in 2005 .

in 2006 , however , 12 th graders constituted the only group that showed a further decline in 30-day use of alcohol .

teen cigarette smoking rates continued to show a decline in all grade levels in 30-day use with the greatest decrease among 12 th graders .

similarly , smokeless tobacco use declined only among 12 th graders who had used the product 30 days prior to the survey .

survey findings of specific drugs are discussed below .

the safe and drug - free schools and communities act is administered by the department of education .

grants are authorized for state programs and for a variety of national programs to promote school safety and assist in preventing drug abuse in the nation's schools .

for the program's appropriations and funding history , see crs report rl33870 , the safe and drug - free schools and communities act: reauthorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] .

as previously stated the sdfsc act is up for reauthorization in the 110 th congress .

how the program is administered under current law is discussed below .

part is an instrument that was developed by the administration to examine the performance of certain programs across federal agencies .

it was used in 2004 for the first time , and the sdfsc state grants component of the sdfsc program was selected to be rated by the instrument .

the sdfsc state grants component was found to be "ineffective" by part because ed was unable to demonstrate that those programs worked and because state grant funds were distributed too thinly to support quality interventions .

consequently , the administration proposes to terminate the state grants program in fy2007 .

ed has explained that the department's strategy to determine whether positive outcomes are occurring as a result of the state grants program is using national survey data from cdc's youth risk behavior surveillance system to determine how widespread are teen drug use and violence , along with data on the extent sdfsc state grant recipients implement research - based programs .

also , ed is conducting an evaluation "using rigorous methodology for measuring the impact of promising interventions , and supporting grants and technical assistance to help states improve the collection , analysis , and use of data to improve the quality , and report the outcomes , of their sdfsc programs. .

