in part ii below , this crs report provides excerpts from key statements on "one china" as articulated by washington , beijing , and taipei , in addition to the three joint communiques and the tra , since the united states first reached understandings with the prc in 1971 .

based on unclassified citations and consultations , the highlights also give a comprehensive look at significant statements and contexts in washington , beijing , as well as taipei .

this compilation identifies new , major ( not all ) elements in the policies of the governments .

the statements also include accounts of presidential assurances .

the three perspectives on "one china" are placed in chronological order under successive u.s .

administrations .

the texts are placed in italics .

july 9 , 1971 our military presence in taiwan at this moment is composed of two elements , the two - thirds of it which is related to activities in other parts of asia [the vietnam war] and the one - third of it which is related to the defense of taiwan .

we are prepared to remove that part related to activities other than to the defense of taiwan , that's two - thirds of our force ... within a specified brief period of time after the ending of the war in indochina .

we are prepared to begin reducing our other forces on taiwan as our relations improve , so that the military questions need not be a principal obstacle between us .

i may say , incidentally , that these are personal decisions of president nixon which have not yet been discussed with our bureaucracy or with congress , and so should be treated with great confidence .

as for the political future of taiwan , we are not advocating a "two chinas" solution or a "one china , one taiwan" solution .

[on zhou enlai's question of whether the united states would support the taiwan independence movement]: we would not support this .

august 2 , 1971 representation in an international organization need not prejudice the claims or views of either government .

participation of both in the united nations need not require that result .

rather it would provide governments with increased opportunities for contact and communication .

it would also help promote cooperation on common problems which affect all of the member nations regardless of political differences .

the united states accordingly will support action at the general assembly this fall calling for seating the people's republic of china .

at the same time , the united states will oppose any action to expel the republic of china or otherwise deprive it of representation in the united nations .

february 22 , 1972 principle one .

there is one china , and taiwan is a part of china .

there will be no more statements made — if i can control our bureaucracy — to the effect that the status of taiwan is undetermined .

second , we have not and will not support any taiwan independence movement .

third , we will , to the extent we are able , use our influence to discourage japan from moving into taiwan as our presence becomes less , and also discourage japan from supporting a taiwan independence movement .

i will only say here i cannot say what japan will do , but so long as the u.s. has influence with japan — we have in this respect the same interests as the prime minister's government — we do not want japan moving in on taiwan and will discourage japan from doing so .

the fourth point is that we will support any peaceful resolution of the taiwan issue that can be worked out .

and related to that point , we will not support any military attempts by the government on taiwan to resort to a military return to the mainland .

finally , we seek the normalization of relations with the people's republic .

we know that the issue of taiwan is a barrier to complete normalization , but within the framework i have previously described , we seek normalization and we will work toward that goal and will try to achieve it .

february 24 , 1972 with regard to taiwan , i do not believe a permanent american presence — whatever happens in our meetings — is necessary to american security .... my goal is the withdrawal of our remaining forces , not just two - thirds , but all forces , including the remaining one - third ... .

it must be consistent with ... the so - called nixon doctrine .

under that doctrine , we are cutting our forces in korea ... .

two - thirds will go , hopefully as soon as we can finish our vietnam involvement .

my plan also is one which reduces the one - third and withdraws it during the period i have the power to act .

but i cannot do it before january of next year .

it has to be over a period of four years .

now if someone asks me when i return , do you have a deal with the prime minister that you are going to withdraw all american forces from taiwan , i will say "no. .

but i am telling the prime minister that it is my plan ... .

february 27 , 1972 the chinese reaffirmed its position: the taiwan question is the crucial question obstructing the normalization of relations between china and the united states ; the government of the people's republic of china is the sole legal government of china ; taiwan is a province of china which has long been returned to the motherland ; the liberation of taiwan is china's internal affair in which no other country has the right to interfere ; and all u.s. forces and military installations must be withdrawn from taiwan .

the chinese government firmly opposes any activities which aim at the creation of "one china , one taiwan ," "one china , two governments," "two chinas," and "independent taiwan " or advocate that "the status of taiwan remains to be determined. .

the u.s. side declared: the united states acknowledges that all chinese on either side of the taiwan strait maintain there is but one china and that taiwan is a part of china .

the united states government does not challenge that position .

it reaffirms its interest in a peaceful settlement of the taiwan question by the chinese themselves .

with this prospect in mind , it affirms the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all u.s. forces and military installations from taiwan .

in the meantime , it will progressively reduce its forces and military installations on taiwan as the tension in the area diminishes .

november 12 , 1973 as for the question of our relations with taiwan , that is quite complex .

i do not be lieve in a peaceful transition... .

they are a bunch of counter - revolutionaries [the nationalists on taiwan ] .

how could they cooperate with us ? .

i say that we can do without taiwan for the time being , and let it come after "100 years. .

august 12 , 1974 to the people's republic of china , whose legendary hospitality i enjoyed , i pledge continuity in our commitment to the principles of the shanghai communique .

the new relationship built on those principles has demonstrated that it serves serious and objective mutual interests and has become an enduring feature of the world scene .

december 15 , 1978 as of january 1 , 1979 , the united states of america recognizes the people's republic of china as the sole legal government of china .

in the future , the american people and the people of taiwan will maintain commercial , cultural and other relations without official government representation and without diplomatic relations .

the administration will seek adjustments to our laws and regulations to permit the maintenance of commercial , cultural , and other non - governmental relationships in the new circumstances that will exist after normalization .

the united states is confident that the people of taiwan face a peaceful and prosperous future .

the united states continues to have an interest in the peaceful resolution of the taiwan issue and expects that the taiwan issue will be settled peacefully by the chinese themselves .

december 16 , 1978 as is known to all , the government of the people's republic of china is the sole legal government of china and taiwan is a part of china .

the question of taiwan was the crucial issue obstructing the normalization of relations between china and the united states .

it has now been resolved between the two countries in the spirit of the shanghai communique and through their joint efforts , thus enabling the normalization of relations so ardently desired by the people of the two countries .

as for the way of bringing taiwan back to the embrace of the motherland and reunifying the country , it is entirely china 's internal affair .

december 29 , 1978 the republic of china is an independent sovereign state with a legitimately established government based on the constitution of the republic of china .

it is an effective government , which has the wholehearted support of her people .

the international status and personality of the republic of china cannot be changed merely because of the recognition of the chinese communist regime by any country of the world .

the legal status and international personality of the republic of china is a simple reality which the united states must recognize and respect .

january 1 , 1979 taiwan has been an inalienable part of china since ancient times .... taiwan's separation from the motherland for nearly 30 years has been artificial and against our national interests and aspirations , and this state of affairs must not be allowed to continue.... unification of china now fits in with the direction of popular feeling and the general trend of development .

the world in general recognizes only one china , with the government of the people's republic of china as the sole legal government .

the recent conclusion of the china - japan treaty of peace and friendship and the normalization of relations between china and the united states show still more clearly that no one can stop this trend.... we place great hopes on the 17 million people on taiwan and also the taiwan authorities .

the taiwan authorities have always taken a firm stand of one china and opposed an independent taiwan .

this is our common stand and the basis for our cooperation... .

the chinese government has ordered the people's liberation army [pla] to stop the bombardment of quemoy and other islands as of today .

a state of military confrontation between the two sides still exists along the taiwan strait .

this can only create artificial tension .

we hold that first of all this military confrontation should be ended through discussion between the government of the people's republic of china and the taiwan authorities so as to create the necessary prerequisites and a secure environment for the two sides to make contacts and exchanges in whatever area... .

january 1 , 1979 the united states of america recognizes the government of the people's republic of china as the sole legal government of china .

within this context , the people of the united states will maintain cultural , commercial , and other unofficial relations with the people of taiwan .

the government of the united states of america acknowledges the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china .

enacted april 10 , 1979 section 2 ( b ) it is the policy of the united states ( 1 ) to preserve and promote extensive , close , and friendly commercial , cultural , and other relations between the people of the united states and the people on taiwan , as well as the people on the china mainland and all other peoples of the western pacific area ; ( 2 ) to declare that peace and stability in the area are in the political , security , and economic interests of the united states , and are matters of international concern ; ( 3 ) to make clear that the united states decision to establish diplomatic relations with the people's republic of china rests upon the expectation that the future of taiwan will be determined by peaceful means ; ( 4 ) to consider any effort to determine the future of taiwan by other than peaceful means , including by boycotts or embargoes , a threat to the peace and security of the western pacific area and of grave concern to the united states ; ( 5 ) to provide taiwan with arms of a defensive character ; and ( 6 ) to maintain the capacity of the united states to resist any resort to force or other forms of coercion that would jeopardize the security , or the social or economic system , of the people on taiwan .

sec .

3 ( a ) in furtherance of the policy set forth in section 2 of this act , the united states will make available to taiwan such defense articles and defense services in such quantity as may be necessary to enable taiwan to maintain a sufficient self - defense capability .

 ( b ) the president and the congress shall determine the nature and quantity of such defense articles and services based solely upon their judgment of the needs of taiwan , in accordance with procedures established by law .

such determination of taiwan 's defense needs shall include review by united states military authorities in connection with recommendations to the president and the congress .

 ( c ) the president is directed to inform the congress promptly of any threat to the security or the social or economic system of the people on taiwan and any danger to the interests of the united states arising therefrom .

the president and the congress shall determine , in accordance with constitutional processes , appropriate action by the united states in response to any such danger .

sec .

4 ( b ) ( 1 ) whenever the laws of the united states refer or relate to foreign countries , nations , states , governments , or similar entities , such terms shall include and such laws shall apply with respect to taiwan .

sec .

15 ( 2 ) the term "taiwan" includes , as the context may require , the islands of taiwan and the pescadores , the people on those islands , corporations and other entities and associations created or organized under the laws applied on those islands , and the governing authorities on taiwan recognized by the united states as the republic of china prior to january 1 , 1979 , and any successor governing authorities ( including political subdivisions , agencies , and instrumentalities thereof ) .

september 30 , 1981 now , i would take this opportunity to elaborate on the policy concerning the return of taiwan to the motherland for the realization of peaceful unification [proclaimed on new year's day 1979]: 1 .

in order to bring an end to the unfortunate separation of the chinese nation as early as possible , we propose that talks be held between the communist party of china and the kuomintang [nationalist party] of china on a reciprocal basis so that the two parties will cooperate for the third time to accomplish the great cause of national unification .

the two sides may first send people to meet for an exhaustive exchange of views .

2 .

it is the urgent desire of the people of all nationalities on both sides of the strait to communicate with each other , reunite with their relatives , develop trade and increase mutual understanding .

we propose that the two sides make arrangements to facilitate the exchange of mail , trade , air and shipping services , and visits by relatives and tourists as well as academic , cultural , and sports exchanges , and reach an agreement thereupon .

3 .

after the country is reunified , taiwan can enjoy a high degree of autonomy as a special administration region , and it can retain its armed forces .

the central government will not interfere with local affairs in taiwan .

4 .

taiwan 's current socio - economic system will remain unchanged , so will its way of life and its economic and cultural relations with foreign countries .

there will be no encroachment on the proprietary rights and lawful right of inheritance over private property , houses , land and enterprises , or on foreign investments .

5 .

people in authority and representative personages of various circles in taiwan may take up posts of leadership in national political bodies and participate in running the state .

6 .

when taiwan's local finance is in difficulty , the central government may subsidize it as is fit for the circumstances .

7 .

for people of all nationalities and public figures of various circles in taiwan who wish to come and settle on the mainland , it is guaranteed that proper arrangements will be made for them , that there will be no discrimination against them , and that they will have the freedom of entry and exit .

8 .

industrialists and businessmen in taiwan are welcome to invest and engage in various economic undertakings on the mainland , and their legal rights , interests , and profits are guaranteed .

9 .

the unification of the motherland is the responsibility of all chinese .

we sincerely welcome people of all nationalities , public figures of all circles , and all mass organizations in taiwan to make proposals and suggestions regarding affairs of state through various channels and in various ways .

taiwan 's return to the embrace of the motherland and the accomplishment of the great cause of national unification is a great and glorious mission history has bequeathed on our generation .... we hope that the kuomintang authorities will stick to their one - china position and their opposition to "two chinas" and that they will put national interests above everything else , forget previous ill will and join hands with us in accomplishing the great cause of national unification and the great goal of making china prosperous and strong , so as to win glory for our ancestors , bring benefit to our posterity , and write a new and glorious page in the history of the chinese nation ! .

april 5 , 1982 clearly , the taiwan issue had been a most difficult problem between our governments ... .

the united states firmly adheres to the positions agreed upon in the joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations between the united states and china .

there is only one china .

we will not permit the unofficial relations between the american people and the people of taiwan to weaken our commitment to this principle .

july 14 , 1982 in negotiating the third joint communique with the prc , the united states: 1. has not agreed to set a date for ending arms sales to taiwan ; 2. ha s not agreed to hold prior consultations with the prc on arms sales to taiwan ; 3. will not play any mediation role between taipei and beijing ; 4. has not agreed to revise the taiwan relations act ; 5. has not altered its position regarding sovereignty over taiwan ; 6. will not exert pressure on taiwan to negotiate with the prc .

july 26 , 1982 i want to point out that this decision [on a joint communique] is based on a prc decision only to use peaceful means to resolve the taiwan issue .

on this point , the u.s. will not only pay attention to what the prc says , but also will use all methods to achieve surveillance of prc military production and military deployment .

the intelligence attained would be brought to your attention .

if there is any change with regard to their commitment to peaceful solution of the taiwan issue , the u.s. commitments would become invalidated .

august 17 , 1982 in the joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations on january 1 , 1979 , issued by the government of the united states of america and the government of the people's republic of china , the united states of america recognized the government of the people's republic of china as the sole legal government of china , and it acknowledged the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china .

the question of united states arms sales to taiwan was not settled in the course of negotiations between the two countries on establishing diplomatic relations .

the chinese government reiterates that the question of taiwan is china 's internal affair .

the message to the compatriots in taiwan issued by china on january 1 , 1979 , promulgated a fundamental policy of striving for peaceful unification of the motherland .

the nine - point proposal put forward by china on september 30 , 1981 represented a further major effort under this fundamental policy to strive for a peaceful solution to the taiwan question .

the united states government attaches great importance to its relations with china , and reiterates that it has no intention of infringing on chinese sovereignty and territorial integrity , or interfering in china's internal affairs , or pursuing a policy of "two chinas" or "one china , one taiwan. .

the united states government understands and appreciates the chinese policy of striving for a peaceful resolution of the taiwan question as indicated in china's message to compatriots in taiwan issued on january 1 , 1979 and the nine - point proposal put forward by china on september 30 , 1981 .

the new situation which has emerged with regard to the taiwan question also provides favorable conditions for the settlement of united states - china differences over the question of united states arms sales to taiwan .

having in mind the foregoing statements of both sides , the united states government states that it does not seek to carry out a long - term policy of arms sales to taiwan , that its arms sales to taiwan will not exceed , either in qualitative or in quantitative terms , the level of those supplied in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the united states and china , and that it intends to reduce gradually its sales of arms to taiwan , leading over a period of time to a final resolution .

in so stating , the united states acknowledges china 's consistent position regarding the thorough settlement of this issue .

august 17 , 1982 regarding future u.s. arms sales to taiwan , our policy , set forth clearly in the communique [issued on the same day] , is fully consistent with the taiwan relations act .

arms sales will continue in accordance with the act and with the full expectation that the approach of the chinese government to the resolution of the taiwan issue will continue to be peaceful .

we attach great significance to the chinese statement in the communique regarding china 's "fundamental" policy , and it is clear from our statements that our future actions will be conducted with this peaceful policy fully in mind .

the position of the united states government has always been clear and consistent in this regard .

the taiwan question is a matter for the chinese people , on both sides of the taiwan strait , to resolve .

we will not interfere in this matter or prejudice the free choice of , or put pressure on , the people of taiwan in this matter .

at the same time , we have an abiding interest and concern that any resolution be peaceful .

i shall never waver from this fundamental position .

august 17 , 1982 the u.s. willingness to reduce its arms sales to taiwan is conditioned absolutely upon the continued commitment of china to the peaceful solution of the taiwan - prc differences .

it should be clearly understood that the linkage between these two matters is a permanent imperative of u.s. foreign policy .

in addition , it is essential that the quantity and quality of the arms provided taiwan be conditioned entirely on the threat posed by the prc .

both in quantitative and qualitative terms , taiwan 's defense capability relative to that of the prc will be maintained .

august 17 , 1982 in the joint communique , the chinese government reiterates in clear - cut terms its position that "the question of taiwan is china 's internal affair. .

the u.s. side also indicates that it has no intention of infringing on chinese sovereignty and territorial integrity , or interfering in china 's internal affairs , or pursuing a policy of "two chinas" or "one china , one taiwan . .

august 18 , 1982 [on the august 17 , 1982 , communique] , let me recapitulate and emphasize a few key features ; then i'll take your questions .

first , the document must be read as a whole , since the policies it sets forth are interrelated [original emphasis] .

second , as i have previously noted , the communique contains a strong chinese statement that its fundamental policy is to seek to resolve the taiwan question by peaceful means ( para 4 ) [original emphasis] .... third , the u.s. statements concerning future arms sales to taiwan ( para 6 ) are based on china 's statements as to its fundamental peaceful policy for seeking a resolution to the taiwan question and on the "new situation" created by those statements ( para 5 ) [original emphasis] .... fourth , we did not agree to set a date certain for ending arms sales to taiwan and the statements of future u.s. arms sales policy embodied in the communique do not provide either a time frame for reductions of u.s. arms sales or for their termination .... we see no mediation role for the u.s. nor will we attempt to exert pressure on taiwan to enter into negotiations with the prc ... .

there has been no change in our long - standing position on the issue of sovereignty over taiwan .

the communique ( para 1 ) in its opening paragraph simply cites that portion of the joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations between the u.s. and the p.r.c .

in which the u.s. "acknowledged the chinese position on this issue" ( i.e. , that there is but one china and taiwan is a part of china ) ... .

it has been reported in the press that the chinese at one point suggested that the taiwan relations act be revised .

we have no plans to seek any such revisions .... [para 9] should not be read to imply that we have agreed to engage in prior consultations with beijing on arms sales to taiwan .

[original emphasis .

june 26 , 1983 after reunification with the mother land , the taiwan special administrative region will assume a unique character and may practice a social system different from that of the mainland .

it will enjoy independent judicial power , and there will be no need to go to beijing for final adjudication .

what is more , it may maintain its own army , provided it does not threaten the mainland .

the mainland will not station anyone in taiwan .

neither troops nor administrative personnel will go there .

the party , governmental , and military systems of taiwan will be administered by the taiwan authorities themselves .

a number of posts in the central government will be made available to taiwan .

february 22 , 1984 there are many disputes in the world that always require solutions .

i have had the belief for many years that , no matter what solutions are used to solve these problems , don't use means of war , but use peaceful ways .

our proposal for unification between the mainland and taiwan is fair and reasonable .

after unification , taiwan will still be allowed to engage in its capitalism , while the mainland implements socialism , but there will be one unified china .

one china , two systems .

the hong kong problem will also be treated the same: one china , two systems .

june 22 , 1984 if we cannot resolve peacefully [the hong kong and taiwan questions] , then can only use force to resolve , but this would be disadvantageous to all sides .

achieving national unification is the nation's wish , if not unified in 100 years , then unified in 1,000 years .

in how to resolve this problem , i think it would only be through "one country , two systems. .

october 31 , 1984 we proposed "one country , two systems" to resolve the problem of national unification , and that is a kind of peaceful coexistence .

we resolved the hong kong problem , permitting hong kong to preserve the capitalist system with no change for 50 years .

this principle also applies to the taiwan problem .

taiwan differs from hong kong and would be able to keep its military .

… taiwan could keep its capitalism , and beijing would not assign people to taiwan .

february 25 , 1989 we remain firmly committed to the principles set forth in those three joint communiques that form the basis of our relationship .

and based on the bedrock principle that there is but one china , we have found ways to address taiwan constructively without rancor .

we americans have a long , historical friendship with chinese people everywhere .

in the last few years , we've seen an encouraging expansion of family contacts and travel and indirect trade and other forms of peaceful interchange across the taiwan strait , reflecting the interests of the chinese people themselves .

and this trend , this new environment , is consistent with america 's present and longstanding interest in a peaceful resolution of the differences by the chinese themselves .

march 14 , 1991 [unification is] to establish a democratic , free , and equitably prosperous china ... .

it should be achieved in gradual phases under the principles of reason , peace , parity , and reciprocity .... [in the short term,] to enhance understanding through exchanges between the two sides of the strait and eliminate hostility through reciprocity ; and to establish a mutually benign relationship by not endangering each other's security and stability while in the midst of exchanges and not denying the other's existence as a political entity while in the midst of effecting reciprocity .

august 1 , 1992 both sides of the taiwan strait agree that there is only one china .

however , the two sides of the strait have different opinions as to the meaning of "one china . .

to peking , "one china " means the "people's republic of china ( prc ) ," with taiwan to become a "special administration region" after unification .

taipei , on the other hand , considers "one china " to mean the republic of china ( roc ) , founded in 1911 and with de jure sovereignty over all of china .

the roc , however , currently has jurisdiction only over taiwan , penghu , kinmen , and matsu .

taiwan is part of china , and the chinese mainland is part of china as well .

september 2 , 1992 i'm announcing this afternoon that i will authorize the sale to taiwan of 150 f - 16a / b aircraft , made right here in fort worth ... .

this sale of f - 16s to taiwan will help maintain peace and stability in an area of great concern to us , the asia - pacific region , in conformity with our law .

in the last few years , after decades of confrontation , great strides have been made in reducing tensions between taipei and beijing .

during this period , the united states has provided taiwan with sufficient defensive capabilities to sustain the confidence it needs to reduce those tensions .

that same sense of security has underpinned taiwan 's dramatic evolution toward democracy .

my decision today does not change the commitment of this administration and its predecessors to the three communiques with the people's republic of china .

we keep our word: our one - china policy , our recognition of the prc as the sole legitimate government of china .

i've always stressed that the importance of the 1982 communique on arms sales to taiwan lies in its promotion of common political goals: peace and stability in the area through mutual restraint .

november 3 , 1992 taipei's sef: on november 3 , a responsible person of the communist chinese arats said that it is willing to "respect and accept" sef's proposal that each side "verbally states" its respective principles on "one china . .

beijing's arats: at this working - level consultation in hong kong , sef representatives suggested that each side use respective verbal announcements to state the one china principle .

on november 3 , sef sent a letter , formally notifying that "each side will make respective statements through verbal announcements. .

arats fully respects and accepts sef's suggestion .

march 15 , 1993 we advocate that both sides hold talks as soon as possible on bringing hostility between the two sides of the taiwan strait to an end and gradually fulfilling peaceful unification ... .

the forces advocating taiwan independence on and off the island have resurged in recent years .

certain international forces have also deliberately created obstacles to impede china 's peaceful unification .

they cannot but arouse serious concern by the chinese government and all the chinese people .

we are resolutely opposed to any form of two china's or one china and one taiwan ; and we will take all necessary drastic measures to stop any activities aimed at making taiwan independent and splitting the motherland .

april 27-29 , 1993 prc ( wang daohan ) : there are many questions that need to be solved because contacts between the two sides of the strait began only after a separation of more than 40 years .

we have said repeatedly that as long as both sides sit down to talk , we can discuss any question .

proper methods for solving problems will be found as long as the two organizations observe the spirit of mutual respect , consult on equal footing , seek truth from facts , and seek common ground while reserving differences .

taiwan ( koo chen - fu ) : there exist not only the same geographical , historical , and cultural origins between the two sides , but also a "blood is thicker than water" sentiment shared by our people .

president lee teng - hui's proclamation that: " taiwan 's relationship with the entire chinese people cannot be severed" could not have said it more clearly .

taiwan: the subjects discussed in the koo - wang talks were planned by the government in accord with the goals of the short - term phase in the guidelines for national unification ... .

the koo - wang talks were obviously in no way political .... during the talks , sef delegates steadfastly upheld the principle of parity in such matters as meeting procedures , conference site , seating , as well as the topics and scope of discussion .

this made it impossible for the other side to slight the fact that the roc is an equal political entity .

august - september 1993 [in 1991] , we accepted the fact that the nation was divided and that , prior to the unification of china , the political authority of both the roc government and the chinese communists exist .

both the roc government and the chinese communists exercise political authority in the areas under their de facto control .

each is entitled to represent the residents of the territory under its de facto control and to participate in the activities of the international community ... .

it is now the fixed policy and goal of the government and the opposition parties in the roc to participate in the united nations ... .

august 31 , 1993 there is only one china in the world , taiwan is an inalienable part of china , and the seat of china 's central government is in beijing .

this is a universally recognized fact as well as the premise for a peaceful settlement of the taiwan question .

the chinese government is firmly against any words or deeds designed to split china 's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

it opposes "two chinas," "one china , one taiwan ," "one country , two governments," or any attempt or act that could lead to "independence of taiwan . .

the chinese people on both sides of the strait all believe that there is only one china and espouse national unification .

taiwan 's status as an inalienable part of china has been determined and cannot be changed .

"self - determination" for taiwan is out of the question .

peaceful unification is a set policy of the chinese government .

however , any sovereign state is entitled to use any means it deems necessary , including military ones , to uphold its sovereignty and territorial integrity .

the chinese government is under no obligation to undertake any commitment to any foreign power or people intending to split china as to what means it might use to handle its own domestic affairs .

it should be pointed out that the taiwan question is purely an internal affair of china and bears no analogy to the cases of germany and korea which were brought about as a result of international accords at the end of the second world war .

july 5 , 1994 it is an incontrovertible historical fact that the roc has always been an independent sovereign state in the international community since its founding in 1912 .

however , relations between the two sides of the taiwan strait are not those between two separate countries , neither are they purely domestic in nature .

in order to ensure that cross - strait relations develop toward benign interaction , the roc government has formulated the concept of a "political entity" to serve as the basis of interaction between the two sides .

the term "political entity" has extensive meaning , it can refer to a country , a government , or a political organization .

at the current stage of cross - strait interaction , only when we set aside the "sovereignty dispute" will we untie the knots that have bound us for more than the past 40 years and progress smoothly toward unification ... .

the roc government is firm in its advocacy of "one china " and is opposed to "two chinas" or "one china , one taiwan . .

but at the same time , given that division and divided rule on the two sides of the taiwan strait is a long - standing political fact , the roc government also holds that the two sides should be fully aware that each has jurisdiction over its respective territory and that they should coexist as two legal entities in the international arena .

as for their relationship with each other , it is that of two separate areas of one china and is therefore "domestic" or "chinese" in nature ... .

the roc government takes "one china , two equal political entities" as the structure for handling cross - strait relations and hopes that cross - strait relations will develop in the direction of being peaceful , pragmatic , and sensible .

. .

the cpc [communist party of china ] should dismiss any misgivings it has concerning the roc government's determination to achieve unification .

what the cpc authorities should give urgent consideration to is how , given the fact that the country is divided under two separate governments , we can actively create favorable conditions for unification and gradually bring the two different "political entities" together to form "one china. .

... at the same time , the chinese people cannot strive for unification just for the sake of unification ; instead , unification should be realized under a reasonable and benign political , economic , and social system and way of living .

therefore , we hold that the two sides of the strait should go all out to build a democratic , free , equally wealthy , and united china ... .

september 7 , 1994 u.s. policy toward taiwan is governed , of course , by the taiwan relations act of 1979 .

three communiques with the people's republic of china ( the shanghai communique of 1972 , the normalization communique of 1979 , and the joint communique of 1982 ) also constitute part of the foundation .

in the joint communique shifting diplomatic relations to the prc 15 years ago , the united states recognized "the government of the people's republic of china as the sole legal government of china . .

the document further states that "within this context , the people of the united states will maintain cultural , commercial , and other unofficial relations with the people of taiwan . .

the united states also acknowledged "the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china . .

these formulations were repeated in the 1982 communique .

since 1978 , each administration has reaffirmed this policy .

the policy has been essential in maintaining peace , stability , and economic development on both sides of the taiwan strait and throughout the region .... we have made absolutely clear our expectation that cross - strait relations will evolve in a peaceful manner .

we neither interfere in nor mediate this process .

but we welcome any evolution in relations between taipei and beijing that is mutually agreed upon and peacefully reached ... .

in the end , it is only the two parties themselves , taiwan and the prc , that will be able to resolve the issues between them .

in this regard , the united states applauds the continuing progress in cross - strait dialogue .... we will continue to provide material and training to taiwan to enable it to maintain a sufficient self - defense capability , as mandated by the taiwan relations act ... .

within this framework , the president has decided to enhance our unofficial ties with taiwan .... the administration strongly opposes congressional attempts to legislate visits by top leaders of the "republic of china " to the u.s .

... recognizing taiwan 's important role in transnational issues , we will support its membership in organizations where statehood is not a prerequisite , and will support opportunities for taiwan 's voice to be heard in organizations where its membership is not possible .

we do not seek and cannot impose a resolution of differences between taiwan and the people's republic of china .

nor should we permit one to manipulate us against the other .

january 30 , 1995 1 .

we must firmly oppose any words or actions aimed at creating an "independent taiwan " and the propositions "split the country and rule under separate regimes," two chinas over a certain period of time," etc. , which are in contravention of the principle of one china .

2 .

we do not challenge the development of non - governmental economic and cultural ties by taiwan with other countries ... .

however , we oppose taiwan's activities in "expanding its living space internationally," which are aimed at creating "two chinas" or "one china , one taiwan. .

... 3 .

it has been our consistent stand to hold negotiations with the taiwan authorities on the peaceful unification of the motherland ... .

i suggest that , as the first step , negotiations should be held and an agreement reached on officially ending the state of hostility between the two sides in accordance with the principle that there is only one china .... 4 .

we should strive for the peaceful unification of the motherland , since chinese should not fight fellow chinese .

our not undertaking to give up the use of force is not directed against our compatriots in taiwan but against the schemes of foreign forces to interfere with china's unification and to bring about the "independence of taiwan. .

... 5 .

great efforts should be made to expand the economic exchanges and cooperation between the two sides of the taiwan strait ... 6 .

people on both sides of the taiwan strait should inherit and carry forward the fine traditions of chinese culture .

7 .

the 21 million compatriots in taiwan , whether born there or in other provinces , are all chinese... we also hope that all political parties in taiwan will adopt a sensible , forward - looking , and constructive attitude and promote the expansion of relations between the two sides .... 8 .

leaders of taiwan authorities are welcome to pay visits in appropriate capacities .

we are also ready to accept invitations from the taiwan side to visit taiwan ... .

the affairs of the chinese people should be handled by ourselves , something that does not take an international occasion to accomplish ... .

april 8 , 1995 1 .

the fact that the chinese mainland and taiwan have been ruled by two political entities in no way subordinate to each other had led to a state of division between the two sides and separate governmental jurisdictions , hence , the issue of national unification .... only by facing up to this reality can both sides build greater consensus on the "one china " issue and at the earliest possible date .

2 .

in taiwan , we have long taken upon ourselves the responsibility for safeguarding and furthering traditional chinese culture , and advocate that culture be the basis for exchanges between both sides to help promote the nationalistic sentiment for living together in prosperity and to foster a strong sense of brotherliness .... 3 .

we will continue to assist the mainland in developing its economy and upgrading the living standards of its people based upon our existing investments and trade relations .

as for trade and transportation links with the mainland , the agencies concerned have to make in - depth evaluations as well as careful plans since these are very complicated issues .... 4 .

i have indicated on several occasions that if leaders on both sides could meet with each other on international occasions in a natural manner , this would alleviate the political confrontation between both sides and foster a harmonious atmosphere for developing future relations ... .

it is our firm belief that the more international organizations both sides join on an equal footing , the more favorable the environment will become for the growth of bilateral relations and for the process of peaceful unification .... 5 .

we believe the mainland authorities should demonstrate their goodwill by publicly renouncing the use of force and refrain from making any military move that might arouse anxiety or suspicion on this side of the taiwan strait , thus paving the way for formal negotiations between both sides to put an end to the state of hostility .... 6 .

hong kong and macau are integral parts of the chinese nation ... post - 1997 hong kong and post - 1999 macau are naturally a matter of great concern to us .

in this regard , the roc government has reiterated its determination to maintain normal contact with hong kong and macau , further participate in affairs related to hong kong and macau , and provide better services to our compatriots there ... .

may 22 , 1995 president clinton has decided to permit lee teng - hui to make a private visit to the united states in june for the express purpose of participating in an alumni reunion event at cornell university , as a distinguished alumnus .

the action follows a revision of administration guidelines to permit occasional private visits by senior leaders of taiwan , including president lee .

president lee will visit the u.s. in a strictly private capacity and will not undertake any official activities .

it is important to reiterate that this is not an official visit .

the granting of a visa in this case is consistent with u.s. policy of maintaining only unofficial relations with taiwan .

it does not convey any change in our relations with or policies towards the people's republic of china , with which we maintain official relations and recognize as the sole legal government of china .

we will continue to abide by the three communiques that form the basis of our relations with china .

the united states also acknowledges the chinese position that there is but one china , and taiwan is a part of china ... .

august 1995 at a meeting in brunei in august 1995 , secretary of state warren christopher reportedly delivered a letter from president clinton to chinese president jiang zemin .

in the letter , which has not been made public , clinton is said to have assured jiang that the united states would ( 1 ) "oppose" taiwan independence ; ( 2 ) would not support "two chinas," or one china and one taiwan ; and ( 3 ) would not support taiwan's admission to the united nations .

march 14 , 1996 our fundamental interest on the taiwan question is that peace and stability be maintained and that the prc and taiwan work out their differences peacefully .

at the same time , we will strictly avoid interfering as the two sides pursue peaceful resolution of differences .

the taiwan relations act ( tra ) of 1979 forms the legal basis of u.s. policy regarding the security of taiwan ... .

however serious , the present situation does not constitute a threat to taiwan of the magnitude contemplated by the drafters of the taiwan relations act .

the prc pressure against taiwan to date does not add up to a "threat to the security or the social or economic system" of taiwan .... we will continue to work closely with you , and if warranted by circumstances , we will act under section 3 ( c ) of the tra , in close consultation with the congress .

overall u.s. china policy , including the taiwan question , is expressed in the three joint communiques with the prc as follows: — the united states recognizes the government of the prc as "the sole legal government of china . .

 — the u.s. acknowledges the chinese position that "there is but one china and taiwan is part of china . .

in 1982 , the u.s. assured the prc that it has no intention of pursuing a policy of "two chinas" or "one china , one taiwan . .

 — within this context , the people of the u.s. will maintain cultural , commercial , and other unofficial relations with the people of taiwan .

 — the u.s. has consistently held that resolution of the taiwan issue is a matter to be worked out peacefully by the chinese themselves .

april 17 , 1996 clinton: yes , we discussed taiwan and china extensively , as well as the recent tension in the strait .

it is obvious that our partnership is designed to try to preserve the peace for all peoples in this region .

and i believe that i can say we both agree that , while the united states clearly observes the so - called one china policy , we also observe the other aspects of the agreement we made many years ago , which include a commitment on the part of both parties to resolve all their differences in a peaceable manner .

and we have encouraged them to pursue that .

therefore , we were concerned about those actions in the taiwan strait .

may 17 , 1996 since 1972 , the foundation for deepening engagement between our nations has been the "one china " policy that is embodied in the three joint communiques between the united states and the people's republic of china ... .

the united states strongly believes that resolution of the issues between the prc and taiwan must be peaceful .

we were gravely concerned when china 's military exercises two months ago raised tensions in the taiwan strait .

our deployment of naval forces to the region was meant to avert any dangerous miscalculations .

we are encouraged that both sides have now taken steps to reduce tensions .

on the eve of the inauguration next monday of taiwan 's first democratically elected president , it is timely to reflect on the enduring value of our "one china " policy for both the prc and taiwan and on our common interest and responsibility to uphold it .

i want to tell you publicly today what we have been saying privately to the leaders in beijing and taipei in recent weeks .

to the leadership in beijing , we have reiterated our consistent position that the future relationship between taiwan and the prc must be resolved directly between them .

but we have reaffirmed that we have a strong interest in the region's continued peace and stability and that our "one china " policy is predicated on the prc's pursuit of a peaceful resolution of issues between taipei and beijing .

to the leadership in taiwan , we have reiterated our commitment to robust unofficial relations , including helping taiwan maintain a sufficient self - defense capacity under the terms of the taiwan relations act .

we have stressed that taiwan has prospered under the "one china " policy .

and we have made clear our view that as taiwan seeks an international role , it should pursue that objective in a way that is consistent with a "one china " policy .

we have emphasized to both sides the importance of avoiding provocative actions or unilateral measures that would alter the status quo or pose a threat to peaceful resolution of outstanding issues .

and we have strongly urged both sides to resume the cross - strait dialogue that was interrupted last summer .

may 20 , 1996 the republic of china has always been a sovereign state .

disputes across the strait center around system and lifestyle ; they have nothing to do with ethnic or cultural identity .

here in this country , it is totally unnecessary or impossible to adopt the so - called course of " taiwan independence. .

for over 40 years , the two sides of the strait have been two separate jurisdictions due to various historical factors , but it is also true that both sides pursue eventual national unification ... .

december 23-28 , 1996 the republic of china has been a sovereign state since 1912 .

following the establishment of the chinese communist regime in 1949 , both sides of the taiwan strait became co - equal political entities ... .

the development of relations with the mainland must be based on safeguarding the survival and development of the republic of china ... .

the republic of china is a sovereign state that must actively promote foreign relations and raise its profile at international activities in its pursuit of national survival and development .

taiwan is not a part of the "people's republic of china ," and the roc government opposes dealing with the cross - strait issue through the "one country , two systems" scheme .

the government should reduce the possibility of confrontation with the mainland by establishing sound mainland policies , and should actively make use of regional and global security and cooperation mechanisms to assure the security of taiwan .

at this point , roc accession to such international bodies as the world trade organization , the international monetary fund , and the world bank , should continue to be actively pursued .

roc admission to the united nations should be actively pursued as a long - term objective through flexible responses to changes in the international situation .

october 29 , 1997 a key to asia's stability is a peaceful and prosperous relationship between the people's republic of china and taiwan .

i reiterated america 's longstanding commitment to a one china policy .

it has allowed democracy to flourish in taiwan and provides a framework in which all three relationships can prosper — between the united states and the prc , the united states and taiwan , and taiwan and the people's republic of china .

i told president jiang that we hope the people's republic and taiwan would resume a constructive cross - strait dialogue and expand cross - strait exchanges .

ultimately , the relationship between the prc and taiwan is for the chinese themselves to determine — peacefully .

first of all , i think the most important thing the united states can do to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the differences is to adhere strictly to the one china policy we have agreed on , to make it clear that within the context of that one china policy , as articulated in the communiques and our own laws , we will maintain friendly , open relations with the people of taiwan and china ; but that we understand that this issue has to be resolved and resolved peacefully , and that if it is resolved in a satisfactory way , consistent with statements made in the past , then asia will be stronger and more stable and more prosperous .

that is good for the united states .

and our own relations with china will move on to another stage of success .

i think the more we can encourage that , the better off we are .

but i think in the end , since so much investment and contact has gone on in the last few years between taiwan and china , i think the chinese people know how to resolve this when the time is right , and we just have to keep saying we hope the time will be right as soon as possible .

sooner is better than later .

october 29 , 1997 china stresses that the taiwan question is the most important and sensitive central question in china - u.s. relations , and that the proper handling of this question in strict compliance with the principles set forth in the three china - u.s. joint communiques holds the key to sound and stable growth of china - u.s. relations .

the united states reiterates that it adheres to its "one china " policy and the principles set forth in the three u.s. - china joint communiques .

october 31 , 1997 we certainly made clear that we have a one - china policy ; that we don't support a one - china , one - taiwan policy .

we don't support a two - china policy .

we don't support taiwan independence , and we don't support taiwanese membership in organizations that require you to be a member state .

we certainly made that very clear to the chinese .

june 27 , 1998 president jiang: the taiwan question is the most important and the most sensitive issue at the core of china - u.s. relations .

we hope that the u.s. side will adhere to the principles set forth in the three china - u.s. joint communiques and the joint china - u.s. statement , as well as the relevant commitments it has made in the interest of a smooth growth of china - u.s. relations .

president clinton: i reaffirmed our longstanding one china policy to president jiang and urged the pursuit of cross - strait discussions recently resumed as the best path to a peaceful resolution .

in a similar vein , i urged president jiang to assume a dialogue with the dalai lama in return for the recognition that tibet is a part of china and in recognition of the unique cultural and religious heritage of that region .

june 30 , 1998 i had a chance to reiterate our taiwan policy , which is that we don't support independence for taiwan , or two chinas , or one taiwan - one china .

and we don't believe that taiwan should be a member in any organization for which statehood is a requirement .

so i think we have a consistent policy .

our only policy has been that we think it has to be done peacefully .

that is what our law says , and we have encouraged the cross - strait dialogue .

and i think eventually it will bear fruit if everyone is patient and works hard .

august 3 , 1998 the path to a democratic china must begin with a recognition of the present reality by both sides of the taiwan strait .

and that reality is that china is divided , just as germany and vietnam were in the past and as korea is today .

hence , there is no "one china" now .

we hope for this outcome in the future , but presently it does not exist .

today , there is only "one divided china," with taiwan and the mainland each being part of china .

because neither has jurisdiction over the other , neither can represent the other , much less all of china .

october 14 , 1998 taiwan: it has been nearly 50 years since the two sides of the taiwan strait became two equal entities under divided rule and not subordinate to each other .

a "divided china " is not only a historical fact , but also a political reality .

taiwan: china 's unification hinges upon the democratization of the chinese mainland .

only when the chinese mainland has achieved democracy can the two sides of the taiwan strait talk about unification .

prc: mr. wang said that taiwan 's political status can be discussed under the one china principle .

on this point , both mr. jiang zemin and mr. qian qichen had similar comments to the effect that anything can be put on the table under the one china principle .

therefore , on the question of one china , this will be our consistent stand before the two sides across the strait are reunified: there is only one china across the strait , taiwan is part of china , and chinese sovereignty and territorial integrity are indivisible .... now , the government of the people's republic of china is universally acknowledged internationally as the only legitimate government representing china .

in spite of this , the two sides should still negotiate on equal footing under the principle that there is but one china .

the issue of whether the talks are between central or local authorities can be left aside .

march 24 , 1999 insisting on peaceful resolution of differences between the prc and taiwan will remain u.s. policy in the future just as surely as it has been our policy over the past twenty years .

our belief , which we have stated repeatedly , is that dialogue between the prc and taiwan fosters an atmosphere in which tensions are reduced , misperceptions can be clarified , and common ground can be explored .

the exchange of visits under the sef / arats framework , currently rich in symbolism but still nascent in substance , has the potential to contribute to the peaceful resolution of difficult substantive differences .

clearly , this will not be easy , but this administration has great confidence in the creativity of the people of taiwan and the people of the mainland , working together , to identify the necessary human contacts and the most comfortable processes to give the dialogue real meaning .

using a phrase that has garnered much favor in washington of late , i could imagine that "out of the box" thinking within this dialogue might contribute to interim agreements , perhaps in combination with specific confidence building measures , on any number of difficult topics .

but , as the u.s. has steadfastly held , we will avoid interfering as the two sides pursue peaceful resolution of differences , because it is only the participants on both sides of the strait that can craft the specific solutions which balance their interests while addressing their most pressing concerns .

july 9 , 1999 the fact that disregarding the reality that the two sides of the taiwan strait are under separate administrations of different governments , the chinese communist authorities have been threatening us with force is actually the main reason why cross - strait ties cannot be improved thoroughly ... .

since the prc's establishment , the chinese communists have never ruled taiwan , penghu , kinmen , and matsu , which have been under the jurisdiction of the republic of china ... .

since our constitutional reform in 1991 , we have designated cross - strait ties as nation - to - nation , or at least as special state - to - state ties , rather than internal ties within "one china " between a legitimate government and a rebellion group , or between central and local governments ... .

july 21 , 1999 clinton [on whether the united states is obligated to defend taiwan militarily if it abandons the one china policy and would continue to provide military aid if taiwan pursues separatism]: well , let me say first of all , a lot of those questions are governed by the taiwan relations act , which we intend to honor .

our policy is clear: we favor the one china policy ; we favor the cross - strait dialogues .

the understanding we have had all along with both china and taiwan is that the differences between them would be resolved peacefully .

if that were not to be the case , under the taiwan relations act we would be required to view it with the gravest concern .... clinton [on delaying a pentagon delegation's visit to taiwan]: i didn't think this was the best time to do something which might excite either one side or the other and imply that a military solution is an acceptable alternative .

if you really think about what's at stake here , it would be unthinkable .

and i want — i don't want to depart from any of the three pillars .

i think we need to stay with one china ; i think we need to stay with the dialogue ; and i think that no one should contemplate force here .

august 1 , 1999 president lee's remarks concerning the nature of the cross - strait relationship were based on the necessity of protecting national interests and dignity .

from the political , historical , and legal perspectives , he merely clarified an existing fact .

he by no means twisted or exaggerated the truth , nor did he exclude the goal of unifying both sides of the strait as a new , democratic china .... taiwan and the chinese mainland have always differed in their definition of "one china . .

thus , in 1992 , ... the two sides eventually reached an agreement on "one china , with each side being entitled to its respective interpretation. .

.. .

however , beijing has unilaterally abandoned this agreement in recent years ... .

in the framework of the 1992 agreement , whereby each side is entitled to its respective interpretation , we have always maintained that the "one china " concept refers to the future rather than the present .

the two sides are not yet unified , but are equals , ruled separately .

we both exist concurrently .

therefore , the two sides can be defined as sharing a "special state - to - state relationship," prior to unification ... .

september 11 , 1999 clinton [on his message concerning taiwan]: my message is that our policy has not and will not change .

we favor one china .

we favor a peaceful approach to working out the differences .

we favor the cross - strait dialogue .

our policy has not changed and it will not change .

jiang [on whether the prc will maintain its threat to use military force against taiwan]: our policy on taiwan is a consistent one .

that is , one , peaceful unification , one country - two systems .

however , if there were to be any foreign intervention , or if there were to be taiwan independence , then we would not undertake to renounce the use of force .

february 21 , 2000 on october 1 , 1949 , the central people's government of the prc was proclaimed , replacing the government of the republic of china to become the only legal government of the whole of china and its sole legal representative in the international arena , thereby bringing the historical status of the republic of china to an end .... so the government of the prc naturally should fully enjoy and exercise china's sovereignty , including its sovereignty over taiwan ... .

the chinese government is actively and sincerely striving for peaceful unification .

to achieve peaceful unification , the chinese government has appealed time and again for cross - strait negotiations on the basis of equality and the one china principle ... .

the chinese government has also proposed that dialogue ( that includes political dialogue ) may start first , which may gradually move on to procedural consultations for political negotiation ( to resolve issues for formal negotiation , such as the name , topics for discussion , and format ) , then political negotiation may begin .

political negotiation may be carried out step - by - step ... .

however , since the early 1990s , lee teng - hui has gradually deviated from the one china principle.. .

in military affairs , the taiwan authorities have bought large quantities of advanced weapons from foreign countries and sought to join the tmd system , attempting to covertly establish certain forms of military alliance with the united states and japan .... facts prove that a serious crisis still exists in the situation of the taiwan strait .

to safeguard the interests of the entire chinese people , including compatriots in taiwan , and maintain the peace and development of the asia - pacific region , the chinese government remains firm in adhering to "peaceful unification , one country / two systems ; " upholding the eight propositions put forward by president jiang zemin for the development of cross - strait relations and the acceleration of the peaceful unification of china ; and doing its utmost to achieve the objective of peaceful unification .

however , if a grave turn of events occurs leading to the separation of taiwan from china in any name , or if there is foreign invasion and occupation of taiwan , or if taiwan authorities indefinitely refuse to peacefully resolve the cross - strait unification problem through negotiations , then the chinese government will only be forced to adopt all possible drastic measures , including the use of force , to safeguard china's sovereignty and territorial integrity , and fulfill the great cause of china's unification .... countries maintaining diplomatic relations with china must not sell arms to taiwan or enter into any forms of military alliance with taiwan ... or help taiwan to produce weapons ... .

february 24 , 2000 we'll continue to reject the use of force as a means to resolve the taiwan question .

we'll also continue to make absolutely clear that the issues between beijing and taiwan must be resolved peacefully and with the assent of the people of taiwan .

may 20 , 2000 today , as the cold war has ended , it is time for the two sides to cast aside the hostilities left from the old era .

we do not need to wait further because now is a new opportunity for the two sides to create an era of reconciliation together .

the people across the taiwan strait share the same ancestral , cultural , and historical background .

while upholding the principles of democracy and parity , building upon the existing foundations , and constructing conditions for cooperation through goodwill , we believe that the leaders on both sides possess enough wisdom and creativity to jointly deal with the question of a future "one china . .

i fully understand that as the popularly elected 10 th - term president of the republic of china , i must abide by the constitution , maintain the sovereignty , dignity , and security of our country , and ensure the well - being of all citizens .

therefore , as long as the ccp regime has no intention to use military force against taiwan , i pledge that during my term in office , i will not declare independence , i will not change the national title , i will not push forth the inclusion of the so - called "state - to - state" description in the constitution , and i will not promote a referendum to change the status quo in regards to the question of independence or unification .

furthermore , the abolition of the national unification council or the guidelines for national unification will not be an issue .

july - august 2000 with regard to cross - strait relations , the one china principle we stand for is that there is only one china in the world ; the mainland and taiwan all belong to one china ; and china's sovereignty and territorial integrity are indivisible .

december 31 , 2000 i have always felt that the people on both sides of the taiwan strait came from the same family and that they all pursue the same goals of peaceful coexistence and mutual prosperity .

since both sides with to live under the same roof , we should be more understanding and helpful rather than harming or destroying each other ... .

the integration of our economies , trade , and culture can be a starting point for gradually building faith and confidence in each other .

this , in turn , can be the basis for a new framework of permanent peace and political integration .

april 25 , 2001 on abc: [if taiwan were attacked by the prc , the united states has an obligation to use] whatever it took to help taiwan defend herself .

on cnn: well , i think that the chinese must hear that ours is an administration , like other administrations , that is willing to uphold the spirit of the ... taiwan relations act .

and i'll do so .

however , i think it's important for people to also note that mine is an administration that strongly supports the one china policy , that we expect any dispute to be resolved peacefully .

and that's the message i really want people to hear .

but as people have seen , that i'm willing to help taiwan defend herself , and that nothing has really changed in policy , as far as i'm concerned .

this is what other presidents have said , and i will continue to say so ... .

i have said that i will do what it takes to help taiwan defend herself , and the chinese must understand that .

secondly , i certainly hope taiwan adheres to the one china policy .

and a declaration of independence is not the one china policy , and we will work with taiwan to make sure that that doesn't happen .

we need a peaceful resolution of this issue .

january 24 , 2002 the refusal to accept the principle of one china and recognize the "1992 consensus" by the leader of the taiwan authorities is the crucial reason leading to a deadlock in cross - strait relations and also the root cause of instability of the situation and possible danger in the taiwan strait .... we hold that political differences must not interfere with economic and trade exchanges between the two sides of the strait .... we are willing to hear opinions from people in taiwan on the establishment of a mechanism for economic cooperation and the promotion of economic relations between the two sides ... .

the democratic progressive party should think more about the welfare of the people in taiwan , thoroughly discard its " taiwan independence party platform," and develop cross - strait relations with a sincere attitude .

we believe that the broad masses of the dpp are different from the minority of stubborn " taiwan independence" elements .

we welcome them to come , in appropriate capacities , to sightsee , visit , and increase their understanding .

february 21 , 2002 jiang: president bush emphasized that the united states upholds the one china policy and will abide by the three sino - u.s. joint communiques .

bush: as [president jiang] mentioned , we talked about taiwan .

the position of my government has not changed over the years .

we believe in the peaceful settlement of this issue .

we will urge there be no provocation .

the united states will continue to support the taiwan relations act .

august 3 , 2002 i would like to take a moment here to make a few calls for your consideration: ( 1 ) during these past few days , i have said that we must seriously consider going down taiwan 's own road .... what does " taiwan 's own road" mean ? .

... taiwan's own road is taiwan's road of democracy , taiwan's road of freedom , taiwan's road of human rights , and taiwan 's road of peace .

 ( 2 ) taiwan is our country , and our country cannot be bullied , diminished , marginalized , or downgraded as a local entity .

taiwan does not belong to someone else , nor is it someone else's local government or province .

taiwan also cannot become a second hong kong or macau , because taiwan is a sovereign independent country .

simply put , it must be clear that taiwan and china are each one country on each side [yibian yiguo] of the strait .

 ( 3 ) china has never renounced the use of force against taiwan and continues to suppress taiwan in the international community .... china's so - called "one china principle" or "one country , two systems" would change taiwan 's status quo .

we cannot accept this , because whether taiwan 's future or status quo should be changed cannot be decided for us by any one country , any one government , any one political party , or any one person .

only the 23 million great people of taiwan have the right to decide taiwan 's future , fate , and status .

if the need arises , how should this decision be made ? .

it is our long - sought ideal and goal , and our common idea: a referendum ... .

i sincerely call upon and encourage everyone to seriously consider the importance and urgency of legislation for holding referendums .

october 25 , 2002 bush: on taiwan , i emphasized to the president that our one china policy , based on the three communiques and the taiwan relations act , remains unchanged .

i stressed the need for dialogue between china and taiwan that leads to a peaceful resolution of their differences ... .

the one china policy means that the issue ought to be resolved peacefully .

we've got influence with some in the region ; we intend to make sure that the issue is resolved peacefully and that includes making it clear that we do not support independence .

jiang: we have had a frank exchange of views on the taiwan question , which is of concern to the chinese side .

i have elaborated my government's basic policy of peaceful unification and one country , two systems , for the settlement of the taiwan question .

president bush has reiterated his clear - cut position , that the u.s. government abides by the one china policy .

june 1 , 2003 u.s. : on taiwan , the president repeated our policy of a one - china policy , based on the three communiques , the taiwan relations act , no support for taiwan independence .

the chinese basically accepted that , and said , okay , that's positive .

they did say that they have concerns about forces on taiwan moving towards independence .

the president said , we don't support independence .

prc : president hu reiterated china 's principled stand on the taiwan issue .... bush said that the u.s. government will continue to follow the "one china " policy , abide by the three u.s. - china joint communiques , oppose " taiwan independence," and that this policy has not changed and will not change .

september 28 , 2003 if we consider the 1996 direct presidential election as the most significant symbol of taiwan becoming a sovereign , democratic country , then , in 2006 , this "complete" country will be 10 years old .

going through 10 years of practical experience , we must consider what we should seek next as a sovereign , democratic country .

i must say that , in the next phase , we should further seek the deepening of democracy and a more efficient constitutional system , in order to lead taiwan 's people to face the rigorous challenges of the new century .

october 19 , 2003 bush : president hu and i have had a very constructive dialogue .... hu : president bush reiterated his government's position of adhering to the one china policy , the three china - u.s. joint communiques , and his opposition to taiwan independence .

october 31 , 2003 the hastening of a new taiwan constitution will determine whether or not our democracy can come into full bloom .

this , strengthened and supplemented by the institutions of direct democracy , such as referendums , will be a necessary step in advancing taiwan 's human rights and the deepening of its democracy .

one must not be misled by the contention that holding referendums or re - engineering our constitutional framework bears any relevance to the "five noes" pledge presented in my inaugural speech .

neither should matters concerning taiwan 's constitutional development be simplistically interpreted as a political debate of unification versus independence .

december 1 , 2003 we oppose any attempt by either side to unilaterally change the status quo in the taiwan strait .

we also urge both sides to refrain from actions or statements that increase tensions or make dialogue more difficult to achieve .

therefore , we would be opposed to any referenda that would change taiwan 's status or move toward independence .

the united states has always held , and again reiterates , that cross - strait dialogue is essential to peace and stability in the taiwan strait area .

president chen pledged in his inaugural address in the year 2000 not to declare independence , not to change the name of taiwan 's government , and not to add the "state - to - state" theory to the constitution , and not to promote a referendum to change the status quo on independence or unification .

we appreciate president chen's pledge in 2000 , and his subsequent reaffirmations of it , and we take it very seriously .

december 9 , 2003 bush [on whether taiwan's president should cancel the referendum planned for march 20 , 2004]: the united states government's policy is one china , based upon the three communiques and the taiwan relations act .

we oppose any unilateral decision by either china or taiwan to change the status quo .

and the comments and actions made by the leader of taiwan indicate that he may be willing to make decisions unilaterally to change the status quo , which we oppose .

wen: on many occasions , and just now in the meeting as well , president bush has reiterated the u.s. commitment to the three sino - u.s. joint communiques , the one china principle , and opposition to taiwan independence .

we appreciate that .

in particular , we very much appreciate the position adopted by president bush toward the latest moves and developments in taiwan — that is , the attempt to resort to referendums of various kinds as an excuse to pursue taiwan independence .

we appreciate the position of the u.s. government .

april 21 , 2004 the united states does not support independence for taiwan or unilateral moves that would change the status quo as we define it .

for beijing , this means no use of force or threat to use force against taiwan .

for taipei , it means exercising prudence in managing all aspects of cross - strait relations .

for both sides , it means no statements or actions that would unilaterally alter taiwan 's status ... .

the president's message on december 9 of last year during prc premier wen jiabao's visit reiterated the u.s. government's opposition to any unilateral moves by either china or taiwan to change the status quo ... .

the united states will fulfill its obligations to help taiwan defend itself , as mandated in the taiwan relations act .

at the same time , we have very real concerns that our efforts at deterring chinese coercion might fail if beijing ever becomes convinced taiwan is embarked on a course toward independence and permanent separation from china , and concludes that taiwan must be stopped in these efforts ... .

the united states strongly supports taiwan 's democracy , ... but we do not support taiwan independence .

a unilateral move toward independence will avail taiwan of nothing it does not already enjoy in terms of democratic freedom , autonomy , prosperity , and security ... .

while strongly opposing the use of force by the prc , we must also acknowledge with a sober mind what the prc leaders have repeatedly conveyed about china 's capabilities and intentions ... .

it would be irresponsible of us and of taiwan 's leaders to treat these statements as empty threats .... we encourage the people of taiwan to regard this threat equally seriously .

we look to president chen to exercise the kind of responsible , democratic , and restrained leadership that will be necessary to ensure a peaceful and prosperous future for taiwan .... as taiwan proceeds with efforts to deepen democracy , we will speak clearly and bluntly if we feel as though those efforts carry the potential to adversely impact u.s. security interests or have the potential to undermine taiwan 's own security .

there are limitations with respect to what the united states will support as taiwan considers possible changes to its constitution .... our position continues to be embodied in the so - called "six assurances" offered to taiwan by president reagan .

we will neither seek to mediate between the prc and taiwan nor will we exert pressure on taiwan to come to the bargaining table .

of course , the united states is also committed to make available defensive arms and defensive services to taiwan in order to help taiwan meet its self - defense needs .

we believe a secure and self - confident taiwan is a taiwan that is more capable of engaging in political interaction and dialogue with the prc , and we expect taiwan will not interpret our support as a blank check to resist such dialogue .... war in the strait would be a disaster for both sides and set them back decades , and undermine everything they and others in the region have worked so hard to achieve .

we continue to urge beijing and taipei to pursue dialogue as soon as possible through any available channels , without preconditions ... .

the united states is committed to make available defensive arms and defensive services to taiwan in order to help taiwan meet its self - defense needs ... .

the prc has explicitly committed itself publicly and in exchanges with the united states over the last 25 years to a fundamental policy "to strive for a peaceful resolution of the taiwan question. .

if the prc meets its obligations , and its words are matched by a military posture that bolsters and supports peaceful approaches to taiwan , it follows logically that taiwan 's defense requirements will change ... .

may 20 , 2004 the constitutional re - engineering project aims to enhance good governance and increase administrative efficiency , to ensure a solid foundation for democratic rule of law , and to foster long - term stability and prosperity of the nation .... by the time i complete my presidency in 2008 , i hope to hand the people of taiwan and to our country a new constitution — one that is timely , relevant , and viable — as my historic responsibility and my commitment to the people .

in the same context , i am fully aware that consensus has yet to be reached on issues related to national sovereignty , territory , and the subject of unification / independence ; therefore , let me explicitly propose that these particular issues be excluded from the present constitutional re - engineering project .

procedurally , we shall follow the rules set out in the existing constitution and its amendments ... .

if both sides are willing , on the basis of goodwill , to create an environment engendered upon "peaceful development and freedom of choice," then in the future , the republic of china and the people's republic of china — or taiwan and china — can seek to establish relations in any form whatsoever .

we would not exclude any possibility , so long as there is the consent of the 23 million people of taiwan .... today , i would like to reaffirm the promises and principles set forth in my inaugural speech in 2000 .

those commitments have been honored .

they have not changed over the past four years , nor will they change in the next four years ... .

october 25 , 2004 there is only one china .

taiwan is not independent .

it does not enjoy sovereignty as a nation , and that remains our policy , our firm policy .

and it is a policy that has allowed taiwan to develop a very vibrant democratic system , a market economic system , and provided great benefits to the people of taiwan .

and that is why we think it is a policy that should be respected and should remain in force and will remain in force , on the american side , it is our policy that clearly rests on the three communiques .

to repeat it one more time: we do not support an independence movement in taiwan .

february 19 , 2005 [a common strategic objective is] "to encourage the peaceful resolution of issues concerning the taiwan strait through dialogue. .

march 4 , 2005 1 .

never sway in adhering to the one china principle .

2 .

never give up efforts to seek peaceful reunification .

3 .

never change the principle of placing hope on the taiwan people .

4 .

never compromise in opposing " taiwan independence" secessionist activities .

march 14 , 2005 if the separatist forces of "taiwan independence" use any name or any means to cause the fact of taiwan's separation from china , or a major incident occurs that would lead to taiwan's separation from china , or the possibilities of peaceful unification are completely exhausted , the country may adopt non - peaceful means and other necessary measures to safeguard national sovereignty and territorial integrity .

april 29 , 2005 hu jintao and lien chan issued a joint press statement to summarize their agreement on goals: ( 1 ) resume cross - strait negotiation on the basis of the "1992 consensus ; " ( 2 ) cease hostilities , conclude a peace agreement , and launch military confidence building measures ( cbms ) ; ( 3 ) comprehensively expand economic engagement ; ( 4 ) negotiate taiwan's international participation including in the who ; ( 5 ) set up party - to - party platform .

june 8 , 2005 if china were to invade unilaterally , we would rise up in the spirit of the taiwan relations act .

if taiwan were to declare independence unilaterally , it would be a unilateral decision , that would then change the u.s. equation , the u.s. look at what the ... the decision - making process .

my attitude is , is that time will heal this issue .

and therefore we're trying to make sure that neither side provokes the other through unilateral action .

february 27 , 2006 the national unification council will cease to function .

no budget will be earmarked for it , and its personnel must return to their original posts .

the national unification guidelines will cease to apply .

april 20 , 2006 bush: we spent time talking about taiwan , and i assured the president my position has not changed .

i do not support independence for taiwan .

hu: during the meeting , i stressed the importance of the taiwan question to mr. president .

taiwan is an inalienable part of chinese territory , and we maintain consistently that under the basis of the one china principle , we are committed to safeguard peace and stability in the taiwan strait , and to the promotion of the improvement and development of cross - strait relations .... we will by no means allow taiwan independence .

president bush gave us his understanding of chinese concerns .

he reiterated the american positions and said that he does not hope that the moves taken by the taiwan authorities to change the status quo will upset the china - u.s. relationship , which i am highly appreciative .

october 17 , 2006 the united states does not support taiwan independence .

we oppose unilateral changes to the status quo by either side .

february 9 , 2007 we do not support administrative steps by the taiwan authorities that would appear to change taiwan 's status unilaterally or move toward independence .

the united states does not , for instance , support changes in terminology for entities administered by the taiwan authorities .

president chen's fulfillment of his commitments will be a test of leadership , dependability , and statesmanship , as well as ability to protect taiwan 's interests , its relations with others , and to maintain peace and stability in the strait .

june 19 , 2007 the united states opposes any initiative that appears designed to change taiwan 's status unilaterally .

this would include a referendum on whether to apply to the united nations under the name taiwan .

while such a referendum would have no practical impact on taiwan 's u.n. status , it would increase tensions in the taiwan strait .

maintenance of peace and stability across the taiwan strait is of vital interest to the people of taiwan and serves u.s. security interests as well .

moreover , such a move would appear to run counter to president chen's repeated commitments to president bush and the international community .

we urge president chen to exercise leadership by rejecting such a proposed referendum .

september 21 , 2007 the united states supports taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organizations whenever appropriate .

such involvement is in the interest of the 23 million people of taiwan and the international community , and we urge all un members to set aside preconditions and work creatively toward this goal .

consistent with our long - standing one china policy , the united states does not support taiwan 's membership in international organizations where statehood is a requirement , so it cannot support measures designed to advance that goal .

we believe that efforts to urge un membership for taiwan will detract from our goal of advancing taiwan 's involvement in international society .

may 20 , 2008 i sincerely hope that the two sides of the taiwan strait can seize this historic opportunity to achieve peace and co - prosperity .

under the principle of "no unification , no independence , and no use of force," as taiwan 's mainstream public opinion holds it , and under the framework of the roc constitution , we will maintain the status quo in the taiwan strait .

in 1992 , the two sides reached a consensus on "one china , respective interpretations. .

many rounds of negotiation were then completed , spurring the development of cross - strait relations .

i want to reiterate that , based on the "1992 consensus," negotiations should resume at the earliest time possible.… we will also enter consultatons with mainland china over taiwan 's international space and a possible cross - strait peace accord.… in resolving cross - strait issues , what matters is not sovereignty but core values and way of life .

december 31 , 2008 hu jintao made six proposals: ( 1 ) abide by the "one china" principle and enhance political mutual trust ; ( 2 ) advance economic cooperation and common development ; ( 3 ) promote chinese culture and strengthen the spiritual bond ; ( 4 ) strengthen people - to - people exchanges , with the dpp putting an end to "taiwan independence" separatist activities ; ( 5 ) safeguard national sovereignty and consult on foreign affairs , including taiwan's participation in the activities of international organizations ; ( 6 ) end the state of hostility and reach a peace agreement , including exploring the establishment of a mechanism of mutual trust for military security .

november 17 , 2009 we also applauded the steps that the people's republic of china and taiwan have already taken to relax tensions and build ties across the taiwan strait .

our own policy , based on the three u.s. - china communiqués and the taiwan relations act , supports the further deve lopment of these ties — ties that are in the interest of both sides as well as the broader region and the united states .

november 17 , 2009 the united states and china underscored the importance of the taiwan issue in u.s. - china relations .

china emphasized that the taiwan issue concerns china's sovereignty and territorial integrity , and expressed the hope that the united states will honor its relevant commitments and appreciate and support the chinese's side position on this issue .

the united states stated that it follows its one china policy and abides by the principles of the three u.s. - china joint communiques .

the united states welcomes the peaceful development of relations across the taiwan strait and looks forward to efforts by both sides to increase dialogues and interactions in economic , political , and other fields , and develop more positive and stable cross - s trait relations .

april 30 , 2010 we will continue to reduce the risks so that we will purchase arms from the united states , but we will never ask the americans to fight for taiwan .

january 19 , 2011 both sides underscored the importance of the taiwan issue in u.s. - china relations .

the chinese side emphasized that the taiwan issue concerns china 's sovereignty and territorial integrity , and expressed the hope that the u.s. side will honor its relevant commitments and appreciate and support the chinese side's position on this issue .

the u.s. side stated that the united states follows its one china policy and abides by the principles of the three u.s. - china joint communiqués .

the united states applauded the economic cooperation framework agreement between the two sides of the taiwan strait and welcomed the new lines of communications developing between them .

the united states supports the peaceful development of relations across the taiwan strait and looks forward to efforts by both sides to increase dialogues and interactions in economic , political , and other fields , and to develop more positive and stable cross - strait relations .

may 20 , 2012 according to our constitution , the sovereign territory of the republic of china includes taiwan and the mainland .

at present , the roc government has authority to govern only in taiwan , p enghu , kinmen , and matsu .

in other words , over the past two decades , the two sides of the taiwan strait have been defined as " one republic of china , two areas. .

may 24 , 2012 [the principle of the "1992 consensus ; one china , respective interpretations"] is based on the concept of "mutual non - recognition of sovereignty and mutual non - denial of governing authority. .

this concept is inspired by the german experience .

the relationship between east germany and west germany was primarily based on the basic treaty of 1972 .

both sides used "supreme power" instead of " sovereignty " and distinguished between " sovereignty " and " governing authority. .

june 13 , 2013 laws and institutions on both sides of the strait support the one china principle and use the one china framework to determine that the relationship between the two sides is n ot state - to - state .

september 26 , 2014 on major issues involving the nation's reunification and the chinese nation's long - term development , our position is clear - cut and firm , and there will be no compromise and wavering .

since 1949 , although the two sides of the strait have not been reunited , the fact that the mainland and taiwan belong to one china has never been changed , nor will it change .

the return to unity between the two sides means the end of political confrontation , not a recreation of territory and of sovereignty .

"peaceful reunification and one country , two systems" is our basic principle to resolve the taiwan issue .

