telephone marketing , better known as telemarketing , is an approximately $720 billion business in the united states , according to the direct marketing association ( dma ) .

as telephone technologies become more advanced , it becomes more cost - effective for telemarketers to use these technologies to sell various products and services directly to consumers .

only a few households have not received a telemarketing call .

however , with the expansion of the telemarketing business comes the expansion of telemarketing fraud .

although the vast majority of telemarketers are legitimate business people , there are other individuals and companies who violate existing laws and rules and bilk unsuspecting customers of $40 billion a year according to some estimates .

in recent years , several federal laws that deal directly with telemarketing issues have been enacted .

each of the laws has a different focus relative to telemarketing , but all attempt to limit or prohibit certain abusive , fraudulent , or deceptive practices .

because both the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) are responsible for different aspects of telemarketing , both agencies were directed to promulgate regulations .

the fcc generally covers consumers' privacy rights relative to telemarketing practices and the use of the telephone system by telemarketers to transmit information whether via facsimile machine , automated dialing mechanisms , recorded calls , or by a live person .

the ftc is concerned more with the content and consequences of the call , and its regulations focus on whether certain sales practices are misleading , fraudulent , or deceptive .

individual states have passed laws relating to telemarketing practices within a state .

simply say , "no , thank you .

i'm not interested. .

no one has to make any special excuse or listen to the presentation of the person on the line .

consumers can go to a local library and ask for help in finding information on telemarketing and telemarketing scams .

the library's internet connection ( if available ) will provide access to the websites listed in this report .

if no internet connection is available , one may contact the ftc to request information about the telemarketing sales rule .

federal trade commission public reference branch sixth street and pennsylvania avenue , nw washington , dc 20580 http: / / www.ftc.gov contacting the local better business bureau ( bbb ) to obtain information about telemarketing and the various types of telemarketing scams is another option .

the better business bureau also provides information at its website http: / / www.bbb.org / alerts / article.asp ? id=448 .

if a letter or postcard arrives or there is a message on a home answering machine stating that someone has won a free trip or a prize or a sweepstakes , be cautious .

consumers should check the area code for the number that must be called to claim a prize or respond to a telemarketing call before they make the call .

most caribbean countries and canada have area codes that are integrated into the u.s. telephone system and may be reached by direct dialing without using separate country codes .

simply making a call to certain area codes may incur substantial long - distance charges .

those charges will depend upon the area code called , long - distance carrier , length of call , a customer's long - distance calling plan ( or lack thereof ) , and other factors .

the toll - free telephone prefixes used in the united states are 800 , 877 , 888 , 866 , and 855 .

a list of area codes and the state , territory , or country served by a particular area code may be viewed at the website of the north american numbering plan administration ( nanpa ) , the administrator of the north american telephone numbering plan .

the website is http: / / www.nanpa.com / area_codes / index.html .

also , the front section of a local phone book usually contains maps and listings identifying area codes .

if a particular code is not listed , customers should call the phone company to determine what area an unfamiliar area code serves .

according to an fcc fact sheet , there are approximately 317 area codes in service today .

about 207 of them are within the united states .

area codes are constantly being added or revised .

if people respond to a prize announcement , they should not give out credit card , bank account , or social security numbers or send money to cover taxes , customs fees , etc. , unless they completely understand all charges , procedures , and details concerning the offer .

there are many different types of telemarketing scams involving many different types of products and services .

for example , some of the known scams deal with stocks and other investments , automatic debit , charitable donations , easy credit , credit cards , credit repair , advanced fee loans , magazine subscriptions , international telephone calls , prizes , sweepstakes , work - at - home schemes , and travel .

if there is doubt , people can request that written documentation explaining the prize , product , or service be forwarded to them .

any reputable telemarketer will send the information .

consumers should take their time and not be pressured into responding immediately .

if a consumer believes that he / she is a victim of a telemarketing scam or that a telemarketing concern is violating existing rules , they should report the incident ( s ) .

first , contact a local or state consumer affairs office or the state attorney general's office .

the ftc's telemarketing sales rule permits local authorities to prosecute telemarketing scam operators who operate across state lines , and individual states may have passed their own laws or established regulations concerning telemarketing .

federal authorities may also be contacted .

victims of false or deceptive telephone solicitation sales practices may file a written complaint with the ftc by sending a description of their situation to: federal trade commission consumer response center drop h285 washington , dc 20580 1-877-ftc - help ( 382-4357 ) ( toll - free ) an electronic complaint form is available at the do - not - call registry website https: / / www.donotcall.gov / complain / complaincheck.aspx .

also , information on complaints is available at http: / / www.ftc.gov .

click on "file a complaint" at the top of the screen .

the information that is provided to the ftc may help the agency establish a pattern of violations that may require action .

however , the ftc generally does not get involved in individual disputes with telemarketing companies .

the ftc also provides information about telemarketing fraud through its ditch the pitch campaign at its website .

information is provided for consumers on protecting themselves and for businesses on complying with ftc regulations .

complaints about telemarketing practices may be filed at this site ; see http: / / www.ftc.gov / bcp / conline / edcams / telemarketing / index.html .

suspected fraudulent telemarketing activities may also be reported to the national fraud information center ( nfic ) , a private , nonprofit organization that assists consumers with telemarketing complaints .

nfic forwards all appropriate complaints to the ftc .

one may obtain information on telemarketing or report suspicious incidents to nfic via telephone , mail , or the internet .

national fraud information center p.o .

box 65868 washington , dc 20035 1-800-876-7060 http: / / www.fraud.or .

one may also contact the federal communications commission if they believe violations of the telephone consumer protection act have occurred .

send a letter describing the complaint in detail to: federal communications commission consumer & governmental affairs bureau complaints 445 twelfth street , nw washington , dc 20554 1-888-call - fcc ( 1-888-225-5322 ) complaints may be filed online at the fcc website: http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / complaints.html information is available at the following fcc web pages: http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / consumerfacts / tcpa.html ( unwanted telemarketing calls ) http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / consumerfacts / unwantedfaxes.html ( unwanted faxes ) http: / / www.fcc.gov / cgb / consumerfacts / telemarketscam.html ( telemarketing scams ) .

if someone wants to be placed on a firm's or individual's do - not - call list , they should state clearly and firmly to the caller that their name is to be added to the list .

the caller must take the name , add it to their list , and keep it there for 10 years .

in addition , consumers should take down the name of the caller , the name of the firm or individual for whom they are making the call , and the address and telephone number where they can be reached .

note the date and time and keep a record of any additional calls that are received ( if any ) from the same source .

if additional calls from the same source continue , a consumer may consider filing a suit in small claims court .

several individual states have passed laws establishing do - not - call lists within the state .

consumers should contact a local consumer affairs office , better business bureau , or an appropriate state office to find out the particulars of their state's do - not - call list or if such a state list exists .

in some cases , there may be a ( monthly or annual ) charge to be added to the list .

if charges are assessed , state law , not fcc or ftc regulations , will determine the charges .

the december 18 , 2002 , ftc announcement of a national do - not - call registry does not mean the end of individual state do - not - call lists .

the ftc registry covers only interstate calls .

each state may regulate telemarketing practices within its borders .

as a result , a particular state's list may cover telemarketing firms operating solely within the borders of the state , while the same firms would not be covered by the ftc's national registry since their calls do not cross state lines .

electronic transfer of individual state lists to the national do - not - call registry is possible .

if such a transfer were done , individuals from a transferred state list may not need to register with the ftc .

the transfer would automatically add names from a state list to the national registry .

however , states are not required to transfer their lists to the ftc .

for information on whether or not a state list has been transferred , contact state authorities .

the ftc provides information on the sharing of state do - not - call list information between several states and the federal government at http: / / www.ftc.gov / bcp / conline / pubs / alerts / dncalrt.htm .

in addition , the dma provides contact information for state do - not - call lists at its website http: / / www.the - dma.org / government / donotcalllists.shtml .

the direct marketing association , a national trade association serving the direct marketing industry , maintains a national do - not - call list .

if someone adds their name to the national list , it will take a few months for it to take effect , and the name will go only to the companies who subscribe to the dma's list service .

telemarketing companies are not required to subscribe to the service , and getting a name on any do - not - call list does not remove it from all telemarketers' lists .

the list is updated four times per year , in january , april , july , and october .

there is no charge to add a name to the list .

send name , address , and home telephone number ( including area code ) to: telephone preference service direct marketing association p.o .

box 9014 farmingdale , ny 11735-9014 http: / / www.dmaconsumers.org / consumerassistance.html in some instances , telemarketers use automated dialing mechanisms that call every number in a targeted geographic area or with a certain prefix .

if someone is in one of those areas or has the designated telephone prefix , they will not escape the call even if their name is on a do - not - call list .

even unlisted numbers are called in these situations .

the dma has established operational guidelines for its members using automatic dialing equipment and software .

the dma also offers a free mail preference service ( mps ) for those who wish to receive less advertising mail at home .

as with the telephone preference service , to register for the mps , a postcard or letter providing name , home address , and signature must be sent to the dma .

mail preference service direct marketing association p.o .

box 9008 farmingdale , ny 11735-9008 http: / / www.dmaconsumers.org / consumerassistance.htm .

on july 7 , 1999 , the dma announced implementation of its " dma privacy promise to american consumers. .

this effort requires all dma members to adhere to a set of consumer privacy protection measures .

these measures include disclosing to consumers when contact information about them may be shared with other marketers ; providing a means for consumers to opt - out of any information sharing arrangement ; honoring any individual consumer's request not to receive any further solicitations from the marketer ; and requiring member companies to use the dma's mail preference and telephone preference services to maintain updated marketing lists of consumers who have chosen to place their names on these lists .

dma members were given reasonable time to comply , and through the use of secret shoppers , decoys , review of consumer complaints , and random staff contacts , the dma seeks to assure that its members comply with these measures .

if a member refuses to correct its procedures when asked to do so , the dma board may expel the company and make its actions public .

in addition , the dma , in conjunction with the ftc and fcc , has developed a web page providing advice to consumers who shop by phone .

the site provides shopping tips , information on federal laws and regulations , and information on filing complaints http: / / www.dmaconsumers.org / .

the dma also provides a website where complaints concerning receipt of telemarketing calls may be placed: http: / / www.the - dma.org / review / complaint.shtml .

the direct marketing association 1120 avenue of the americas new york , ny 10036-6700 [phone number scrubbed .

the american teleservices association ( ata ) is a national association representing call centers , trainers , consultants , and equipment suppliers in the telemarketing industry .

ata advocates for its members' interests in both federal and state legislative bodies , provides educational opportunities for its members , and acts as the industry's information clearinghouse .

in addition , ata has established a code of ethics for its members .

american teleservices association 3815 river crossing parkway suite 20 indianapolis , in 46240 [phone number scrubbed] http: / / www.ataconnect.or .

