afghanistan has a history of a high degree of decentralization , and resistance to foreign invasion and occupation .

some have termed it the "graveyard of empires. .

the george w. bush administration argued that the u.s. departure from the region after the 1989 soviet pullout contributed to afghanistan's descent into chaos .

after the taliban regime was deposed in 2001 , the administration and its international partners decided to build a relatively strong , democratic , afghan central government .

the effort , which many outside experts described as "nation - building," was supported by the united nations .

the obama administration's strategy review in late 2009 initially narrowed official u.s. goals to preventing terrorism safe haven in afghanistan , but policy in some ways expanded the preexisting nation - building effort .

building the capacity of and reforming afghan governance have been consistently judged to be key to the success of u.s. policy , even after the 2014 security transition to afghan lead .

table 1 briefly depicts the process and events that led to the formation of the post - taliban government of afghanistan and subsequent developments .

the stated obama administration goal in afghanistan was to prevent terrorist organizations that can plan attacks against the u.s. homeland , partners , and interests from regaining safe haven in afghanistan .

to accomplish that goal , u.s. policy is to enable the afghan government and security forces to defend the country against the insurgency and to govern effectively and transparently .

in an august 2017 speech , president trump articulated an intent to reorient afghanistan policy around a conditions - based approach , forsaking timelines and public discussion of troop levels and other benchmarks .

the strategy articulated by the president also appeared to emphasize pressure on pakistan to deny safe haven to afghan militants , as well as an explicit repudiation of past u.s. efforts to "nation - build" in afghanistan and to build western - style institutions there .

the united states has encouraged afghanistan's neighbors to support a stable and economically viable afghanistan and to include afghanistan in regional security and economic organizations and platforms .

the trump administration has specifically linked u.s. policy in afghanistan to broader regional dynamics , particularly as they relate to south asia , and in particular signaled that the administration plans to assertively pressure pakistan to deny safe haven to afghan militants .

the administration first obtained formal pledges from afghanistan's neighbors to noninterference in afghanistan at an international meeting on afghanistan in istanbul on november 2 , 2011 ( "istanbul declaration" ) and again at the december 5 , 2011 , bonn conference ( held on the 10 th anniversary of the bonn conference that formed the post - taliban government ) .

as a follow - up to the istanbul declaration , confidence - building measures by afghanistan's neighbors were discussed at a kabul ministerial conference on june 14 , 2012 , which is now known as the "heart of asia" ministerial process .

the heart of asia process involves 14 regional countries , 14 supporting countries , and 11 regional and international organizations that agreed to jointly fight terrorism and drug trafficking and pursue economic development .

the most recent heart of asia meetings were in islamabad in december 2015 and amritsar , india , on december 4 , 2016 ; the next annual conference ( the seventh ) is to be held in azerbaijan .

afghanistan has sought to increase its integration with neighboring states through participation in other international fora , including south asian association for regional cooperation ( saarc ) , which afghanistan joined in november 2005 ; the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) , a security coordination body that includes russia , china , uzbekistan , tajikistan , kazakhstan , and kyrgyzstan , to which afghanistan was granted full observer status in june 2012 ; the regional economic cooperation conference on afghanistan ( recca ) , which was launched in 2005 , last met in november 2016 in istanbul , and is to be hosted by turkmenistan in ashkabad in 2017 ; a "regional working group" initiative , co - chaired by turkey and unama , which organized the november 2011 istanbul meeting mentioned above ; a "kabul silk road" initiative , led by unama , to promote regional cooperation on afghanistan ; and the still - expanding 50-nation "international contact group," through which u.s. officials have sought to enlist regional and greater international support for afghanistan .

in addition , several regional meetings series have been established between the leaders of afghanistan and neighboring countries .

these include summit meetings between afghanistan , pakistan , and turkey ; between afghanistan , pakistan , the u.s. , and china ( the quadrilateral coordination group , or qcg ) ; and between iran , afghanistan , and pakistan .

however , this latter forum ended in mid - 2012 after afghanistan signed the spa with the united states , which iran strongly opposed .

the quadrilateral coordination group met for the sixth time in october 2017 .

russia convened a meeting with pakistan and china to discuss afghanistan in december 2016 ( more below ) , drawing harsh condemnation from the afghan government , which was not invited to participate ; afghanistan was invited to , and attended , the second ( february 2017 ) and third ( april 2017 ) meetings , though the united states declined to attend .

economically , the u.s. has emphasized the development of a central asia - south asia trading hub — part of a "new silk road" ( nsr ) — in an effort to keep afghanistan stable and economically vibrant as donors wind down their involvement .

the fy2014 omnibus appropriation , ( p.l .

113-76 ) provided up to $150 million to promote afghanistan's links within its region .

the fy2016 consolidated appropriation ( p.l .

114-113 ) contains a provision that an unspecified amount of economic support funds ( esf ) appropriated for afghanistan be used "for programs in south and central asia to expand linkages between afghanistan and countries in the region. .

experts have long asserted that economic development is pivotal to afghanistan's long - term stability .

the economy is struggling against a donor drawdown .

the economy ( gross domestic product , gdp ) has grown an average of 9% per year since 2001 , although aid cutbacks and political uncertainty about the post - 2104 security situation caused a slowing to 4% growth in 2013 and a further slowing to below 2% in 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 , with a slight recovery forecast for 2017 .

on the other hand , the afghan government is assessed by the international community as increasingly able to execute parts of its budget and deliver basic goods and services .

afghan government revenue comes mostly through taxation ( which rose by nearly 27% from fy2015 to fy2016 ) , including through a 20% corporate tax rate , and most of the remainder from customs duties .

the tax system has been computerized .

since the international community intervened in afghanistan in 2001 , there have been debates over many aspects of aid to afghanistan , including amounts , mechanisms for delivery , donor coordination , and distribution within afghanistan .

donor aid accounts for more than 95% of afghanistan's gdp and at least two - thirds of total afghan government expenditures ( operating budget and development budget ) .

some economic sectors in afghanistan have been developed largely with private investment , including by well - connected afghan officials or former officials who founded companies .

therefore , it is often difficult to determine the effects on afghanistan's economy of aid , as compared to the effects of investment , trade , and other variables .

as noted above , in 2011 the united states articulated a vision of greater afghan economic integration in the region and its role in a "new silk road" trading pattern that would presumably accelerate afghan private sector growth and customs revenue receipts .

however , implementation has been slow due to political differences within the region and the difficult security situation regionally .

further hindering afghanistan is that its economy and society are still fragile after decades of warfare that left about 2 million dead , 700,000 widows and orphans , and about 1 million afghan children raised in refugee camps outside afghanistan .

millions of afghan refugees have since returned , although as many as 2.7 million remain outside afghanistan ( mostly in pakistan and iran ) .

in october 2016 , afghanistan and the european union signed an accord under which afghan refugees who have recently been resettled in the eu countries would return to afghanistan .

the literacy rate is very low and afghanistan has a small , although growing , pool of skilled labor , middle managers , accountants , and information professionals .

during the 1990s , the united states was the largest single provider of assistance to the afghan people even though no u.s. aid went directly to the taliban government when it was in power during 1996-2001 ; monies were provided through relief organizations .

between 1985 and 1994 , the united states had a cross - border aid program for afghanistan , implemented by usaid personnel based in pakistan .

citing the difficulty of administering this program , there was no usaid mission for afghanistan from the end of fy1994 until the reopening of the u.s. embassy in afghanistan in late 2001 .

table 11 at the end of this report portrays u.s. assistance to afghanistan since the fall of the taliban .

the cited figures do not include costs for u.s. combat operations .

some laws have required the withholding of u.s. aid subject to administration certification of afghan compliance on a variety of issues , including counternarcotics efforts , corruption , vetting of the afghan security forces , afghan human rights practices and protection of women's rights , and other issues .

all required certifications have been made and virtually no u.s. funds have been withheld from afghanistan .

the fy2017 consolidated appropriation ( p.l .

115-31 ) conditions esf and incle funding to afghanistan on various requirements , including the submission of an interagency strategy for u.s. policy in afghanistan , and the certification , by the secretary of state , that the afghan government is meeting certain benchmarks related to various metrics including corruption , democratic development , and women's rights .

the secretary is required to submit biannual reports ( with the first due 90 days after passage ) on these benchmarks .

separately , the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

114-328 ) extends a number of reporting requirements , with an added provision on the implementation of the afghan personnel and pay system ( p.l .

114-92 ) .

separately , u.s. officials have been able to use such u.s. - provided benefits as fuel supplies and advice on institutions that control afghan pay scales to exercise some leverage over afghans suspected of corruption .

the fy2008 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

110-181 ) established a "special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction" ( sigar ) modeled on a similar outside auditor for iraq .

the sigar issues quarterly reports and specific audits of aspects of afghan governance and security , with particular attention to how u.s. - provided funds have been used .

the sigar , as of october 2017 , is john sopko .

some executive branch agencies , including usaid , have criticized some sigar audits as inaccurate or as highlighting problems that the agencies are already correcting .

for example , dod took strong exception to a december 4 , 2013 , audit by the sigar that asserted that the u.s. military had failed to adequately manage risk accounting for $3 billion in dod funds for the andsf .

the fy2017 consolidated appropriation , referenced above , provides $54.9 million for sigar operations in fy2017 .

a key post - taliban aid authorization bill , s. 2712 , the afghanistan freedom support act ( afsa ) of 2002 ( p.l .

107-327 , december 4 , 2002 ) , as amended , authorized about $3.7 billion in u.s. civilian aid for fy2003-fy2006 .

the law , whose authority has now expired , was intended to create a central source for allocating funds ; that aid strategy was not implemented .

however , some of the humanitarian , counternarcotics , and governance assistance targets authorized by the act were met or exceeded by appropriations .

the act authorized the following: $15 million per year in counternarcotics assistance ( fy2003-fy2006 ) ; $10 million per year for fy2003-fy2005 for political development , including national , regional , and local elections ; $80 million total to benefit women and for afghan human rights oversight ( $15 million per year for fy2003-fy2006 for the afghan ministry of women's affairs , and $5 million per year for fy2003-fy2006 to the human rights commission of afghanistan ) ; $425 million per year for fy2003-fy2006 in humanitarian and development aid ; $300 million for an enterprise fund ; and $550 million in drawdowns of defense articles and services for afghanistan and regional militaries .

 ( the original law provided for $300 million in drawdowns .

that was increased by subsequent appropriations laws. ) .

a subsequent law ( p.l .

108-458 , december 17 , 2004 ) , implementing the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission , contained "the afghanistan freedom support act amendments of 2004. .

the subtitle mandated the appointment of a u.s. coordinator of policy on afghanistan and requires additional administration reports to congress .

a bill in the 110 th congress to reauthorize afsa , h.r .

2446 , passed by the house on june 6 , 2007 ( 406-10 ) .

it would have authorized about $1.7 billion in u.s. economic aid and $320 million in military aid ( including drawdowns of equipment ) per year for several years .

a senate version ( s. 3531 ) , with fewer provisions than the house bill , was not taken up by the full senate .

currently , the united states disburses about 50% of its donated aid funds through the afghan government .

that percentage meets the goal set by the international community in 2010 .

usaid has approved over a dozen afghan ministries to receive direct u.s. aid , some of which is channeled through the afghanistan reconstruction trust fund ( artf ) , run by the world bank .

donors have contributed about $6 billion to the artf , the funds of which are about equally split between funding afghan salaries and priority development investments .

no "enterprise fund" that was envisioned in the afghanistan freedom support act was ever established .

however , small amounts of usaid funds have been used to assist a few afghan enterprises , at least partially fulfilling the intent of the legislation .

in an effort to increase cooperation with the afghan government in assisting development , during the ghani visit to washington , dc , the administration announced an $800 million "new development partnership. .

the funds , which will come from already appropriated funds ( not representing a request for additional funding ) , will be overseen by usaid , and will be disbursed on programs in afghanistan "only after agreed reforms or development results have been accomplished , as measured by clear and objective indicators of achievement. .

through the artf , the united states supports an afghan government program — implemented through the ministry of rural rehabilitation and development — that promotes local decision making on development — the "national solidarity program" ( nsp ) .

donors have provided the program with over $600 million , about 90% of which has been u.s. funding .

the program provides block grants of up to $60,000 per project to local councils to implement their priority projects .

the program has given at least 20,000 grants to a total of 21,600 villages that participate in the program — participation requires setting up a community development council ( cdc ) to help decide on what projects should be funded .

the afghan funds from the nsp have brought bridges , water wells , and some hydroelectric power to numerous villages .

the program has been widely hailed by many institutions as a highly effective , afghan - run program .

u.s. funds for the program are drawn from a broad category of esf for "good governance. .

the afghanistan infrastructure trust fund was set up in early 2013 to channel an additional percentage of u.s. aid directly to afghanistan .

the multilateral fund is managed by the asian development bank .

an initial u.s. contribution of $45 million was made in march 2013 , but was supplemented by tens of millions more to support a power grid project running north - south ; the total u.s. contribution is around $153 million .

 ( this is not the same program as the u.s. "afghanistan infrastructure fund," which is a dod - state program to fund afghan infrastructure projects. ) .

non - u.s. donors , including such institutions as the eu and the asian development bank , provide much of the funds for afghanistan's development .

major pledges have been made primarily at donor conferences such as tokyo ( 2002 ) , berlin ( april 2004 ) , kabul ( april 2005 ) , london ( february 2006 ) , paris ( june 2008 ) , london ( january 2010 ) , tokyo ( july 2012 ) , and brussels ( october 4-5 , 2016 ) .

tokyo conference and mutual accountability framework ( tmaf ) .

the tokyo conference ( july 8 , 2012 ) focused on identifying sources of post - 2014 assistance ( 2012-2022 is termed the "transformation decade" ) .

at the conference , the united states and its partners pledged a total of $16 billion in aid to afghanistan through 2015 ( $4 billion per year for 2012-2015 ) and agreed to sustain support through 2017 at levels at or near the past decade .

as part of that overall pledge , at the conference , then - secretary clinton said the obama administration would ask congress to sustain u.s. aid to afghanistan at roughly the levels it has been through 2017 .

among other major pledges , japan pledged $5 billion over five years ( 2012-2017 ) , and germany pledged $550 million over four years ( 2014-2016 ) .

the tokyo mutual accountability framework ( tmaf ) that resulted from the conference stipulated requirements of the afghan government in governance , anti - corruption , holding free and fair elections , and human rights practices .

as an incentive , if afghanistan meets the benchmarks , the tmaf increases ( to 10% by 2014 and to 20% by 2024 ) the percentage of aid provided through the afghanistan reconstruction trust fund ( artf ) and other mechanisms that gives kabul discretion in the use of donated funds .

a senior officials meeting held in kabul on july 3 , 2013 , to review the afghan performance found that the afghan government had met only a few of the stipulated benchmarks and was making slow progress on most of the others .

a follow - up to the tokyo conference was the london conference that was held on december 4 , 2014 , and which was attended by 60 countries , including pakistan .

brussels conference .

donors met again to assess progress on the tmaf benchmarks and pledged more funds for afghanistan at a donors meeting in brussels on october 4-5 , 2016 .

the conference welcomed afghanistan's new "national peace and development framework" and its efforts to fight corruption .

at the conclusion of the meeting , donors announced pledges of $15.2 billion for the period of 2017-2020 ( about $5 billion per year ) , of which about 20% will be provided by the united states .

among multilateral lending institutions , the world bank has been key to afghanistan's development .

in may 2002 , the world bank reopened its office in afghanistan after 20 years .

its projects have been concentrated in the telecommunications and road and sewage sectors .

the asian development bank ( adb ) has also been playing a major role in afghanistan , including in financing railway construction .

the adb funded the paving of a road from qandahar to the border with pakistan and contributed to a project to bring electricity from central asia to afghanistan .

on the eve of the london donor's conference of january 28 , 2010 , the imf and world bank announced $1.6 billion in afghanistan debt relief .

efforts to build the legitimate economy are showing some results , by some accounts .

some sectors , discussed below , are being developed primarily ( although not exclusively ) with private investment funding .

private investment has been the main driver of much of the new construction evident particularly in kabul , including luxury hotels ; a $25 million coca cola bottling factory ( opened in september 2006 ) ; apartment and office buildings ; and marriage halls and other structures .

the bottling factory is located near the bagrami office park ( another private initiative ) , which includes several other factories .

the serena luxury hotel was built by the agha khan foundation , a major investor in afghanistan .

a multi - billion dollar development near the kabul airport , called "new kabul city," has been constructed .

an arm of dod , called the task force for business and stability operations ( tfbso ) , sought to facilitate additional private investment in afghanistan .

however , a sigar report of november 2014 assessed that the task force's efforts yielded very little result .

the tfbso concluded its operations in march 2015 after its authorities expired the previous year .

funding for the task force is included in table 11 at the end of this report .

uncertainty about the post - 2014 political and security situation caused some afghan businessmen to relocate outside the country , or to develop external components of their business in case the situation in afghanistan deteriorates .

the following sections outline what has been accomplished with u.s. and international donor funds and private investment .

continuing taliban attacks on schools have caused some ( "over 1,000" according to a january 2017 address by the acting minister of education ) to close and hindered efforts to enroll afghan students .

while most sources give a figure of 9 million children enrolled in school , the january 2017 sigar report relays a december 18 , 2016 , interview with the afghan minister of education , who said that "after adjusting numbers for more than three million permanently absent registered students from school records , only six million students were actually attending classes in afghanistan. .

afghanistan's university system is said to be highly underfunded , in part because afghans are entitled to free higher education ( to the b.a .

level ) by the constitution , which means that demand for the higher education far outstrips afghan resources .

the shortfall is impeding the development of a large enough pool of skilled workers for the afghan government .

afghanistan requires about $35 million to operate its universities and institutes for one year .

the health care sector has made considerable gains in reducing infant mortality and giving about 85% of the population at least some access to health professionals .

still , according to some outside groups , nearly 20% of all afghans have had a close relative or friend who died because of the inability to quickly reach medical care or unaffordable cost , even though health care technically should be free according to afghan law and regulations .

usaid funds for health have gone directly to the ministry of health to contract with international ngos to buy medical supplies for clinics .

egypt operates a 65-person field hospital at bagram air base that instructs afghan physicians , and jordan operates a similar facility in mazar - e - sharif .

a $236 million usaid program called "partnership contracts for health" provided immunizations , prenatal exams , and equipment and salaries in 13 provinces .

road building has been a priority ; as former commander of u.s. forces in afghanistan general eikenberry ( later ambassador ) has said , "where the roads end , the taliban begin. .

at least 10,000 miles of roads have been built since 2001 by all donors , of which about half was funded by the united states .

road construction has been usaid's largest project category there , accounting for about $2.8 billion in u.s. spending since the fall of the taliban , according to a sigar report of october 2016 .

roads are considered key to enabling afghan farmers to bring legitimate produce to market in a timely fashion ; in several of the most restive provinces , u.s. funds , including cerp , have been used to build small roads linking farming communities to the markets for their products .

the major road , the ring road ( including highway one from qandahar to kabul ) , has been completely repaved using funds from various donors , including substantial funds from the asian development bank , at a total expense of about $4 billion ( all donors ) .

other major projects include a road from qandahar to tarin kowt ( uruzgan province ) built by u.s. military personnel , inaugurated in 2005 ; a road linking the panjshir valley to kabul ; a salang bypass road through bamiyan province ; and an east - west road across afghanistan , from herat to kabul , though funding for only a few segments ( herat to chest - e - sharif , and maidany shar to bamiyan , and bamiyan city to yakowlang in that same province ) has been identified ( from italy and japan ) .

some observers warn that the afghan government lacks the resources to adequately maintain the roads built with international funds .

many of the roads built have fallen into disrepair and are marked with major potholes , as discussed in detail in the sigar report on u.s. - funded road projects in afghanistan released in october 2016 .

afghan officials say that trade with central asia increased after a bridge over the panj river , connecting afghanistan and tajikistan , opened in late 2007 .

the bridge was built with $33 million in ( fy2005 ) u.s. assistance .

the bridge is helping what press reports say is robust reconstruction and economic development in the relatively peaceful and ethnically homogenous province of panjshir , the political base of the northern alliance , though others claim it has facilitated drug trafficking .

afghanistan is beginning to develop a rail system — a sector it lacked as a legacy of security policy during the late 19 th century that perceived railroads as facilitating invasion of afghanistan .

rail is considered increasingly crucial to afghanistan's ability to develop its mineral wealth because it is the means by which minerals can be exported to neighboring countries .

in particular , china has committed to building a rail line from its mes aynak copper mine project to the northern border and it is conducting a feasibility study for that railway as of mid - 2014 .

a spur to the hajji gak iron mine would be funded by india ( about $1 billion ) as part of its project there .

however , there are indications india and china might opt instead truck their minerals out , a process that would slow full exploitation of these mines .

there are also plans to build a line from herat and kabul to qandahar , and then on to the border with pakistan .

the planned railways will link afghanistan to the former soviet railway system in central asia , and to pakistan's railway system , increasing afghanistan's economic integration in the region .

in september 2012 , the government established the afghan rail authority to maintain and regulate this sector .

energy sector development is considered crucial to economic growth and political stability in afghanistan , but considerable u.s. efforts in this area over the past fifteen years have arguably yielded mixed results .

while the percentage of afghans with access to electricity has increased due to these and other development efforts , by most estimates the large majority remains without grid - connected power .

afghanistan has a complex power system , operating in nine separate , unconnected grids , and is still largely dependent on the sale of surplus power from its neighbors , importing 77% of its energy .

the vast majority ( 95% ) of afghanistan's domestically generated electricity is provided by hydropower .

the united states has worked to create more independent and cohesive system by assisting in the development of indigenous power production and management capabilities and by connecting afghanistan's disparate power grids .

according to the most recent quarterly special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) report , total u.s. disbursements for power projects total over $2 billion , including: over $1.5 billion in usaid economic support funds ( esf ) since fy2002 ; approximately $180 million in dod commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) funds as of july 2015 ; and about $467 million in dod afghanistan infrastructure funds as of june 2017 .

some have raised concerns about the sustainability of these efforts .

in april 2014 , sigar john sopko said in congressional testimony that "the problem of planning and implementing programs without considering the cost and feasibility of sustaining them is , perhaps , no more strikingly evident than in the u.s. government's efforts to develop afghanistan's energy sector. .

he highlighted the $355 million kabul power plant ( also known as the tarakhil power plant ) , which a subsequent sigar audit found was operating at less than one percent of its capacity .

that audit described the plant as "severely underutilized," though more recent reports indicate it has occasionally fulfilled kabul's electricity needs when the city's usual sources of power are unavailable .

even though only about 12.5% of afghanistan's land is arable , about 80% of afghans live in rural areas and the agriculture sector has always been key to afghanistan's economy and stability .

about 25% of afghanistan's gdp is contributed by agriculture .

the late ambassador holbrooke , including in his january 2010 strategy document , outlined u.s. policy to boost afghanistan's agriculture sector not only to reduce drug production but also as an engine of economic growth .

prior to the turmoil that engulfed afghanistan in the late 1970s , afghanistan was a major exporter of agricultural products .

usaid programs have helped afghanistan double its legitimate agricultural output over the past five years , particularly through the export of commodities like pomegranates , saffron , and raisins .

since 2002 , usaid has disbursed over $2 billion to build capacity at the ministry of agriculture , irrigation , and livestock ( mail ) , increase access to markets , and provide alternatives to poppy growing , according to a january 2017 sigar report .

u.s. strategy has addressed not only crop choice but also trying to construct the entirety of the infrastructure needed for a healthy legitimate agriculture sector , including road building , security of the routes to agriculture markets , refrigeration , storage , transit through pakistan and other transportation of produce , building legitimate sources of financing , and other aspects of the industry .

select u.s. projects include a $150 million program for the relatively safe areas of afghanistan to continue to develop licit crops .

the incentives driving economic alternatives for the north , east , and west ( idea - new ) program ran through fy2014 .

a $474 million program in southern and eastern areas of the country where counterinsurgency operations are ongoing , afghanistan vouchers for increased production in agriculture ( avipa - plus ) .

the program ran through fy2011 and included initiatives coordinated with u.s. counterinsurgency operations in helmand and qandahar provinces .

the program provided vouchers for wheat seed , fertilizer , and tools , in addition to supporting cash for work programs and small grants to local cooperatives .

several afghan telecommunications firms ( eg , roshan , mtn , and afghan wireless ) have been formed since 2002 and over $2 billion in private investment has flowed into this sector , according to a 2016 sigar report .

cellular networks now reach approximately 90% of afghans , and the asia foundation found in 2016 that 89% of respondents reported that their household owned at least one mobile phone , up from 52% in 2009 .

this rapid development , aided by tens of millions of dollars in support from dod , state , and usaid , has made telecommunications a key driver of the afghan economy .

the telecommunications sector has been assessed by various government agencies as contributing billions in tax revenues to the afghan government , and providing employment to tens of thousands of afghans .

the 62-year - old national airline , ariana , is said to be in significant financial trouble due to corruption that has affected its safety ratings and left it unable to service a heavy debt load .

there are new privately run airlines , such as safi air ( run by the safi group , which has built a modern mall in kabul ) and kam air , but they , along with ariana afghan airlines , have been banned from eu airspace since 2010 due to safety concerns .

in january 2013 , the u.s. military ceased contracting with kam air on the grounds that it was helping traffic opium ; the u.s. military rescinded the ruling after afghan complaints that questioned the allegation .

afghanistan's mining sector has been largely dormant since the soviet invasion .

some afghan leaders complain that not enough has been done to revive such potentially lucrative industries as minerals mining , such as of copper and lapis lazuli ( a stone used in jewelry ) .

the issue became more urgent in june 2010 when the dod task force for business and stability operations announced , based on surveys , that afghanistan may have untapped minerals worth over $1 trillion .

although copper and iron are the largest categories by value , there are believed to also be significant reserves in western afghanistan of such minerals as lithium , which is a crucial component in batteries .

however , as noted above , the expected revenue from this sector has not materialized to date because investors have not built rail lines needed to export the minerals from afghanistan in large volumes .

some experts assert that u.s. hopes for this sector as a driver of long - term economic sustenance for afghanistan , as several senior u.s. officials have expressed , are misplaced .

an additional brake on investment is the lack of legislative action on a new law on mines .

the afghan cabinet approved a draft in february 2013 and sent it to the national assembly in july 2013 , but the assembly has not acted on it to date .

mes aynak copper field .

a major project , signed in november 2007 , is with china metallurgical group for the company to invest $3.0 billion to develop afghanistan's mes aynak copper field in lowgar province .

the agreement , viewed as generous to the point where it might not be commercially profitable for china metallurgical group , includes construction of two coal - fired electric power plants ( one of which will supply more electricity to kabul city ) ; a segment of railway ( discussed above ) ; and a road from the project to kabul .

work was slowed by various factors , including the need to clear mines in the area and to excavate ancient buddhist artifacts that local activists insist be preserved .

actual extraction was expected to begin in mid - 2012 , and still has not begun .

u.s. forces do not directly protect the project , but u.s. forces have set up small bases on some of the roads leading to the mine project to provide general stability there .

hajji gak iron ore project .

in september 2011 seven bids were submitted for another large mining project , the hajji gak iron ore mine ( which may contain 60 billion tons of iron ore ) in bamiyan province .

the bids — from chinese , indian , and other firms — were evaluated and , in late 2011 , the steel authority for india ltd. ( sail ) was awarded the largest share of the project .

one of the four blocs of the project was awarded to kilo gold of canada .

the project , involving an investment of nearly $11 billion , is expected to generate $200 million in annual government revenues when fully operational ( by 2017 ) , although this level might not be reached unless the associated rail lines are built to allow export in high volumes .

sail denied reports in may 2015 that it would not proceed with the project , saying only that it had completed an assessment of the costs and benefits of the project .

other mining projects have been awarded ( subject to finalized contract negotiations ) : the balkhab coooper mine in sar - i - pol province , awarded to afghan gold and minerals co. ; the shaida copper mine in herat province , awarded to afghan minerals group .

 ; the badakshan gold project , in that province , awarded to turkish - afghan mining co. ; and zarkashan copper and gold project ( ghazni province ) , awarded to sterling mining / belhasa international llc .

years of war have stunted developed of a hydrocarbons energy sector in afghanistan .

the country has no hydrocarbons export industry and a small refining sector that provides some of afghanistan's needs for gasoline or other fuels .

most of afghanistan's fuel comes from neighboring states ; oil and gas account for about a quarter of all imports .

however , afghanistan's prospects in this sector appeared to brighten by the announcement in march 2006 of an estimated 3.6 billion barrels of oil and 36.5 trillion cubic feet of gas reserves , amounts that could make afghanistan self - sufficient in energy or even able to export .

major projects and contracts include the angot field in northern afghanistan , part of a field that may contain 60 million barrels of oil , originally let by the afghan government to a local firm ( ghazanfar neft gas ) ; the amu darya basin ( northern afghanistan ) oil fields , the development rights to which were awarded to china national petroleum co. in 2012 .

the field began producing at about 5,000 barrels per day in early 2013 , with a longer - term potential of 145,000 barrels per day .

the $3 billion development has a local partner , the watan group , owned by karzai relatives rashid and rateb popal ; the "afghan - tajik basin," estimated to hold 950 million barrels of oil , 7 trillion cubic feet of gas , and other gas liquids ( an agreement on extraction was signed in october 2013 with turkey's state owned tpic , uae's drago oil , and ghazanfar ) ; and large oil fields in balkh province ( which includes angot field ) , estimated to hold 1.8 billion barrels of oil ; a contract for their development was awarded to china national petroleum company .

usaid has funded test projects to develop gas resources in northern afghanistan .

one key project was the shehbergan gas development project , which consisted of a number of gas wells and , in partnership with the private sector , building a 200 megawatt gas - fired thermal plant and associated transmission lines in northern afghanistan ( linking afghanistan's natural gas field in shehbergan to the population center in mazar - e - sharif ) .

a contract was awarded to the turkish petroleum company to conduct gas drilling , and test drills indicated that commercial amounts of gas exist , though production will likely take 5-7 years once professional exploration begins .

usaid's contribution to the roughly $580 million project , which ended in 2016 , was $120 million .

another pilot project , funded by the task force for business and stability operations , is to develop filling stations and convert cars to use compressed natural gas ( cng ) , which is produced in the gas field in shehbergan and could provide an inexpensive source of fuel in the future .

during the march 2015 ghani visit to washington , dc , the united states and afghanistan announced forming a "joint working group" to explore ways to support afghanistan's integration into regional energy markets .

another long - stalled major energy project apparently has begun to move forward .

during 1996-1998 , the clinton administration supported proposed natural gas and oil pipelines through western afghanistan as an incentive for the warring factions to cooperate .

a consortium led by los angeles - based unocal corporation proposed a $7.5 billion central asia gas pipeline that would originate in southern turkmenistan and pass through afghanistan to pakistan , with possible extensions into india .

the deterioration in u.s. - taliban relations after 1998 suspended hopes for the pipeline projects .

in may 2002 , the leaders of turkmenistan , afghanistan , and pakistan signed preliminary agreements on the project and , in 2011 , the asian development bank agreed to finance the project .

on july 8 , 2014 , turkmenistan , afghanistan , pakistan , and india signed an operational agreement on the $10 billion pipeline under which pakistan and india would each get 42% of the gas transported and afghanistan would get the remainder .

india is a large customer for natural gas and its participation is considered crucial to making the venture commercially viable .

the leaders of the four countries involved formally "broke ground" on the pipeline at a ceremony in turkmenistan on december 15 , 2015 , and work on the pakistani section began in march 2017 .

while originally scheduled for completion in 2019 , afghan officials now assess production will begin in 2021 .

u.s. officials view this project as superior to a proposed gas pipeline from iran to india , transiting pakistan .

the key to u.s. economic strategy , as exemplified by the new silk road strategy , is to encourage afghanistan's trade relationships .

the united states is promoting regional economic integration , discussed above , as well as bilateral economic agreements between afghanistan and its neighbors .

a key to the strategy was accomplished in 2011 when afghanistan and pakistan finalized provisions to implement their 2010 transit trade agreement .

to facilitate afghanistan's ability to increase trade , usaid funded a five - year project ( $63 million total during 2010-2014 ) to simplify the customs clearance process .

this includes new import procedures that have reduced the time needed for imports to clear customs by 45% .

afghanistan took a major step forward on building its trade relationships with its july 29 , 2016 , accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

afghanistan applied for membership in 2003 and , in december 2004 , the countries of the wto voted to start membership talks with afghanistan .

earlier , in september 2004 , the united states and afghanistan signed a bilateral trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) , and most of afghanistan's exports are eligible for duty free treatment under the enhanced generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program .

the administration economic strategy report of december 2011 says the administration is reaching out to afghan exporters and u.s. importers of afghan products to make increased use of the gsp program .

the tifa is seen as a prelude to a broader and more complex bilateral free trade agreement , but negotiations on an fta have not begun .

the tifa is monitored by a joint tifa "council" that meets periodically .

another initiative supported by the united states is the establishment of joint afghan - pakistani "reconstruction opportunity zones" ( rozs ) which would be modeled after "qualified industrial zones" run by israel and jordan in which goods produced in the zones receive duty free treatment for import into the united states .

bills in the 110 th congress , s. 2776 and h.r .

6387 , would have authorized the president to proclaim duty - free treatment for imports from rozs to be designated by the president .

in the 111 th congress , a version of these bills was introduced ( s. 496 and h.r .

1318 ) , and president obama specifically endorsed their passage during his march 2009 strategy announcement .

h.r .

1318 was incorporated into h.r .

1886 , a major pakistan aid appropriation , but the version of the major pakistan aid bill that became law ( p.l .

111-73 ) did not authorize rozs .

