federal employees participate in one of two retirement systems .

the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) was established in 1920 and covers only employees hired before 1984 .

participants in the csrs do not pay social security payroll taxes and they do not earn social security benefits .

for a worker retiring after 30 years of federal service , a csrs annuity will be equal to 56.25% of the average of his or her highest three consecutive years of basic pay .

because the social security trust funds needed additional cash contributions to remain solvent , the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) required federal employees hired after 1983 to participate in social security .

to coordinate federal pension benefits with social security , congress directed the development of a new retirement system for federal employees hired after 1983 .

the result was the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-335 ) .

the fers consists of three elements: social security , the fers basic retirement annuity and the fers supplement , and the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) .

all federal employees initially hired into federal employment on or after january 1 , 1984 , are enrolled in the fers , as are employees who voluntarily switched from csrs to fers during "open seasons" held in 1987 and 1998 .

of 2,751,000 federal civilian and postal service employees enrolled in these federal retirement plans as of september 30 , 2013 , 2,477,000 ( 90% ) were participating in the fers and 274,000 ( 10% ) were under the csrs .

the thrift savings plan is a defined contribution ( dc ) retirement plan similar to the 401 ( k ) plans provided by many employers in the private sector .

newly hired federal employees who participated in a 401 ( k ) plan can , if they choose , roll over their 401 ( k ) account balances into the tsp .

workers who leave the federal government for jobs in other sectors of the economy can leave their money in the tsp — where it will continue to accrue interest , dividends , and capital gains according to the performance of the funds in which they have chosen to invest — or they can roll over their tsp funds on a tax - deferred basis into another tax - qualified retirement savings account such as an ira or a 401 ( k ) plan .

all tsp participants are immediately and fully vested in their contributions to the plan , federal matching contributions , and any growth in the value of their investment from interest , dividends , and capital gains .

participants are fully vested in the 1% agency automatic contributions to the tsp after three years ( two years for congressional employees and executive - branch political appointees ) .

p.l .

106-361 ( october 27 , 2000 ) allows "rollover distributions" into the tsp from other tax - qualified retirement savings plans , such as those authorized for private - sector firms under section 401 ( k ) of the tax code and for non - profit organizations under i.r.c .

section 403 ( b ) .

this law also allows employees to begin making tax - deferred contributions to the tsp immediately upon becoming employed by the federal government .

p.l .

106-398 ( october 30 , 2000 ) allows uniformed military personnel on active duty or in the ready reserve to participate in the tsp under the same terms and conditions as civilian federal employees , but without matching contributions .

p.l .

111-31 ( june 22 , 2009 ) provides for newly hired federal employees to be enrolled automatically in the tsp at a default contribution rate of 3% of pay .

participants can elect a different contribution rate and change their investment allocations , or they can elect not to contribute to the tsp .

p.l .

111-31 also eliminates a previous waiting period for employees under fers to be eligible to receive agency automatic ( 1% ) and agency matching contributions .

p.l .

113-255 ( december 18 , 2014 ) changes the default investment option for automatic contributions to tsp .

prior to p.l .

113-255 , tsp default contributions were automatically invested in the "g" fund ( government security fund ) of the tsp .

p.l .

113-255 , however , changed the default investment option to the age - appropriate lifecycle fund .

using a series of simplifying assumptions , the following tables illustrate the role of the tsp in assuring an adequate income during retirement for federal employees enrolled in the fers .

each table shows the annual salary in the year before retirement for four employees: one at the gs - 4 level , one at gs - 8 , one at gs - 12 , and one at gs - 15 .

the salaries shown are the estimated pay at step 8 of the pay grades in the year 2044 ( table 4 and table 5 ) or 2034 ( table 6 and table 7 ) , assuming that future federal salary increases 4.0% per year .

the salary amounts are expressed in their 2015 dollar equivalents , based on an estimated future inflation rate of 2.7% per year .

the tables show the estimated replacement rates during the first year of retirement for the annual income provided by converting an employee's tsp account into a level , single - life annuity .

within each of the four tables , two factors are varied: pay grade and the employee contribution to the tsp .

final salaries and retirement income replacement rates are shown for each of four illustrative pay grades .

the replacement rate is shown for employees who make no contribution to the tsp , and thus receive only the agency automatic 1% contribution ; for workers who contribute 5% of pay , and therefore receive a 5% contribution from their employing agencies ; and for workers who contribute 10% of pay , which results in the same 5% agency contribution as would a 5% employee contribution .

across the four tables , two factors are varied: the assumed rate of return on contributions to the tsp and the employees' number of years of service at retirement .

the results shown in table 4 and table 6 are based on a constant , nominal rate of return on investment of 6.0% per year .

in table 5 and table 7 , the results are based on a constant , nominal rate of return of 8.0% per year .

because the rate of inflation is assumed in these estimates to be 2.7% per year , the real rate of return on investment is 3.2% in table 4 and table 6 , whereas in table 5 and table 7 the real rate of return on investment is 5.2% per year .

in table 4 and table 5 , the replacement rates have been estimated for a federal employee who retires on december 31 , 2044 , at the age of 62 after 30 years of service under fers .

in table 6 and table 7 , the replacement rates have been estimated for an employee who retires on december 31 , 2034 , at the age of 62 after 20 years of service under fers .

the results presented in each of the following tables assume that the employee contributed the same percentage of pay to the tsp each year over the length of his or her entire career .

the tables illustrate the effects of career - long employee contribution rates of 0% , 5% , and 10% .

table 4 and table 5 show the replacement rates after a 30-year career , assuming nominal rates of return on investment of 6.0% per year and 8.0% per year , respectively .

obviously , actual rates of return on an employee's tsp account will vary from year to year , and over 30 years an employee could achieve average rates of return that are higher or lower than the results shown here .

moreover , many employees begin their careers contributing little or nothing to the tsp and gradually increase their contributions as their incomes increase , and as they become more aware of the need to save for retirement .

consequently , these examples should be regarded as illustrations only .

p.l .

111-31 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act , was signed into law on june 22 , 2009 .

p.l .

111-31 contains the thrift savings plan enhancement act as title i of division b of the bill .

as enacted , p.l .

111-31 : provides for newly hired federal employees to be enrolled automatically in the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) at a default contribution rate of 3% of pay ; requires the federal retirement thrift investment board to establish within the tsp a qualified roth contribution program that provides for after - tax contributions and tax - free distributions ; gives the federal retirement thrift investment board authority to allow tsp participants to invest in mutual funds in addition to the five investment funds now included in the tsp ; requires the thrift board to submit to congress an annual report that includes demographic information about tsp participants and fund managers ; requires participants to sign an acknowledgement of risk if they invest contributions in any investment option other than government securities ; grants the executive director of the tsp authority to issue subpoenas under certain circumstances ; allows funds held in an individual's tsp account to be subject to court orders with respect to payment of restitution to victims of certain crimes ; requires the secretary of defense to report to congress the estimated cost of an agency match on contributions to the tsp by members of the uniformed services ; and allows the surviving spouse of a deceased tsp participant to maintain the decedent's account with the tsp .

p.l .

113-255 , the smart savings act , was signed into law on december 18 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-255 changes the default investment option for tsp contributions .

previously , the default investment option for tsp contributions was the "g" fund ( government security fund ) .

under p.l .

113-255 , however , the default investment option is now the age - appropriate lifecycle fund .

the changes under p.l .

113-255 do not apply to military servicemembers ; the default tsp investment option for military servicemembers remains the "g" fund .

the thrift savings plan is administered by an independent government agency , the federal retirement thrift investment board , which is charged in statute with operating the thrift plan prudently and solely in the interest of the participants and their beneficiaries .

the assets of the thrift plan are maintained in the thrift savings fund , which invests the assets in accordance with participant instructions in five investment funds authorized by congress to be included in the plan .

the thrift board currently contracts with blackrock institutional trust company to manage the index funds in which the f , c , s , and i fund assets are invested .

the contracts for each fund are open to competitive bids by qualified investment managers every three to five years .

the costs of administering the tsp are paid from the assets of the thrift fund .

administrative costs of the tsp in 2013 were 2.9 basis points ( one basis point is 1 / 100 th of 1 percent , or 0.01% ) , or about 29 cents for each $1,000 invested .

participant accounts the thrift plan maintains individual accounts for each participant .

participant accounts are credited with the participant's contributions and agency contributions , and are charged for withdrawals .

the value of the participant's account reflects the number of shares and the daily share prices of the funds in which the account is invested .

administrative expenses are a component of the share price calculation .

the benefit to which a participant is entitled is the participant's vested account .

thrift plan participants can receive account - balance information and conduct transactions by automated telephone service or on the thrift plan's website .

the federal retirement thrift investment board the federal retirement thrift investment board was established by the fers act of 1986 .

the board is responsible for developing the investment policies of the thrift plan and overseeing the management of the plan , which is under the day - to - day direction of an executive director appointed by the board .

three of the five members of the board — including the chairman — are appointed by the president .

the president chooses a fourth member of the board in consultation with the speaker of the house and the house minority leader and a fifth member in consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the senate .

members of the board serve four - year terms and all nominations are subject to senate confirmation .

the law requires that all nominees to the board must be individuals with "substantial experience and expertise in the management of financial investments and pension benefit plans. .

communication and education the thrift board communicates with plan participants to help them better understand the investment choices , benefits , and administration of the tsp .

employing agencies distribute information , including the summary of the thrift savings plan for federal employees , which provides a comprehensive description of the plan , as well as booklets describing the loan program , withdrawal programs , and annuity options under the plan .

investment information also is provided through the tsp fund sheet and the managing your account leaflets which are available on the tsp website .

the thrift board also issues a quarterly newsletter , tsp highlights .

participants can obtain their account balances from the website , request contribution allocations and interfund transfers or , in some cases , loans and withdrawals .

the website also provides various calculators that can be used as retirement planning tools .

a tsp video is available that explains the basics of the tsp .

tsp bulletins are issued regularly to inform agency personnel and payroll specialists of current operating procedures .

the thriftline , the board's toll - free automated voice response system , provides both general plan and account - specific information .

the authorizing legislation that established the thrift board defines the board's authority and responsibilities .

it provides for substantial independence of the board from political pressures .

authority the thrift board has the authority to appoint the executive director of the thrift plan ; remove the executive director for cause ( requires four votes ) ; establish investment policies for the thrift plan ; instruct the director to take whatever actions the board deems appropriate to carry out the policies it establishes ; and submit to congress legislative proposals relating to its responsibilities under federal law .

independence members of the board are nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate , but once confirmed they cannot be removed from their four - year terms without good cause .

the selection and nomination process are designed to assure that members of the board are individuals who are supported by the president and congress .

they serve in times of good behavior , rather than at the pleasure of the president or congress , assuring that they can carry out the responsibilities of their positions without removal from office .

the federal retirement thrift investment board receives no appropriations from congress .

administrative expenses are paid through agency - automatic contributions forfeited by employees who leave federal service before they have vested and charges against participant accounts .

responsibility the law requires that the members of the board shall discharge their responsibilities solely in the interest of participants and beneficiaries .

in practice , this means that the investment policies and management practices of the fund are evaluated by the board exclusively in reference to the efficient and prudent management of the fund's assets .

this exclusive responsibility serves to further insulate the board from pressures to adopt investment policies or management practices that might not be in the long - term interest of preserving and increasing the security and investment performance of the fund's assets .

oversight to assure that the members of the thrift board remain aware of the interests and concerns of thrift plan participants and beneficiaries , the authorizing legislation established the employee thrift advisory council .

this 14-member council is appointed by the chairman of the thrift board and must include representatives of federal employee and postal service labor organizations , managerial employees , supervisory employees , female employees , senior executives , and annuitants .

all fiduciaries of the plan , including members of the thrift board , are required by law to be bonded .

the secretary of labor is authorized by law to investigate any suspected breach of duty by a fiduciary of the plan .

the financial statements of the thrift board are audited regularly by an independent accounting firm .

congressional oversight of the thrift plan is performed by the house committee on oversight and government reform and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

