during the latter years of the clinton presidency , the united states began to focus on the possible deploymentof defenses against long - range ballistic missiles .

the administration , and many missile defense supporters , claimed that the united states needed to pursue nationalmissile defenses ( nmd ) because "rogue"nations such as north korea , iran , and iraq might soon acquire longer range missiles that could strike u.s. territory,and the united states could not be certain thatthe threat of offensive retaliation would deter these unpredictable actors .

the clinton administration realized thatits plans for nmd would exceed the limitsimposed by the 1972 anti - ballistic missile treaty between the united states and soviet union .

consequently , theadministration opened discussions with russiain an effort to negotiate amendments to the treaty that would permit the deployment of a limited nmd system .

russian officials consistently and repeatedly insisted that the 1972 abm treaty is the cornerstone of strategic stability ( this is defined on page 4 ) .

they arguedthat any changes to the treaty that permitted the deployment of defenses against long - range ballistic missiles wouldundermine international strategic stability,upset the nuclear balance established by the treaty , and interfere with russia's nuclear deterrent capabilities .

duringtalks with the clinton administration,russia refused to accept any modifications to the abm treaty that would permit national missile defenses andcampaigned against the u.s. policy at meetingswith other nations and international organizations .

russia also offered alternatives , suggesting that the unitedstates , russia , and the international communityaddress emerging missile threats with diplomacy and arms control measures that would seek to stop the proliferationof new threats and with cooperation ontheater - range ballistic missile defenses to address those threats that did emerge .

this report provides a detailed review of russia's reaction to u.s. policy on missile defense and u.s. proposals for modifications to the abm treaty .

it beginswith a brief background section that describes the central limits in the abm treaty and u.s. policy on thedeployment of missile defenses .

it then describes , inmore detail , russia's objections to the u.s. proposals .

the report also provides a summary of possible militaryresponses that russia might take after the unitedstates withdraws from the abm treaty and begins deployment of missile defenses and contains a discussion ofrussia's proposals for diplomatic and militaryalternatives to the u.s. plans to deploy missile defenses .

the report concludes with a brief discussion of the u.s.response to russia's objections , a few issues forcongress , and a summary of the russian reaction to the u.s. withdrawal from the abm treaty .

russian officials have stated that , instead of relying on missile defenses that could upset stability and underminearms control , the two sides should rely on "anumbrella based on diplomacy" ( 30 ) and has offeredproposals for measures that the international community might adopt to address the threat posed by missileproliferation .

the clinton administration did not dismiss the russian approach , but also did not accept it as analternative to the u.s. approach .

then - secretaryof defense cohen noted , after the june 2000 summit between presidents clinton and putin , that the response tomissile proliferation should include bothdiplomatic efforts to stop proliferation and defensive systems to protect the nations from possible attack .

 ( 31 ) .

during the first months of the bush administration , analysts and observers debated how russia would react ifand when the united states withdrew from theabm treaty .

they questioned whether russia would continue to press its objections to u.s. policies on missiledefense and the abm treaty , or whether it wouldtry to reach an accommodation with the bush administration on a new framework for strategic stability .

manymembers of the bush administration believed thatthe united states would gain russia's cooperation when russia realized that the u.s. was committed to withdrawingfrom the abm treaty .

they noted thatrussia remained extremely interested in reductions in offensive nuclear forces and that the bush administration'splans to reduce u.s. forces would ease russia'sconcerns about u.s. intentions .

others , however , argued that russia had outlined well - reasoned and complex objections to u.s. policies on missile defense and the abm treaty , and that it wasnot likely to change its views in the near term .

instead , they believed that russia could follow through on its threatsto withdraw from a range of arms controlagreements and its plans to augment its nuclear forces .

they argued that the united states might eventually becomeless secure , even if it deployed missiledefenses , because it would be faced with a more adversarial , less cooperative russia .

and russia would retainenough nuclear weapons to saturate the u.s.defenses and threaten the survival of the united states .

this debate grew silent in september 2001 , after the terrorist attacks on the world trade center and pentagon .

russia's president putin was the first internationalleader to call president bush after the attacks and he quickly offered his support to the u.s. war on terrorism .

heallowed u.s. forces to use bases in formersoviet republics and he cooperated by sharing intelligence and russian knowledge about afghanistan .

theu.s. - russian relationship that emerged in the lattermonths of 2001 seemed to prove the bush administration's view that the two nations were no longer enemies andthat they could build a new , more cooperativerelationship .

thus , when president bush announced , on december 13 , 2001 , that the united states had given russia the six - month notice of its intent to withdraw from theabm treaty , russia's reaction differed sharply from the conventional wisdom .

reports indicated that the whitehouse called president putin in the days beforethe announcement , and that the two sides worked together to craft statements that would indicate that the withdrawalwould not upset their relationship .

in hisstatement , president putin said that he considered the u.s. decision to be "mistaken" and he emphasized that russiahad done everything it could to preserve thetreaty .

but he indicated that the u.s. withdrawal would not undermine u.s. - russian relations , and that the twosides should work out a "new framework ofmutual strategic relations. .

 ( 54 ) the white housewelcomed putin's statement and said that it agreed that the u.s. withdrawal presented "no threat to the security ofthe russian federation. .

the white house also pledged to work with russia to formalize reductions in offensiveforces , a process that russia viewed as a highpriority .

 ( 55 ) other officials and analysts in russia responded with a similar , mild tone .

andrey kokoshin , who had served as russia's deputy defense minister and was amember of the duma , also referred to the u.s. decision as a mistake , but said that it would not undermine russia'ssecurity because russia had weapons systemsthat were capable of overcoming u.s. defenses .

kokoshin said that russia would not have to "step up thecapabilities" of its strategic nuclear forces .

 ( 56 ) marshalligor sergeyev , the former defense minister and an adviser to putin , echoed these views .

he said that the u.s.withdrawal would not create any problems forrussia's military security for 10-15 years .

he also supported the negotiation of a new strategic framework , arguingthat it "would be extremely undesirable toremain in a legal vacuum on strategic stability matters for a long time. .

 ( 57 ) some in russia , however , offered a more negative response .

the dumaapproved aresolution that called the u.s. withdrawal "mistaken and destabilizing. .

 ( 58 ) by the time the u.s. withdrawal took effect , on june 13 , 2002 , the united states and russia had negotiated a new treaty limiting strategic offensive weapons andthe presidents had signed a joint declaration outlining a new framework for cooperation between the two nations .

although some tensions remained in thisrelationship , particularly with respect to russia's nuclear cooperation with iran , cooperation between the two nationscontinued to grow .

the u.s. withdrawalfrom the abm treaty no longer seemed like a potentially divisive issue .

foreign minister ivanov noted the event,but stated the "the primary aim now is tominimize the negative consequences of the u.s .

withdrawal. .

 ( 59 ) he , and others , noted that russia had convinced the united states to continue negotiations onreductions in strategic offensive forces , which represented a significant achievement for russian diplomacy .

furthermore , defense minister sergei ivanov notedthat the u.s. missile defense system did not yet exist and , therefore , there was no reason for russia to retaliate .

 ( 60 ) the russian duma , on the other hand , criticized the u.s. withdrawal , calling it a "gross political mistake" and proposed that , in response , russia "declare itselffree from its commitments under the start ii treaty. .

 ( 61 ) the russian government took this step on june 13 , 2002 , when the foreign ministry issued astatement saying that russia no longer felt bound by the treaty .

 ( 62 ) this step , however , was largely symbolic .

officials in both the u.s. and russian governmentshave indicated that the treaty has been set aside ; they acknowledged its absence when they referred to the starti treaty as "start" in the text of the newstrategic offensive reductions treaty .

hence , although russian officials criticized u.s. missile defense plans and promised to take military and diplomatic steps in response to the u.s. withdrawal fromthe abm treaty , the russian reaction when the event occurred was far less aggressive .

the changes in theinternational security environment , and the continuingimprovements in the u.s - russian relationship , had essentially buried the debate over the abm treaty .

