on december 6 , 2002 , recently released political prisoner oscar elã­as biscet was arrestedat a human rights demonstration in havana .

the cuban government had released biscet on october31 2002 , after three years of imprisonment for displaying the cuban flag upside down .

 ( see "humanrights" below ) .

in early november 2002 , the u.s. department of state ordered the expulsion of four cubandiplomats in the united states in response to the espionage case of a defense intelligence agency ( dia ) analyst spying for cuba .

cuba strongly asserted that the diplomats were not involved inintelligence activities .

 ( see "cuban spies in the united states" below. ) .

from september 26-30 2002 , a u.s. food & agribusiness exhibition was held in havanafeaturing 288 exhibitors marketing 1,000 products from more than 30 states , the district ofcolumbia , and puerto rico .

 ( see "food and medical exports" below. ) .

on july 24 , 2002 , the house approved the fy2003 treasury department appropriations bill , h.r .

5120 , by a vote of 308-121 , that contained three amendments easing cubaembargo restrictions on travel , remittances , and agricultural exports .

on july 24 , white housespokesman ari fleischer stated that the president would veto the measure if it contained suchprovisions .

on july 16 , 2002 , president bush again suspended for a six - month period the right ofindividuals to file lawsuits against those persons benefitting from confiscated u.s. property in cubaunder title iii of the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act ( p.l .

104-114 ) .

on june 26 , 2002 , cuba's national assembly approved amendments to the cubanconstitution stating that "socialism and the revolutionary political and social system in theconstitution ... are irrevocable ; and cuba will never again return to capitalism. .

 ( see "politicalconditions" below. ) .

a speech by fidel castro at the national assembly session raised concernsamong some observers that castro was planning another mass migration exodus like the ones in1980 and 1994 .

subsequently , however , both cuban and u.s. officials stated the importance ofmaintaining the migration accords .

 ( see "migration" below. ) .

on june 10 , 2002 , the senate approved ( by a vote of 87-0 ) s.res .

272 ( nelson ) ,which expresses support for the varela project that is working for a national referendum in cubato bring about political change .

 ( see "human rights" section below. ) .

on june 6 , 2002 , the house international relations committee's subcommittee oninternational operations and human rights held a hearing on radio and tv marti featuringadministration and outside witnesses .

 ( see "radio and tv marti" section below. ) .

on june 5 , 2002 , the senate foreign relations committee , subcommittee on westernhemisphere , peace corps , and narcotics affairs , held a hearing on the issue of cuba and biologicalweapons .

on may 6 , 2002 , under secretary of state for arms control and international securityjohn bolton stated that "the united states believes that cuba has at least a limited offensivebiological warfare research - and - development effort" and "has provided dual - use technology toother rogue states. .

when questioned on the issue at that time , secretary of state powell assertedthat the united states believes cuba has the capacity and the capability to conduct research onbiological weapons but emphasized that the administration had not claimed that cuba had suchweapons .

 ( see "cuba and terrorism" below. ) .

on may 20 , 2002 , president bush announced a new initiative on cuba that includes severalmeasures designed to reach out to the cuban people .

 ( see "u.s. policy toward cuba" below. ) .

on may 12 , 2002 , former president jimmy carter arrived in cuba for a six - day visit .

during the trip , carter raised human rights issues , and included the topic in an address televisedin cuba .

 ( see "u.s. policy toward cuba" below. ) .

on may 5 , 2002 , the cuban government released prominent political prisoner vladimiroroca from jail about two months before his 5-year sentence was complete .

 ( see "human rights"below. ) .

on may 1 , 2002 , the conference report ( h.rept .

107-424 ) to the 2002 farm bill was filedwithout a provision from the senate version of the bill ( section 335 ) that would have eliminatedrestrictions in u.s. law against u.s. private financing of agricultural sales to cuba .

on april 23,2002 , the house had approved ( 273-143 ) a nonbinding motion to instruct the house conferees toaccept the senate provision .

 ( see"food and medical exports" below. ) .

on april 19 , 2002 , the u.n. commission on human rights approved a resolution ( by a voteof 23-21 , with 9 abstentions ) calling on cuba to improve its human rights record "in accordancewith the universal declaration of human rights and the principles and standards of the rule oflaw .

" ( see "human rights" below. ) .

on march 19 , 2002 , former defense intelligence agency ( dia ) analyst ana montes pledguilty to spying for the cuban government for 16 years .

federal prosecutors reportedly agreed toa 25-year prison term if montes provides information on what she knows about cuban intelligenceactivities .

 ( see "cuban spies in the united states" below. ) .

on march 12 , 2002 , the cuban government delivered three diplomatic notes to the statedepartment proposing bilateral agreements on drug - interdiction , migration , and cooperationagainst terrorism .

 ( see "drug interdiction cooperation" below. ) .

with the cutoff of assistance from the former soviet union , cuba experienced severeeconomic deterioration from 1989-1993 , although there has been some improvement since 1994 .

estimates of economic decline in the 1989-93 period range from 35-50% .

recovery began in 1994,with the economy growing 0.7% in 1994 , 2.5% in 1995 , and 7.8% in 1996 .

while the cubangovernment originally was predicting a growth rate of 4-5% for 1997 , growth for the year was just2.5% , largely because of disappointing sugar production .

for 1998 , the government's goal was fora growth rate of 2.5-3.5% , but another poor sugar harvest , a severe drought in eastern cuba , and theeffects of hurricane georges resulted in an estimated growth rate of just 1.2% .

in 1999 and 2000,the economy rebounded with growth rates of 6.2% and 5.6% , respectively .

growth slowed to 3% in 2001 in the aftermath of the effects of hurricane michelle and theseptember 11 terrorist attacks in the united states .

the terrorist attacks severely affected cuba'stourist industry , with reports of some hotels closing and restaurants empty .

hurricane michelledamaged some 45,000 homes and severely hurt the agricultural sector .

low world prices for sugarand nickel , a decline in the number of tourists since september 2001 , and venezuela'sapril - september 2002 suspension of oil shipments to cuba because of cuba's slow payment allcontributed to the economic downturn in 2002 .

 ( 2 ) for 2002 , a flat economic growth rate of 0% is forecast , while arate of 3.2% is forecast for 2003 , assuming an improvement in the global economy .

 ( 3 ) an oil strike and politicalturmoil in venezuela that began in december 2002 has caused further concern in cuba about its oilsupplies since venezuela provides cuba with one - third of its oil needs .

 ( 4 ) socialist cuba has prided itself on the nation's accomplishments in health and education .

forexample , according to the world bank , the literacy rate is 94% and life expectancy is 76 years,compared to 79% and 68 years average for other middle - income developing countries .

the unitednations children's fund ( unicef ) reports that cuba's infant mortality rate ( per 1,000 live births ) was just 7.9 in 1996 , the lowest rate in latin america and among the world's top 20 countries forthis indicator .

nevertheless , the country's economic decline has reduced living standardsconsiderably and resulted in shortages in medicines and medical supplies .

when cuba's economic slide began in 1989 , the government showed little willingness toadopt any significant market - oriented economic reforms , but in 1993 , faced with unprecedentedeconomic decline , cuba began to change policy direction .

since 1993 , cubans have been allowedto own and use u.s. dollars and to shop at dollar - only shops previously limited to tourists anddiplomats .

self - employment was authorized in more than 100 occupations in 1993 , most in theservice sector , and by 1996 that figure had grown to more than 150 occupations .

other cubaneconomic reforms included breaking up large state farms into smaller , more autonomous , agriculturalcooperatives ( basic units of cooperative production , ubpcs ) in 1993 ; opening agricultural marketsin september 1994 where farmers could sell part of their produce on the open market ; openingartisan markets in october 1994 for the sale of handicrafts ; allowing private food catering , includinghome restaurants ( paladares ) in june 1995 ( in effect legalizing activities that were already takingplace ) ; approving a new foreign investment law in september 1995 that allows fully ownedinvestments by foreigners in all sectors of the economy with the exception of defense , health , andeducation ; and authorizing the establishment of free trade zones with tariff reductions typical of suchzones in june 1996 .

in may 1997 , the government enacted legislation to reform the banking systemand established a new central bank ( bcc ) to operate as an autonomous and independent entity .

despite these measures , the quality of life for many cubans remains difficult , characterizedby low wages , high prices for many basic goods , shortages of medicines , and power outages .

moreover , some analysts fear that the government has begun to backtrack on its reform efforts .

regulations and new taxes have made it extremely difficult for many of the nation's self - employed ( at one point estimated at more than 200,000 , but now estimated at 160,000 or lower , out of a totallabor force of some 4.5 million ) .

some home restaurants have been forced to close because of theregulations .

some foreign investors in cuba have also begun to complain that the government hasbacked out of deals or forced them out of business .

although cuba has undertaken some limited economic reforms , politically the countryremains a hard - line communist state .

fidel castro , who turned 76 on august 13 , 2002 , has ruledsince the 1959 cuban revolution , which ousted the corrupt government of fulgencio batista frompower .

castro soon laid the foundations for an authoritarian regime by consolidating power andforcing moderates out of the government .

in april 1961 , castro admitted that the cuban revolutionwas socialist , and in december 1961 , he proclaimed himself to be a marxist - leninist .

from 1959until 1976 , castro ruled by decree .

a constitution was enacted in 1976 setting forth the communist party as the leading forcein the state and in society ( with power centered in a politburo headed by fidel castro ) .

theconstitution also outlined national , provincial , and local governmental structures .

executive poweris vested in a council of ministers , headed by fidel castro as president .

legislative authority isvested in a national assembly of people's power , currently with 601 members , that meets twiceannually for brief periods .

while assembly members were directly elected for the first time infebruary 1993 , only a single slate of candidates was offered .

from october 8-10 , 1997 , the cubancommunist party held its 5th congress ( the prior one was held in 1991 ) in which the party reaffirmedits commitment to a single party state and reelected fidel and raul castro as the party's first andsecond secretaries .

direct elections for the national assembly were held for a second time in january1998 , but voters again were not offered a choice of candidates .

elections for the national assemblywill be held again in 2003 .

in response to the challenge posed by the varela project , a human rights initiative that calledfor changes to the constitution ( see below ) , the cuban government orchestrated a nationalreferendum in late june 2002 , signed by 8.1 million people , that declared cuba's socialist systemcould not be changed .

subsequently the national assembly on june 26 , 2002 , approved amendmentsto the constitution stating that "socialism and the revolutionary political and social system in theconstitution ... are irrevocable ; and cuba will never again return to capitalism. .

 ( 5 ) .

in the early 1960s , u.s. - cuban relations deteriorated sharply when fidel castro began tobuild a repressive communist dictatorship and moved his country toward close relations with thesoviet union .

the often tense and hostile nature of the u.s. - cuban relationship is illustrated by suchevents and actions as: u.s. covert operations to overthrow the castro government culminating in theill - fated april 1961 bay of pigs invasion ; the october 1962 missile crisis in which the united statesconfronted the soviet union over its attempt to place offensive nuclear missiles in cuba ; cubansupport for guerrilla insurgencies and military support for revolutionary governments in africa andthe western hemisphere ; the 1980 exodus of around 125,000 cubans to the united states in theso - called mariel boatlift ; the 1994 exodus of more than 30,000 cubans who were interdicted andhoused at u.s. facilities in guantanamo and panama ; and the february 1996 shootdown by cubanfighter jets of two u.s. civilian planes , resulting in the death of four u.s. crew members .

 ( 10 ) since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely of isolating the islandnation through comprehensive economic sanctions .

the principal tool of u.s. policy remainscomprehensive sanctions , which were made stronger with the cuban democracy act ( cda ) of 1992and with the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-114 ) , often referredto as the helms / burton legislation .

the cda prohibits u.s. subsidiaries from engaging in trade withcuba and prohibits entry into the united states for any vessel to load or unload freight if it hasengaged in trade with cuba within the last 180 days .

the helms / burton legislation - - enacted in theaftermath of cuba's shooting down of two u.s. civilian planes in february 1996 - - combines avariety of measures to increase pressure on cuba and provides for a plan to assist cuba once itbegins the transition to democracy .

among the law's sanctions is a provision in title iii that holdsany person or government that traffics in u.s. property confiscated by the cuban government liablefor monetary damages in u.s. federal court .

acting under provisions of the law , president clintonsuspended the implementation of title iii at 6-month intervals .

another component of u.s. policy consists of support measures for the cuban people , aso - called second track of u.s. policy .

this includes u.s. private humanitarian donations , u.s.government support for democracy - building efforts for cuba , and u.s. - sponsored radio andtelevision broadcasting to cuba , radio and tv marti .

the clinton administration made several changes to u.s. policy in the aftermath of thepope's january 1998 visit to cuba , which were intended to bolster u.s. support for the cuban people.these included the resumption of direct flights to cuba ( which had been curtailed after the february1996 shootdown of two u.s. civilian planes ) , the resumption of cash remittances for the support ofclose relatives in cuba ( which had been curtailed in august 1994 in response to the migration crisiswith cuba ) , and the streamlining of procedures for the commercial sale of medicines and medicalsupplies and equipment to cuba .

in january 1999 , president clinton announced several additionalmeasures to support the cuban people .

these included a broadening of cash remittances to cuba,so that all u.s. residents ( not just those with close relatives in cuba ) could send remittances to cuba ; an expansion of direct passenger charter flights to cuba from additional u.s. cities other than thecurrent flights from miami ( direct flights later in the year began from los angeles and new york ) ; and an expansion of people - to - people contact by loosening restrictions on travel to cuba for certaincategories of travelers , such as professional researchers and those involved in a wide range ofeducational , religious , sports competition , and other activities .

bush administration policy .

president bushmade his first major statement on his administration's policy toward cuba on may 18 , 2001 .

hestated that his administration would "oppose any attempt to weaken sanctions against cuba'sgovernment ... until this regime frees its political prisoners , holds democratic , free elections , andallows for free speech. .

he added that he would "actively support those working to bring aboutdemocratic change in cuba. .

 ( 11 ) although president bush has announced stronger measures to enforce the embargo , he alsohas continued in the same vein as the clinton administration by suspending implementation of titleiii of the helms - burton legislation .

on july 13 , 2001 , president bush asked the treasurydepartment to enhance and expand the enforcement capabilities of the office of foreign assetscontrol .

the president noted the importance of upholding and enforcing the law in order to prevent"unlicensed and excessive travel," enforce limits on remittances , and ensure that humanitarian andcultural exchanges actually reach pro - democracy activists in cuba .

just three days later , on july 16,2001 , president bush decided to continue to suspend for a 6-month period the title iii provisionsof the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act ( p.l .

104-114 ) that allows u.s. nationals to suefor money damages in u.s. federal court those persons who traffic in property confiscated in cuba .

he cited efforts by european countries and other u.s. allies to push for democratic change in cuba.president bush again suspended implementation of title iii on january 16 , 2002 , for a 6-monthperiod .

on may 20 , 2002 , president bush announced a new initiative on cuba that includes fourmeasures designed to reach out to the cuban people: 1 ) facilitating humanitarian assistance to thecuban people by u.s. religious and other non - governmental organization ( ngos ) ; 2 ) providingdirect assistance to the cuban people through ngos ; 3 ) calling for the resumption of direct mailservice to and from cuba ( 12 ) ; and 4 ) establishing scholarships in the united states for cubanstudents and professional involved in building civil institutions and for family members of politicalprisoners .

president bush also called on cuba to take steps to ensure that the 2003 national assemblyelections are free and fair and to adopt meaningful market - based reforms .

if those conditions weremet , the president maintained that he would work with congress to ease the ban on trade and travel .

however , the president maintained that full normalization of relations ( diplomatic recognition , opentrade , and a robust aid program ) would only occur when cuba has a fully democratic government,when the rule of law is respected , and when the human rights of all cubans are fully protected .

thepresident's initiative did not include an explicit tightening of restrictions on travel to cuba that someobservers had expected .

the president , did state , however , that the united states would "continueto enforce economic sanctions on cuba , and the ban on travel to cuba , until cuba's governmentproves that it is committed to real reform. .

carter visit to cuba .

former president jimmycarter arrived in cuba on may 12 , 2002 for a six - day visit .

during the trip , carter repeatedly raisedhuman rights issues .

on may 13 , 2002 , carter met with two leading human rights activists , elizardosanchez of the cuban commission of human rights and national reconciliation and oswaldopaya , who heads the christian liberation movement and is the main organizer of the varela projectthat has the goal of a national referendum to change cuba's laws ( see "human rights" section abovefor more on the varela project ) .

he met with a number of human rights and religious organizationsand activists on may 16 .

perhaps most significantly , however , was president carter's address inhavana that was broadcast live on television and radio on may 14 .

carter criticized cuba's one - partyrule that does not allow opposition movements to organize .

he asked cuba to permit theinternational committee of the red cross to visit cubans prisons and to receive the u.n. humanrights commissioner to visit in order to address such issues as prisoners of conscience and thetreatment of inmates .

he also called attention to the varela project .

in addition to his advocacy of democracy and respect for human rights , carter also called forthe united states to take the first step of improving the u.s. - cuban bilateral relationship .

he calledon congress "to permit unrestricted travel between the united states and cuba , establish opentrading relationships , and repeal the embargo. .

carter acknowledged that u.s. policy was not thesource of cuba's economic problems , but he maintained that "the embargo freezes the existingimpasse , induces anger and resentment , restricts the freedoms of u.s. citizens , and makes it difficultfor us to exchange ideas and respect. .

 ( 13 ) in response to carter's call to lift the embargo , the bushadministration reiterated its stance of maintaining the embargo as a "vital part of american foreignpolicy. .

 ( 14 ) .

crs electronic briefing book on trade , cuba sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] .

http: / / www.congress.gov / brbk / html / ebtra108.html crs electronic briefing book on trade , economic sanctions and agricultural exports , by remyjurenas .

http: / / www.congress.gov / brbk / html / ebtra13.html crs report rl31302 , appropriations for fy2003: treasury , postal service , executive office ofthe president , and general government , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20450 ( pdf ) , the case of elian gonzalez: legal basics , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30837 , cuba: an economic primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30628 , cuba: issues and legislation in the 106th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and[author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31139 , cuba: u.s .

restrictions on travel and legislative initiatives , by mark p.sullivan .

crs report rl30386 ( pdf ) , cuba - u.s. relations: chronology of key events 1959 - 1999 , by mark p.sullivan .

crs report 94-759 ( pdf ) , cuba - u.s. relations: should the united states reexamine its policy ? .

 , by markp .

sullivan .

crs report rs20468 , cuban migration policy and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30384 , economic sanctions: legislation in the 106th congress , by dianne e.rennack .

crs report 97-949 ( pdf ) , economic sanctions to achieve u.s. foreign policy goals: discussion andguide to current law , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30570 , elian gonzalez: chronology and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib10061 , exempting food and agriculture products from u.s. economicsanctions: status and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib93107 , normal - trade - relations ( most - favored - nation ) policy of the unitedstates , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20449 , private bills for citizenship or permanent residency: a brief overview , by[author name scrubbed] .

crs report 94-636 ( pdf ) , radio and television broadcasting to cuba: background and issues through1994 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31258 , suits against terrorist states , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21003 , travel restrictions: u.s. government limits on american citizens' travelabroad , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

