as discussed above , hearings involve considerable preparation .

by the day of the hearing , senators and staff expect that important requirements of senate rules , such as publicly announcing hearings , have been met .

critical decisions , such as choice of and format for presenting witnesses , have been made .

necessary research has been conducted , and relevant materials assembled in a briefing book .

briefings may have been conducted for senators , staff , witnesses , and the press .

administrative issues , such as arranging for a reporter of debates , have been addressed .

with thorough and careful preparation , most hearings can be expected to proceed routinely .

senators and staff sometimes confront unanticipated events that require a change in plans , such as a need to call additional witnesses or to close a session to the public .

at the end of the question and answer period , the committee chair will close the hearing .

the chair may summarize what the committee has accomplished by holding the hearing and comment on the future committee schedule or expected action .

senate rules provide a procedure whereby a committee may direct its staff to prepare a daily digest of the written statements submitted by witnesses .

a committee can also ask its staff to prepare daily summaries of the oral testimony presented before the committee on a particular day ( rule xxvi , paragraph 4 ( c ) ) .

with the approval of the chair and ranking minority member , the committee can include the latter summaries in its published hearings .

summaries can be distributed to committee members and the press .

follow - up questions may be prepared and submitted to witnesses for written replies to expand on their testimony .

witnesses may be asked to expand on answers given at the hearing or to discuss new matters raised in the course of the hearing .

often the chair will announce that the hearing record will be left open for a period of time so that additional information can be entered into the formal hearing record .

if the hearing is investigative , the committee can prepare and issue its report .

if the hearing is legislative , the committee may proceed to markup and report a measure to the senate floor .

finally , committees attend to administrative details following a hearing , such as restoring the hearing room to its original condition and sending thank - you letters to witnesses .

points of order against actions that occurred during a committee hearing are normally ruled upon by the chairman .

in any case , pursuant to senate rules ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) , no point of order for a violation of committee hearing rules will be entertained subsequently on the senate floor if a measure has been properly reported .

this rule states in part , "action by any committee in reporting any measure or matter in accordance with the requirements of this subparagraph shall constitute the ratification by the committee of all action theretofore taken by the committee with respect to that measure or matter...." thus , if a senator believes a hearing was conducted improperly , he or she must make this belief known in committee , and the point of order must be timely raised .

once the measure reaches the senate floor , a point of order because of procedural infractions during the hearing would not be sustained .

aberbach , joel d. keeping a watchful eye: the politics of congressional oversight .

washington: the brookings institution , 1990 .

aberbach , joel d. "what's happened to the watchful eye ? .

congress and the presidency , vol .

29 , no .

1 ( spring 2002 ) , pp .

3-23 .

cohen , richard e. "crackup of the committees. .

national journal , vol 13 , ( march 13 , 1999 ) , pp .

688-692 .

degregorio , christine .

"leadership approaches in congressional committee hearings. .

western political quarterly , vol .

45 ( december 1992 ) , pp .

971-983 .

harvey , thomas e. "congressional testimony: a practical guide for newcomers to the congressional hearing process. .

federal bar news & journal , vol .

35 ( november 1988 ) , pp .

414-415 .

hill , james p. "the third house of congress versus the fourth branch of government: the impact of congressional committee staff on agency regulatory decision - making. .

john marshall law review , vol .

19 ( winter 1996 ) , pp .

247-273 .

lustberg , arch .

testifying with impact: a " how to " booklet for those who testify on the federal , state , or local levels of government .

washington: association division , u.s. chamber of commerce , 1982 .

mackenzie , g. calvin .

the politics of presidential appointments .

new york: the free press , 1981 .

oleszek , walter j .

"preliminary legislative action," congressional procedures and the policy process , 7 th ed. , pp .

78-112 .

washington: cq press , 2007 .

the presidential appointee ' s handbook , 2 nd ed .

washington: national academy of public administration , 1988 .

schneier , edward v. and bertram gross .

"committee action or inaction," congress today , pp .

381-409 .

new york: st. martin's press , 1993 .

sinclair , barbara .

unorthodox lawmaking: new legislative processes in the u.s. congress .

washington: cq press , 2000 .

unekis , joseph k. "committee hearings. .

in donald c. bacon , roger h. davidson , and morton keller , eds. , the encyclopedia of the united states congress , vol .

1 , pp .

423-426 .

new york: simon and schuster , 1995 .

u.s. general accounting office .

office of special investigations .

investigators ' guide to sources of information .

washington: gpo , 1997 .

wells , william g. jr. "hearings and testimony. .

working with congress: a practical guide for scientists and engineers , pp .

87-98 .

washington: american association for the advancement of science and carnegie commission on science , technology , and government , 1992 .

