the united states faces a wide range of national security threats , from intercontinentalballistic missiles to the use of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) ( 1 ) by terrorists .

the debate overthe seriousness of the various threats has intensified recently .

various studies and commissions haverecommended far reaching changes in the approach to domestic preparedness and response to threatsto the homeland .

the threat of domestic terrorism has generated a wide ranging debate regardingall organizational aspects of the problem , including the approach from a strategic perspective andthe more focused aspects of organizational structure , budgetary priorities , and intelligence collection.several recent studies have proposed a greater role for the u.s. military in combating terrorism whileothers call for the creation of entirely new structures to combat the complete spectrum of threats tothe united states , including terrorism and the use of wmd by terrorists .

 ( 2 ) this paper ( 3 ) outlines current legislation and policies that govern the military's role when supporting lawenforcement in a domestic terrorism crisis .

it also highlights some of the issues confronting the u.s.government .

the military forces designed to respond to a crisis differ significantly from unitsdesigned to support the post - crisis consequence management of a terrorist incident .

as such , theyare governed by different directives and levels of authorization for their employment .

until recently , terrorism to many americans was a remote , if frightening possibility thataffected only individuals or groups outside the territorial boundaries of the united states .

eventsof the past decade indicate that the terrorist threat has changed significantly in ways that make itmore dangerous and much more difficult to counter .

the terrorist attacks of the 1970s and 1980susually had clear political objectives .

these attacks resulted in just enough bloodshed and loss of lifeto gain attention to the terrorists' cause yet not enough to alienate them from the public support theysought .

bombings , kidnapings , and aircraft hijacking were accomplished by declared , identifiablegroups with specific political goals in mind .

in contrast , the decade of the 1990s has produced adifferent type of terrorism - terrorism designed to produce massive casualties with little regard fordistinct political goals and often no claims of responsibility .

recent examples of this type of attack,such as the world trade center bombing in new york city , the alfred p. murrah federal buildingbombing in oklahoma city , the east african embassy bombings in 1998 , and destruction of theworld trade center in 2001 make it appear that a terrorist's aim is to kill as many people as possible .

the possible inclusion of weapons of mass destruction in the terrorists' arsenal now makes this aneven more dangerous proposition .

recently , in the trial of the perpetrators of the east african embassy bombings , a witnesstestified that usama bin laden's group , al qaeda ( arabic for "the base" ) , sought to acquire chemicaland nuclear material to use against the united states .

 ( 4 ) although it is unknown whether al qaeda was successful inacquiring the material , the probability that terrorist groups who have openly threatened the unitedstates are attempting to acquire a wmd capability is a serious escalation of this dangerous problem .

to understand fully the military's role in domestic crisis response it is necessary to explorethe national - level structures and response options prior to the involvement of military forces .

ingeneral , the laws of the united states assign primary authority to the federal government to preventand respond to terrorism .

the fbi , through doj , is designated the lead federal agency for crisismanagement of threats or acts of terrorism that take place in the united states or in internationalwaters that do not involve the flag vessel of a foreign country .

crisis management is predominatelya law enforcement function that manages the resources necessary to prevent or resolve a terroristincident including intelligence gathering , surveillance , tactical operations , negotiations , forensics,and follow - on investigations .

it also includes technical missions involving wmd such as search,render safe procedures , transfer and disposal of a device , and limited decontamination ifnecessary .

 ( 18 ) thefederal response to a terrorist incident is seen as a highly coordinated interagency operation that caninclude federal , state , and local participation .

primary federal agencies besides the doj and the fbiare the federal emergency management agency , ( 19 ) dod , the department of energy , the environmental protectionagency , the department of health and human services , and now the department of homelandsecurity .

pdd 39 and assorted legislation permits dod to develop and maintain plans and capabilitiesto respond to threats or acts of terrorism , including use of nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons .

in a domestic crisis involving wmd , dod may be called upon to assist in several different waysranging from actual interdiction of the terrorists to the loaning of specialized equipment for use bylaw enforcement agencies in the crisis .

the department of defense has published directivesestablishing policy and assigning responsibility for providing military assistance to civil authoritiesincluding specific policy for assistance to civil law enforcement officials in emergencies involvingterrorism and wmd .

a number of intelligence and terrorism experts argue that the trend toward terrorists' use ofwmd is not as great a danger as other , more traditional national security threats .

but , because of theserious implications of the successful use of a wmd by terrorists on american soil , it is most likelynot an event that the american public is willing to accept either .

to successfully combat thepossibility of a terrorist incident , especially one using wmd , the current interagency domestic crisismanagement policies and structures should be analyzed to determine their effectiveness against thecurrent threat and their adaptability to the future threat .

there are many critical issues concerning u.s. terrorism policy overall and domesticterrorism specifically .

several issues that could significantly affect the nation's crisis responsecapabilities were explored in recent national - level commissions .

most experts believe that acomprehensive national strategy coherently linking national policy with the capabilities of the manyagencies charged with domestic terrorism responsibilities is a critical step in defeating the threat .

many experts also contend that the united states would be better served by employing the full rangeof dod's capabilities during domestic crisis response operations .

 ( 50 ) some see the creation ofan entirely new agency with responsibility for "homeland defense" as the best method to ensuresuccess against domestic terrorism .

 ( 51 ) lastly , newly proposed congressional oversight roles are seenby many as an important factor in a more effective response to domestic terrorism .

the current national strategy for terrorism is seen by many as an uncoupled system of plansthat individually respond to various aspects of the threat but do not collectively ensure acomprehensive response capability in the event of a credible threat or actual terrorism act onamerican soil .

as a starting point , most observers recommend the united states articulate an endstate to which it should aim to accomplish its combating terrorism policy .

for example , there is no one definition of terrorism to use when coordinating interagencycombating terrorism policy .

the state department , the department of justice , and dod , all usedefinitions with subtle , yet far - reaching differences .

if terrorism is defined as merely a legal issue,then law enforcement takes priority .

in legal terms , terrorist - related acts are now arson , murder , orkidnaping .

if terrorism is seen as affecting national security , it is a political or military issue thatcould end with response by military forces to prevent , deter , or interdict the terrorist act .

with no specific national objectives for which federal , state , and local agencies can gaugeprogress or measure capability , terrorism policy , it is argued , becomes an exercise in executingprograms within a set budget .

the general policies that involve preparation for interdicting athreatened terrorist act have no clear priority of implementation among those responsible forexecuting the policy .

comprehensive threat and risk assessments concerning the possible use ofwmd by terrorists would allow federal authorities to make judgments as to whether funding is atthe proper level overall , as well as allocations for specific programs .

these same assessments couldassist in establishing priorities and reducing or eliminating duplication of effort in combatingterrorism programs .

current statutory authority allows the u.s. military to act in a support role in domestic crisisresponse .

even if the president invokes the insurrection statutes allowing a military response to aspecific situation , federal law enforcement personnel remain in overall charge of the operation .

itis debatable what affect the employment of the military as a lead federal agency in a domesticcrisis response role during limited terrorist attacks would have on the military's capabilities andprobability of success .

the military appears to have sufficient capability to respond to the narrowmission of interdicting a domestic terrorist event prior to its execution or responding to a situationin progress when the fbi either does not have the capability or is overwhelmed by multiplecontingencies .

what appears to be the main stumbling block to better coordination and response betweenthe fbi and the military is the numerous and often confusing statutory and regulatory authorities thatgovern the use of the military in a domestic situation .

different statutes apply to a situationdepending on whether it is a nuclear , chemical , or biological threat or incident .

many experts assertthat a clearly specified legal authority in place prior to the use of federal military forces in a domesticsituation could allow for a more streamlined and effective use of these forces while ensuring civilliberties and law enforcement concerns are respected .

different laws apply when employing themilitary in a tactical role as opposed to providing non - hostile technical assistance .

current laws maytend to delay or complicate military involvement in the situation which could reduce effectiveness .

another issue is that some in dod see the use of crisis response forces in a domestic situation as notbeing a legitimate mission .

they express concern about the effect such use has on the preparationof those forces to fight and win our nation's wars .

reduced force structure and shrinking budgetsalso make it difficult to focus on taskings outside of their primary mission .

some express concernover widespread use of the military in domestic situations and the effect it could have on civil rights .

they contend the military is not trained to carry out police work , although others point out thatmilitary forces do train in law enforcement situations and regularly exercise with federal agenciesin crisis response situations in the united states .

 ( 52 ) laws that more clearly specify the military's role in domestic crisis response would mostlikely make committing resources , personnel , and effort to that role more successful while at thesame time continuing to protect the civil liberties of our citizens .

several recent studies and legislative initiatives proposed new governmental structures toalleviate what they contend is the federal government's fragmented approach to homeland security .

recommendations dealing with combating terrorism issues range from creating an independenthomeland defense agency responsible for the entire spectrum of security to reorganizing the existingstructure with more focus on current terrorism issues and threats .

these recommendations tendedto concentrate on the consequence management side of the combating terrorism issue - how thenation should prepare to respond to the aftermath of a successful terrorist attack .

many of thesedebates were resolved when the administration proposed and congress mandated the formation ofthe department of homeland security , formed in january 2003 .

 ( 53 ) the narrower mission ofcrisis response - interdicting or deterring an attack with either law enforcement or military forces - receives much less attention in the proposals .

many of the suggestions for creating a new agency were grounded in the perceived need fora unified national framework for combating terrorism .

the new structure would be responsible forplanning and integrating the activities of the multiple government agencies involved in terrorismpolicy , budget considerations , and operations .

most importantly supporters say , the agency wouldcoordinate the federal response with local and state authorities to make full use of all resourcesavailable .

while all these suggestions may make great strides towards focusing federal , state , andlocal consequence management programs on the current challenges , they do not necessarily makea contribution to crisis response issues .

many argue that the existing operational capabilities , processes , and procedures that the fbipossesses as the lead federal agency for domestic crisis management are currently working wellwith dod as a supporting agency .

by most accounts , the fbi has a clear and unambiguousrelationship with military crisis response forces .

military training in domestic law enforcementscenarios is sufficient to prepare for the employment of crisis response forces in a support role underthe lead of the fbi .

exercises designed to simulate both technical assistance and tactical support ofa domestic terrorist incident , including the use of wmd , have been successful .

 ( 54 ) the statutory andregulatory authorities guiding the use of the military in domestic situations tends to complicate theadministrative process of military involvement , thereby slowing down the operational response .

but,advocates claim that the existing processes and structures for terrorism crisis response appear towork well overall while protecting civil liberties .

congress has taken a proactive approach to the significant challenges associated withcombating terrorism .

recent legislation like the nunn - lugar - domenici domestic preparednessprogram has been successful in enhancing domestic consequence management capabilities at thefederal , state , and local levels .

however , other attempts to legislate policy and structure forcombating terrorism have been less successful .

proposals to create an office of terrorismpreparedness and a new deputy attorney general for combating domestic terrorism during the lastcongressional session , while initially receiving wide support , were eventually not approved whenthe final version of the bill emerged .

the proposals were an attempt to create a structure that wouldhave budgetary and policy oversight on the dozens of departments and agencies responsible forresponding to terrorist attacks .

with over $11 billion in the fiscal year 2001 combating terrorismbudget , congressional oversight of increasingly complex and rapidly growing programs is aconsiderable task .

responsibility for reviewing the combating terrorism budget is now divided among a numberof key congressional committees in both houses .

several recent studies have recommend a newapproach to providing oversight for both combating terrorism policy and budget .

a special jointcommittee or one in each chamber with a full - time staff having the necessary experience andbackground in terrorism issues that would bridge these jurisdictional boundaries has beenproposed .

 ( 55 ) proponentspoint to the permanent select committees on intelligence that each chamber now employs foroversight of an equally complicated issue .

the objective is to help eliminate duplication in programsand funding and develop a more coherent national plan for combating terrorism .

additionally , congress may wish to undertake a thorough review of the current statutes andother legislation affecting domestic combating terrorism policy , with a view toward facilitatingincreased cooperation among federal agencies charged with combating terrorism responsibilities .

most experts agree that the united states is vulnerable to terrorism .

while intelligenceexperts contend that the use of a wmd is less likely than the more conventional forms of terrorism,the consequences of a successful attack could be massive .

many believe that current u.s. policy fordealing with domestic terrorism lacks coherent focus .

recent proposals for restructuringnational - level organizations to deal with a major terrorist event have mostly centered on theconsequence management aspect .

crisis response cooperation between the fbi and the military iswell demonstrated .

the military has demonstrated that it understands its supporting role to lawenforcement and is prepared to act with technical assistance or tactical forces as called upon .

recentchanges in the nsc policy structure will most probably take some time to have an effect on policyor operational issues .

additionally , reshaping national strategy on domestic terrorism , more clearlyarticulating the military's statutory authority or limitations in domestic situations , and providingcritical and focused congressional oversight and assistance to those functions would clearly enhancethe capabilities of crisis response forces to deter or interdict a possible terrorist incident .

