u.s. assistance to colombia , virtually all of it related to counternarcotics efforts , has increased steadily sincefy1995 ( see tables 1 and 6 ) .

the united states hasprovided equipment , supplies , and other aid for the counternarcotics efforts , initially largely to the colombiannational police ( cnp ) , but recently increasingly tothe colombian military .

as of fy2000 , more is being provided to the military .

most of the funding has supportedthe tracking , interdiction and arrest oftraffickers , the destruction of laboratories , and eradication efforts .

of pre - plan colombia assistance , a small amountsupported reforms to the judicial system , andalternative development .

this amount was increased greatly in the plan colombia legislation .

the state department bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) has been the primary agency in counternarcotics efforts .

inl runs the airwing which supplies aircraft for the narcotics crop eradication program in south america , in which colombia isa major participant .

inl also coordinates theactivities of other civilian agencies , such as the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , the agency forinternational development , and the federal bureau ofinvestigation ( fbi ) , providing them with funds from the state department's international narcotics control ( inc ) account .

these agencies have worked withcolombia's judicial system to improve law enforcement capabilities , criminal justice procedures , and theaccessibility and fairness of the justice system .

theyalso have assisted colombia's eradication and interdiction efforts .

the department of defense ( dod ) also has been a major source of funding and support for colombian counternarcotics efforts , mainly through programs whichare not considered "traditional foreign aid" programs .

 ( 1 ) under defense legislation , dod provides support for efforts to detect and monitor illicit narcoticsoperations , principally the maintenance of five radar sites in colombia .

dod also conducts surveillance overflightsfrom locations outside colombia .

during1999 , dod helped establish , train and equip the first special colombian army counternarcotics battalion ( cacb ) of some 950 troops , which commencedoperations towards the end of that year .

 ( 2 ) thebattalion was set up to conduct its own cn missions , as well as to provide security for the police counternarcoticsforces in their operations .

dod also sponsors a riverine cn program , training personnel of the colombian navyand marines to control narcotics traffickingalong colombia's extensive network of rivers .

 ( 3 ) thenumbers of u.s. uniformed military personnel assisting in these efforts has varied in the low hundreds .

the u.s. military and other agencies also have provided other support to the colombian military and police .

through section 506 ( a ) of the foreign assistanceact of 1961 , as amended , dod and other agencies ( see tables 1 and 6 ) have provided substantialamounts of equipment to the colombian military and police .

 ( 4 ) in addition , the united states has funded the construction of the joint intelligence center ( jic ) at tresesquinas in southwest colombia to strengthen police andmilitary intelligence gathering and analysis capabilities , and to encourage them to share intelligence .

many of the critics of military assistance have argued that although the aid is provided for counternarcotics purposes , it can be used to further counterinsurgencyefforts .

news reports in the summer of 1998 alleged that the united states had provided covert assistance to thecolombian military for counternarcotics andcounterinsurgency operations , including the participation of active duty military personnel and private contractors .

 ( 5 ) at the same time , the press reported thepresence of u.s. special operations forces who were training with colombian military units under the jointcombined exchange training program ( u.s.c .

title10 , section 2011 ) , ( 6 ) which some interpreted asproviding de facto counterinsurgency aid .

although the clinton administration denied that the united states was providing counterinsurgency assistance , analysts acknowledged that some types of u.s.counternarcotics training provide lessons that can also be applied to counterinsurgency operations .

the clintonadministration had also held that assistanceprovided to police and military forces in operations targeted at guerrilla drug production or protection activities fitwithin the definition of counternarcotics aid .

inmarch 1999 , however , the clinton administration expanded the conditions under which it provided intelligenceto colombian security forces , routinely providinga colombian police - military joint task force with intelligence information related to the guerrillas .

although theunited states provided the information to assistwith counternarcotics operations , the general accounting office reported that the u.s. embassy in colombia didnot have a system to ensure that the informationwas used only for counternarcotics purposes .

 ( 7 ) table 1 .

u.s. assistance to colombia , fy1999-fy2001 ( obligations and authorizations , $ millions ) sources : general accounting office ( gao - 01-26 ) , department of state , congressional budgetjustification for foreign operations for fy2001 ; u.s. agencyfor international development budget justification for fy2001 , annex iv ; and information provided by department of state and department of defenseofficials .

this chart includes direct u.s. foreign assistance ( i.e. , the categories usually counted as u.s. foreign aid,which are in italics ) , as well as the costs of goods and services provided to colombia from other u.s. government programs supporting counternarcotics effortsin colombia .

the united states alsoprovides a small amount of dod excess defense articles ( eda ) to colombia .

other funds are spent in colombiaon counternarcotics and other activities thatare considered part of u.s. programs: for instance , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) spends its ownfunds on joint operations in colombia .

figureson fy2000 and fy2001 state department inc funding provided january 10-11 , 2001 .

figures on dod sections1004 , 124 , 1004 / 124 , and 1033 fundingprovided june 29 , 2001 ; some $10.9 million of funds in the dod accounts was planned for an fy2001 obligation,but as of july 5 , 2001 had not actually beenobligated .

* dod sections 124 , 1004 , and 1033 funding is taken from regional accounts and the tentative allocations forcolombia can be shifted to respond to developingneeds in other areas .

 ( section 124 covers u.s. operated radar systems in colombia and elsewhere , and other costsof u.s. detection and monitoring of drugflights. ) .

a for fy1999 , includes $173.2 million in congressionally - mandated supplemental appropriationsfunding for helicopters , helicopter and aircraft upgrades , radar,and police assistance .

fy2000 non - dod plan colombia supplemental funds were all assigned to the statedepartment inc account ; the state department istransferring them to the other agencies carrying out programs in colombia with those funds .

b the aid fy1999 figure includes $10.0 million in disaster relief funding and $3.0 million ineconomic support funds ( esf ) .

aid pipeline funding of $5.0million in development funding authorized in previous years was expended in fy1999 .

the aid fy2000 andfy2001 figures are all esf .

these aid figures donot include funds provided to aid from the inc account .

c fmf pipeline funding of $13 million authorized prior to fy1995 and funding available from thefy1995 fmf authorization was intended to be expended frommid - fy1997 through fy1999 .

on april 9 , 2001 , the bush administration requested $731 million in fy2002 funding for a broader regionalstrategy called the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) that would include funding from the international narcotics control account ( inc ) for not only colombia,but also bolivia , brazil , ecuador , panama , peru,and venezuela .

subsequently , the bush administration referred to this and funding from other specified accountsfor these countries as the andean regionalinitiative ( ari ) , which totals some $882.29 million .

 ( this does not include department of defense funding , whichhas yet to be announced. ) .

for colombia , the bush administration request for fy2002 will provide continued support for plan colombia legislation programs .

 ( note it is anticipated thatfunding provided through the plan colombia legislative will continue to be expended through fy2002. ) .

the $399million requested for colombia includes$146.5 million for economic , social and governance programs , and $252.5 million for counternarcotics and securityprograms .

the $146.5 million for social , economic , and governance programs in colombia includes: $61.5 million for programs to improve the justice system and the rule of law , to promote human rights,and to assist with anti - corruptionefforts and the peace process ; $60.5 million for the voluntary eradication of coca and heroin poppy crops , and for local governanceand civil societyprograms ; $22.0 million for displaced persons , including $7 million in emergency relief and $15 million tosupport the education , health , and housingprograms of international organizations and non - governmental organizations ; and $2.5 million for other program support .

the $252.5 million for counternarcotics and security programs in colombia includes: $87.5 million for support to the colombian national police , including funds for eradication , foraviation support , training , equipment andinfrastructure , and for logistical support ; $79.5 million to training , operational support , logistical support , and capital investment for the army'shuey ii and uh - 60helicopters ; $26.5 million to improve the infrastructure supporting counternarcotics operations , particularly forforce protectionpurposes ; $13.5 million for colombian army units involved in counternarcotics operations ; $43.0 million in support for air , maritime , riverine , and ground interdiction ; $2.5 million in program support .

the following table provides a breakdown by purpose and by funding account for the $882.29 million andean regional initiative .

table 3 .

president bush's andean regional initiative ( ari ) ,incorporating the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) ( $ millions ) source: ari reference sheet , 150 account , provided by the department of state , may 14 , 2001 .

table 4 .

comparative chart of plan colombia legislation ( the administration request ; the housefy2000 supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r .

3908 ) ; the senate foreign operations appropriations ( s.2522 ) and senate appropriationscommittee fy2001 military construction appropriations ( s. 2521 ) bills ; and the enacting legislation , themilitary construction appropriations actfor fy2001 , p.l .

106-246. ) .

* subtotals and totals may not add due to rounding .

for a further breakdown of all categories of plan colombia assistance , see: http: / / www.ciponline.org / colombia / aidcompare.htm .

table 5 .

comparison of salient legislative provisions regarding colombia table 6 .

u.s. aid to colombia fy1989-fy1998 ( obligations and authorizations , $ millions ) source note: data is drawn from a number of sources , not all of which are consistent , includingvarious editions of the u.s. overseas loans and grants andassistance from international organizations "green book" , prepared by the aid budget office , the foreign militarysales , foreign military construction sales,and military assistance facts book , prepared by the department of defense security cooperation agency , withdata as of september 30 , 1998 , informationprovided directly by the departments of state and defense that are not recorded in these publications , and by thegeneral accounting office ( gao ) for1996-1998 .

 ( see gao report gao - 01-26. ) .

where contradictions existed , gao data was preferred , and then otherprinted data was used .

in particular , gao useddata on the amounts of dod drawdown assistance actually delivered in fy1996 through fy1998 ; other sourcesshow the amount authorized , i.e. , $40.5 million infy1996 , $14.2 million in fy1997 , and $41.1 million in fy1998 .

because of a possible lack of data or inaccuracies,some yearly totals may be understated oroverstated , particularly prior to fy1996 .

note: this chart includes direct u.s. foreign assistance ( i.e. , the categories usually counted as u.s. foreign aid , which are in italics ) , as well as the costs of goodsand services provided to colombia from other u.s. government programs supporting counternarcotics efforts incolombia .

the united states also provides asmall amount of dod excess defense articles ( eda ) to colombia .

other funds are spent in colombia oncounternarcotics and other activities that areconsidered part of u.s. programs: for instance , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) spends its own fundson joint operations in colombia .

dod section124 detection and monitoring funds cover u.s. operated radar systems in colombia and elsewhere , and other costsof u.s. detection and monitoring of drugflights .

a in these years , there was assistance in this category of less than $50,000 .

house appropriations committee .

subcommittee on foreign operations , export financing and related programs .

hearing on colombia counternarcoticsfunding .

february 29 , 2000 .

house appropriations committee .

subcommittee on foreign operations , export financing and related programs .

hearing on emergency supplementalappropriations request for plan colombia .

march 2 , 2000 .

house armed services committee .

hearing on southcom / u.s .

policy towards colombia .

march 23 , 2000 .

house government reform committee .

subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources .

hearing on department of defense's druginterdiction program , january 27 , 2000 .

house government reform committee .

subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources .

hearing on narcotics crisis in colombia .

february 15 , 2000 .

house government reform committee .

subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources .

hearing on getting u.s. aid to colombia.october 12 , 2000 .

house international relations committee .

subcommittee on western hemisphere affairs .

hearing on plan colombia .

september 21 , 2000 .

senate appropriations committee .

subcommittees on defense and on military construction .

hearing on colombia supplemental request .

february 24 , 2000 .

senate armed services committee .

hearing on u.s. support for counter - narcotics activities in the andean region and neighboring countries .

april 4 , 2000 .

senate caucus on international narcotics control , and senate finance committee , subcommittee on international trade .

hearing on illegal drug trade in theandes .

february 22 , 2000 .

senate foreign relations committee .

subcommittee on western hemisphere , peace corps affairs , narcotics and terrorism .

hearing on proposed emergencyanti - drug assistance to colombia .

february 25 , 2000 .

