debate over the creation of a federal chief information officer ( cio ) position has ebbed and flowed over thepast five years as congress has sought to addressgovernment information technology ( it ) organizational and management issues .

in private sector organizations witha cio , this person serves as the seniordecisionmaker providing leadership and direction for information resource development , procurement , andmanagement , with a focus on improving efficiency andthe quality of services delivered .

the possibility of creating a federal cio , to be located in the office ofmanagement and budget ( omb ) , was originallyconsidered in an early draft of what became the clinger - cohen act in 1995 ( p.l .

104-106 ) .

however , the idea ofa single federal cio was dropped in favor ofcreating cio positions within the executive agencies in the final version of the law .

the mixed results ofagency - level cios , combined with a growing interest inbetter managing government technology resources , brought renewed attention to creating a national cio positionduring the 106th congress .

in addition , therecent piecemeal efforts to move governmental functions and services online has led some observers to call for anelectronic government ( e - government ) "czar" ora federal cio to coordinate these efforts .

 ( 1 ) during the mid - 1990s , congress considered several bills focusing on governmental reform and improved management of public resources .

the option ofestablishing a federal cio was one of several proposals to address these problems .

the success of cios in theprivate sector is often cited as an example forgovernment to follow .

however , the interest in establishing cios in the federal government was generated by theexperience of local and state governments .

atthe time forty states had some form of a cio operating in a policy capacity , as did several major cities .

for many,their experience demonstrated that there was aneed for someone to articulate a "vision" of information resources that helped coordinate agency activities and goalsrather than reinforce the artificial"stovepipes" that separated them .

however , the idea of a federal cio was dropped in favor of agency - level cios following testimony at a july , 1995 senate governmental affairs committeehearing .

at this hearing , a number of arguments were made in favor of eliminating the single federal cio provisionsin the clinger - cohen act .

some critics ofthe proposal argued that the operational nature of the cio position ( i.e. , the development of technical standards,determining the applicability of procurementlaws , and maintenance of performance and efficiency indicators ) was a poor fit with the traditional policy role ofomb .

other critics argued that creating a federalcio was adding another layer of bureaucracy and centralizing decisionmaking procedures .

they contended thatit was counterproductive to the purpose of theclinger - cohen act , which was to decentralize decisionmaking processes and purchasing decisions away from thegeneral services administration ( gsa ) to theindividual executive agencies .

a third argument made by some critics at the time was that the role of a federal ciowas too big for any one person or agency tohandle .

proponents of this view noted that the size of the department of defense alone was larger than some stategovernments , and that cross - agency groupsfocusing on specific problems would be a more effective approach .

in light of this opposition , congress decidedto instead designate a cio in each of the majorexecutive branch agencies .

these agency - level cios were tasked with the following responsibilities: ( 1 ) providing advice and other assistance to the head of the executive agency and other senior management personnel of the executive agency to ensure thatinformation technology is acquired and information resources are managed for the executive agency in a mannerthat is consistent with chapter 35 of title 44,united states code , and the priorities established by the head of the executive agency ; ( 2 ) developing , maintaining , and facilitating the implementation of a sound and integrated information technology architecture for the executive agency ; and ( 3 ) promoting the effective and efficient design and operation of all major information resources management processes for the executive agency , includingimprovements to work processes of the executive agency .

 ( 2 ) following the passage of p.l .

104-106 , president clinton created the chief information officers council .

established by executive order 13011 , federalinformation technology , on july 16 , 1996 , it serves as "the principal interagency forum to improve agencypractices on such matters as the design , modernization,use , sharing , and performance of agency information resources. .

 ( 3 ) the ciocouncil is comprised of the cios and deputy cios from twenty - eight federaldepartments and agencies .

 ( 4 ) the deputy director for management for theoffice of management and budget ( omb ) serves as the chair of the cio council andthe vice chair is elected from the membership .

the cio council meets monthly and has six committees to addressspecific information technology managementconcerns such as enterprise interoperability , security and privacy , and e - government .

the committees work to helpfacilitate the growth of government standards,share best practices , and help agencies work to be in compliance with reform legislation such as the governmentperformance and results act ( gpra ) .

thecouncil's materials are sometimes used by the general accounting office ( gao ) to help inform its methodologywhen evaluating the information technologymanagement progress of various agencies .

 ( 5 ) the council also has workedwith the office of personnel management ( opm ) to develop special pay rates forhard - to - hire it professionals .

 ( 6 ) .

during the 106th congress ( and the concurrent presidential campaign ) a number of policymakersmade proposals regarding the establishment of a federal cio .

while none of these bills passed , new bills have been introduced during the first half of the 107thcongress .

a summary of the major provisions of the relevantbills is listed below , with a more comprehensive overview provided in appendix a .

a variety of policy options have been proposed , suggesting there is bipartisan support in favor of establishinga federal cio position .

however , there are somedissenting voices raising a number of issues that remain unresolved .

this includes whether a federal cio shouldin fact be established .

if so , the organizationalplacement of the position , and the scope of responsibility and authority assigned to the position needs to bedetermined .

some of these issues arise from theimplicit paradox of trying to centralize management of decentralized technologies .

others are the result of differingopinions regarding how informationtechnology fits into the general scope of governance .

crs report rl30153 , critical infrastructures: background and early implementation of pdd - 63 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30745 , electronic government: a conceptual overview , by harold c. relyea .

crs report rl31088 , electronic government: major proposals and initiatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30661 ( pdf ) , government information technology management: past and future issues ( the clinger - cohen act ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-67 stm , internet: an overview of key technology policy issues affecting its use and growth , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , glenn j.mcloughlin , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31057 , a primer on e - government: sectors , stages , opportunities , and challenges of online governance , by [author name scrubbed] .

