the bilateral economic relationship between the united states and european union ( eu ) is shaped by two outstanding trends .

on the one hand , the two transatlantic economies share a high degree of commercial interaction , most notably a huge trade and investment relationship and a growing number of corporate mergers .

cooperation between the two partners has been critical to the promotion of world trade .

on the other hand , the bilateral economic relationship is subject to limited , but increasingly contentious , trade conflicts that potentially could have adverse political and economic repercussions .

these include a weakening of shared interests and bonds as well as an undermining of the credibility of the world trade organization .

the dimensions of the mutually beneficial side of the economic relationship are well known .

the united states and eu are parties to the largest two - way trade and investment relationship in the world .

annual two - way flows of goods , services , and foreign direct investment exceeded $1.3 trillion in 2005 .

this sum means that over $3 billion is spent every day on transatlantic purchases of goods , services , and direct investments .

the european union as a unit is the second largest ( next to canada ) trading partner of the united states in merchandise or goods .

in 2005 the eu accounted for 20.6% ( or $186 billion ) of u.s. exports and 18.5% ( or $309 billion ) of u.s. imports .

the eu is also the largest u.s. trading partner in services .

in 2005 , the eu purchased slightly over 34% of total u.s. services exports ( or $130 billion ) .

but the united states since 1993 has been importing more goods from the eu than it has been exporting .

in 2005 , the resulting u.s. trade deficit with the eu totaled $122 billion or 16% of the u.s. merchandise trade deficit with the world .

this trade deficit is partially offset by u.s. surpluses in services trade which have averaged around $10 billion dollars over the 2002-2005 period .

based on a population of some 457 million citizens and a gross domestic product of about $13.4 trillion ( compared to a u.s. population of 298 million and a gdp of $12.5 trillion in 2005 ) , the twenty - five members of the eu combine to form the single largest ( in terms of gdp ) market in the world .

given the reforms entailed in the introduction of the european single market in the early 1990s , along with the introduction of a single currency , the euro , for twelve members , the eu market is also increasingly open and standardized .

the fact that each side has a major ownership stake in the other's market may be the most remarkable aspect of the commercial relationship .

at the end of 2004 , the total stock of two - way direct investment reached $1.9 trillion ( composed of $942 billion in eu investment in the united states and $965 billion in u.s. investment in the eu ) , making u.s. and european companies the largest investors in each other's market .

roughly 60% of corporate america's foreign investments are located in europe , while almost 75% of europe's foreign investments are based in the united states .

this massive amount of ownership of companies in each other's markets translates into billions of dollars of sales , production , and expenditures on research and development .

in addition , an estimated 6-7 million americans are employed by european affiliates operating in the united states and almost an equal number of eu citizens work for american companies in europe .

foreign direct investment also serves to spur international trade flows .

this is due to the fact that trade taking place within the same company ( imports by u.s. affiliates from their eu parent firms and exports by u.s. companies to their eu affiliates ) accounts for around one - third of u.s. total trade with the eu .

the trade and employment linkages associated with foreign direct investment engender strong and politically active interest groups that lobby on both sides of the atlantic in favor of maintaining friendly bilateral ties , reducing regulations , and in opposing protectionist proposals .

the united states and the european union , acting in concert , are the superpowers of the world trading system .

as shown in tables 1 and 2 , together they accounted for 35% of world merchandise trade in 2004 and 60% of the world's production of goods and services in 2003 .

cooperation and joint leadership between the two partners have historically been the key to all efforts to liberalize world trade on a multilateral basis , including the creation of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) in 1948 and the world trade organization ( wto ) in 1995 .

trade tensions , disputes , and rivalry coexist alongside and , in part , result from these cooperative and generally positive currents .

bilateral trade disputes have been an important part of the relationship during the cold war as well as after .

they are nothing new nor unexpected given the huge volume of commercial interactions .

historically , with the possible exception of agriculture , the disputes have been managed without excessive political rancor , perhaps due to the balanced nature of the trade and investment relationship .

policymakers and many academics often emphasize that the u.s. and eu always have more in common than in dispute , and like to point out that trade disputes usually affect a tiny fraction ( often estimated at 1-2 percent ) of the trade in goods and services .

in the middle of this decade , however , washington and brussels are still at loggerheads over a number of issues , ranging from bio - engineered food products and aircraft to the treatment of agriculture in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

the conflicts have not been easy to resolve , and some of the efforts at dispute resolution have led to escalation and tit - for - tat retaliation .

instead of compromising in an effort to find solutions , policymakers on both sides sometimes appear more interested in getting even .

congress has been in the middle of many of the trade disputes .

by both crafting and passing legislation , congress has supported the efforts of u.s. agricultural and industrial interests to gain better access to eu markets .

congress has pressured the executive branch to take a harder line against the eu in resolving a number of disputes , but has also cooperated with the administration in crafting compromise solutions .

combined with a growing value of trade now being disputed , the political and economic effects of trade discord between brussels and washington are important questions .

why are many disputes so difficult to resolve ? .

what can be done to improve dispute resolution efforts ? .

are the disputes undermining business confidence or efforts at economic policy coordination ? .

are the disputes weakening the credibility of the wto dispute settlement system ? .

do the political disputes reflect differences between the two partners in terms of basic values and orientations ? .

if so , could the disputes force a fundamental re - evaluation of the importance of the bilateral relationship ? .

in short , what is the significance of trade conflict to the bilateral relationship ? .

this report considers these overriding questions in three parts .

the first part categorizes and evaluates the trade conflicts according to their underlying causes and characteristics .

in light of the causes and dimensions of the disputes , the second section examines the potential for conflict management .

a final section assesses the role that trade disputes may be playing in the u.s. - eu economic relationship .

changes in government regulations , laws , or practices that protect or promote domestic commercial interests at the expense of foreign interests are at the heart of most trade conflicts .

while governments are the sole providers or suppliers of trade protection , there are a range of parties or interest groups that demand or request measures that result in protection for domestic parties .

these include producers and workers , as well as consumer and environmental interest groups .

governments may also be the primary demanders or initiators of actions that have trade protectionist effects .

u.s. - eu trade conflicts vary according to the nature of the demand for protection .

many of the major u.s. - eu trade conflicts are classified and discussed below according to the nature of the demand for protective action .

while many of the conflicts are spurred by multiple demanders and causes , an attempt is made to classify disputes according to categories that seemingly account for the overriding cause or demand for government action .

as most trade conflicts embody a mixture of economic , political , and social dimensions , there is ample room for disagreement over the dominant cause of any particular dispute .

by and large , this report classifies most of the conflicts according to american perspectives .

u.s. - european disagreements over the cause and nature of the controversy , of course , provides the basis for many of the conflicts .

whether the conflict is propelled by protectionist or other domestic aims remains a key question in some disputes as well .

the three categories of trade conflicts — traditional , foreign policy , and regulatory — appear to offer different possibilities for conflict management .

this is due not only to the fact that the causes and dimensions of these categories of conflicts differ , but also because the institutional relationships and forces that affect the supply of and demand for protection are operative in varying degrees from category to category .

these factors include the presence or absence of bilateral or multilateral agreements and rules that govern the settlement of the disputes , the extent to which the disputes fit into the standard free trade versus protectionism dichotomy , the relevance of underlying economic and political trends , and the effectiveness of other institutional arrangements designed to prevent or resolve the disputes .

bilateral and multilateral trade agreements can dampen the inclination of governments to supply protection and the private sector to demand protection by providing a fairly detailed "road map" of permissible actions and obligations .

while often litigated and disputed , the obligations tend to be relatively clear - cut and help resolve disagreements .

when new spats arise , built - in procedures of many agreements can facilitate a settlement or help avoid escalation .

conflicts that fall into the standard free trade versus protectionism dichotomy also have a built - in potential for undercutting any rationale governments may have to supply protection or private parties may use in demanding protection .

this happens due to an ideological consensus in both the u.s. and eu in favor of resisting protectionism on both economic and political grounds .

as a result , most demands for protection from producer interests must be justified as exceptions to the generalized support for freer trade arrangements and policies .

diverse economic and political trends can also suppress the supply and demand for protection .

for example , declining support for industrial policy initiatives , as has been the case in both the u.s. and eu , could make industry - specific pleas for government assistance less compelling .

high priority political commitments , such as the eu's policy towards enlargement , may also create incentives for reform and liberalization as opposed to protection .

both formal and informal cooperative arrangements have proliferated over the past decade to better manage transatlantic trade disputes .

these have included efforts to strengthen regulatory co - operation and the establishment of forums for bilateral consultations .

by attempting to incorporate the views of a wider range of domestic interest groups , these efforts have also aimed at preventing disputes from arising .

applying these factors to the three categories of trade disputes , there are grounds for judging that traditional trade conflicts may become less disruptive to the bilateral relationship in the future , but more limited grounds for projecting a diminution of foreign policy induced friction .

the prospects for future domestic - policy related trade disputes fall somewhere in between these two extremes , with reasons for foreseeing a reduction in friction associated with some disputes , but not all .

the basis for this assessment is presented below .

mark twain reportedly once said of wagner's music that "it is not as bad as it sounds. .

similarly , u.s. - eu trade conflicts may not be as ominous and threatening as they appear .

despite the rise in trade tensions and episodes of tit - for - tat retaliation over the past few years , the notion that the relationship between the world's two most powerful economic powers is constantly teetering on the brink of a transatlantic trade war seems a stretch .

nor does it appear that the trade conflicts represent or symbolize any kind of fundamental rift that is possibly developing between the united states and europe .

at the same time , the disputes do not appear to be ephemeral distractions or mere consequences of a mass media that tends to sensationalize and define the relationship unfairly .

nor are they products of trade negotiators , who like generals , are often accused of fighting the last war .

nor are they trivial or silly squabbles because they represent a mere 1-2% of transatlantic trade .

trade conflicts rather appear to have real , albeit limited , economic and political consequences for the bilateral relationship .

perhaps more significantly , trade disputes may also pose very real obstacles for the two partners in their efforts to play a leadership role in promoting a more open and prosperous world economy .

this is particularly evident in the way bilateral trade disputes may be testing the functioning of the world trade organization .

the economic and political impacts that result from u.s. - eu trade disputes can be easily identified , but are much harder to quantify .

in both cases , a variety of forces effectively contains the economic and political costs from rising or getting out of hand .

the $300 million in retaliatory u.s. tariffs levied on european exports over the banana and beef disputes and the over $2 billion in eu tariffs imposed on u.s. exports over the fsc ( now suspended ) and byrd amendment disputes provide the most visible economic costs of trade conflict .

the retaliatory tariffs are designed to dramatically increase the costs of selective european and u.s. products , making it much more difficult for those "targeted" foreign producers to sell in the u.s. or eu markets .

in theory , foreign exporters denied access to markets are expected to pressure their respective governments to change the policies that are in violation of wto rules .

retaliation is not , however , cost - free .

the process also hurts importers , consumers , and firms dependent on those imports as inputs in their production process .

these entities intensively lobby congress and the european commission to keep their products off any retaliation list that is drawn up .

domestic political pressures , thus , limit the scope and flexibility trade officials on both sides of the atlantic have in devising a retaliation list .

as a result , most retaliation lists tend to be dominated by luxury items or high value - added agricultural items that are produced by both economic superpowers .

under these conditions , coming up with a list of products whose export value matches the relatively small sum of a few billion dollars is no easy task .

attempts by either brussels or washington to retaliate on a much larger value of trade could be expected to ignite a firestorm of political opposition .

the huge stake each side has in the other's market through foreign direct investments , merger and acquisition activity , combined with "globalized" patterns of production , would likely serve as major counter - forces to any rise in trade warfare .

these trends create extensive overlapping interests among companies and strong incentives to contain disputes .

in globally traded sectors , mass production in a single location is becoming rare as companies source inputs , research , design , and marketing strategies from all over the world .

this , in turn , shrinks the scope of , as well as complicates , the definition of what is domestic production or a domestic company .

in terms of political impacts , trade disputes likely have some effect on public opinion and attitudes , as well as connect in some way to other transatlantic problems .

polls indicate that there is a great deal of fear in europe that the united states , due to the strength of its economy , has the ability to impose both economic and social changes on the rest of the world .

this fear and perhaps frustration may translate into antipathy to the united states , often expressed as anti - americanism .

u.s. retaliation against europe for not accepting hormone - enhanced beef , for example , may only fuel these generalized anti - american feelings that the united states is a bully .

the reaction to u.s. retaliation may be even more acute among some european policymakers .

by selectively targeting only those eu members that have clearly benefitted from wto illegal policies , many european policymakers view retaliation as a frontal assault on european unity — an old - fashioned divide - and - conquer strategy .

commenting on the u.s. proposal to rotate items under trade sanctions from product to product and country to country , french president chirac complained bitterly that carousel retaliation is "much closer to 19 th century gunboat diplomacy than to 21 st century diplomacy. .

whether or how these reactions affect cooperation in other problem areas is difficult to know .

clearly , if trade tensions work to undermine the notion that the united states and europe share common interests or lead to a view that a weaker europe or a weaker america is in the other's interest , then the consequences could be major .

but there is no evidence to suggest that this is happening as the united states and the eu to date have been able to compartmentalize trade problems to a remarkable degree .

trade disputes may have discernible impacts on u.s. - eu efforts to provide leadership of the world economy .

the disputes absorb a significant amount of time and energy of key policymakers at the expense of efforts to pursue common interests and objectives , such as completing the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

moreover , the two powers need to set an example of cooperation and adherence to wto rules if the whole system is not to unravel .

the credibility of the wto depends critically on a prompt , effective , and fair dispute - settlement mechanism .

unfortunately , the eu is seen by u.s. policymakers and interest groups affected by the beef and banana cases as having used every loophole to delay decisions and then refuse to comply with panel decisions .

similarly , u.s. compliance efforts in fsc and byrd amendment disputes are found wanting by eu policymakers .

while only a handful of u.s. - eu wto disputes have ended in withdrawal of concessions ( i.e .

retaliation ) since 1995 , non - compliance by a key member arguably weakens the authority of the wto and serves as a poor model for the rest of the world .

why should we comply with wto panel decisions if the eu does not have to , many countries ask .

non - compliance by one of the two leading economic powers is also said to diminish the perceived value of negotiating new trade agreements .

both the u.s. and eu ( bananas in the case of the u.s. and the fsc in the case of the eu ) have brought complaints to the wto that may have been motivated more by a desire to score points with domestic political interests or to rack up negotiating leverage by successfully prosecuting cases than to address serious trade problems .

to the extent that a charge of capricious use of the dispute settlement process is valid , the wto as an institution may also be weakened .

some may argue that no institution can survive for long this kind of treatment by the body's two biggest members .

to deal with the problem of non - compliance , the u.s. and eu have legalistic and diplomatic options .

in the area of some of the most bitter u.s. - eu disagreements , particularly over gmos , the wto may be asked to make decisions on very complex issues that go deep into the domestic social and the environmental life of each side .

binding rulings in areas that have strong domestic roots can raise sovereignty issues and court a public backlash .

under these circumstances , where the formulations of right and wrong are increasingly blurred , it may be legitimate to question whether wto panels should be asked to clarify vague rules where there is little u.s. - eu consensus , or whether trade officials should attempt to negotiate diplomatic solutions to disagreements that are so difficult to resolve .

