ever since the bush administration's october 2008 removal of north korea from the u.s. state sponsors of terrorism list , a series of actions by north korea have led to calls for the obama administration to return pyongyang to the list .

the list identifies any country the government of which the secretary of state determines "has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. .

in the spring of 2010 , these calls intensified due to two developments .

first , on march 26 , 2010 , a south korean naval vessel , the cheonan , sank in waters disputed by the two koreas .

nearly 50 south korean sailors died in the incident .

a multinational investigation team led by south korea determined that the ship was sunk by a north korean submarine .

 ( see " legislation in the 111 th congress " below for a selection of related congressional actions. ) .

south korea , backed by the united states and japan , has taken the case before the united nations security council .

seoul is hoping for a unsc presidential statement condemning the attack .

on may 24 , 2010 , south korean president lee myung - bak also announced that north korean ships would no longer be permitted to pass through shipping lanes under south korean control , and that north - south trade , visits , and exchanges generally would be suspended .

exceptions were made for humanitarian aid to infants and children , and for the north - south korean industrial complex outside of kaesong , north korea , where over 100 south korean manufacturers employ over 40,000 north korean workers .

south korean minister of unification hyun in - taek announced that new investments in the kaesong complex would be stopped and that the number of south korean personnel at the complex — which had often approached 1,000 people in mid - week — would be reduced .

the kaesong industrial park accounts for a significant share of north - south trade , so if the complex's operations continue to operate as before , it is unclear how much direct , practical effect the measures will have .

traveling in beijing , secretary of state hillary rodham clinton stated to reporters that lee's steps were "prudent and entirely appropriate," and that president obama had directed u.s. government agencies to review their existing authorities and policies related to north korea , "to ensure that we have adequate measures in place , and to identify areas where adjustments would be appropriate. .

when asked whether north korea would be returned to the terrorism list , secretary clinton said that the state department "continually reviews north korea's actions" to determine its actions meet the criteria for designation as a state sponsor of terrorism .

the second development was the appearance of reports , largely from israeli sources , that a reshipment of north korean rockets and rocket - propelled grenades that were seized in thailand in december 2009 were ultimately destined for hamas and / or hezbollah .

as discussed below , for years , there have been reports from a variety of sources of similar arms shipments from north korea .

 ( see " new reports of support of terrorist groups ." ) .

in the spring and early summer of 2010 , the state department appeared to deem these reports insufficient to place north korea back on the terrorism list .

on june 28 , 2010 , state department spokesman philip crowley said that the department had determined that while the cheonan's sinking was a violation of the 1953 armistice agreement that brought an end to the major fighting of the korean war , it was not an act of international terrorism because it was "taken by the military or the state against the military of another state. .

therefore , crowley said , the sinking "by itself would not trigger placing north korea on the state sponsor of terrorism list. .

crowley did not mention , and was not asked about , reports of recent north korean links to terrorist groups .

he said that there is a "never - ending" process of reviewing whether to re - list north korea , and that the administration "will not hesitate to take action" if the department determines that north korea has taken actions that "demonstrate a consistent support for international terrorism. .

on october 11 , 2008 , the bush administration formally removed north korea from the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism .

the removal came as part of a u.s. - north korean agreement on establishing mechanisms for verifying north korea's declaration of elements of its plutonium nuclear program .

north korea had issued the declaration on june 26 , 2008 .

president bush announced that he had sent to congress notification of his intent to remove north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism after 45 calendar days .

under u.s. law , the president is required to notify congress 45 days before removing a country from the list .

if congress did not approve legislation to block north korea's removal during the 45-day period , the president would have been free to remove north korea .

any congressional legislation to block removal would have had to be signed by the president and could have been subjected to a presidential veto .

the white house said that the president's intention was to remove north korea on august 11 , 2008 , at the end of the 45-day notification period .

the u.s. - north korean nuclear agreement laid out measures to implement a february 2007 agreement reached by the six party talks on the north korean nuclear issue .

the u.s. - north korean agreement , embodied in the measures of june 26 , 2008 , consists of two obligations each that north korea and the bush administration agreed to fulfill .

north korea is to allow a process of disablement of its plutonium nuclear facilities at yongbyon .

the disablement process began in october 2007 .

the bush administration claimed that 8 of 11 components of the disablement process had been completed and that close to 50% of nuclear fuel rods in the yongbyon nuclear reactor had been removed .

north korea's second obligation is to provide the united states and other members of the six party talks on north korea's nuclear program with a "complete and correct" declaration of nuclear programs .

the united states' two obligations under the agreement are to terminate economic sanctions on north korea under the u.s. trading with the enemy act and remove north korea from u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism .

however , in the white house statement of june 26 , president bush stated that removal of north korea from the terrorism support list was dependent on north korea agreeing to a verification system to verify the contents of its declaration .

the administration reportedly submitted to north korea in july 2008 a plan for a verification system that would have allowed inspectors to visit nearly any site throughout north korea .

north korea rejected the u.s. proposal , and the bush administration did not remove north korea on august 11 , 2008 , when the 45-day congressional notification period ended .

north korea then announced a cessation of the disablement program at yongbyon and an intention to resume operation of its plutonium reprocessing plant at yongbyon .

assistant secretary of state christopher hill went to pyongyang in early october 2008 and negotiated a verification deal reportedly of a more limited scope , concentrating inspections on only yongbyon .

north korea agreed and announced a resumption of disablement .

secretary of state condoleezza rice announced on october 11 , 2008 , that north korea was removed from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

the removal of north korea from the terrorism list , however , did not result in an early conclusion of the february 2007 six party nuclear agreement , contrary to the expectations of the bush administration .

the north korean government and the bush administration soon conflicted over the content of the october 2008 agreement on verification , particularly over whether it allowed inspectors to take samples of nuclear materials from the yongbyon installations .

the non - north korea five parties to the talks ( the united states , south korea , china , japan , and russia ) also had not completed the delivery of 1 million tons of heavy oil that they had promised in the february 2007 agreement .

the incoming obama administration faced these issues after it took office .

the most critical reaction to the u.s. delisting of north korea came from japan .

japan had opposed delisting until north korea had taken steps toward resolving cases of its kidnapping of japanese citizens .

in april 2007 , the department of state released its annual global terrorism report to congress , country reports on terrorism , 2006 [ country reports , 2006 ] .

north korea is prominently mentioned in the yearly report , which include data on terrorist trends and activity worldwide and serves as the basis for the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism that are subject to u.s. sanctions .

emerging , or ongoing , problem areas "areas of concern" are identified as well .

in addition to data on terrorist trends , groups , and activities worldwide , country reports provide a description as to why countries are on the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism that are subject to u.s. sanctions .

thus , included in country reports are detailed data on the five countries currently on the "terrorism list": cuba , iran , north korea , sudan , and syria .

u.s. administration officials maintain that the practice of designating and reporting on the activities of the state sponsors of terrorism list and concomitant sanctions policy has contributed significantly to a reduction in the overt — and apparently overall — activity level of states supporting terrorism in the past decade .

libya and sudan are frequently cited as examples of such success , but to date , not north korea .

north korea is also included on a concomitant list of states "not fully cooperating" with u.s. anti - terrorism efforts .

this list includes the five state sponsors of terrorism currently on the department of state's list and afghanistan .

in late january each year , under the provisions of section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act of 1979 , as amended , the secretary of commerce , in consultation with the secretary of state , provides congress with a list of countries supporting terrorism .

compilation of the list is the result of an ongoing process .

throughout the year the department of state gathers data on terrorist activity worldwide , and then beginning about november , the list is formally reviewed .

each new determination under section 6 ( j ) of the act must also be published in the federal register .

congressional report language provides guidelines for designation .

a house foreign affairs committee report approving the anti - terrorism and arms export amendments act of 1989 ( h.rept .

101-296 ) included as criteria ( 1 ) allowing territory to be used as a sanctuary ; ( 2 ) furnishing lethal substances to individuals / groups with the likelihood that they will be used for terrorism ; ( 3 ) providing logistical support to terrorists / groups ; ( 4 ) providing safe haven or headquarters for terrorists / organizations ; ( 5 ) planning , directing , training or assisting in the execution of terrorist activities ; ( 6 ) providing direct or indirect financial support for terrorist activities ; and ( 7 ) providing diplomatic facilities such as support or documentation to aid or abet terrorist activities .

a senate report had similar criteria ( s.rept .

101-173 ) .

paragraph 6 ( j ) ( 4 ) of the export administration act prohibits removing a country from the list unless the president first submits a report to the house committee on foreign affairs , and the senate committees on banking , housing , and urban affairs , and foreign relations .

when a government changes ( i.e. , a government is significantly different from that in power at the time of the last determination ) , the president's report , submitted before the proposed rescission would take effect , must certify that ( 1 ) there has been a fundamental change in the leadership and policies of the government of the country concerned ( an actual change of government as a result of an election , coup , or some other means ) ; ( 2 ) the new government is not supporting acts of international terrorism ; and ( 3 ) the new government has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future .

when the same government is in power , the current situation with north korea , the president's report — submitted at least 45 days before the proposed rescission would take effect — must justify the rescission and certify that ( 1 ) the government concerned has not provided support for international terrorism during the preceding six - month period ; and ( 2 ) the government concerned has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future .

congress can let the president's action take effect , or pass legislation to block it , the latter most likely over the president's veto .

since enactment of this procedure in 1989 , the bush administration removed three countries from the list of state sponsors of terrorism — north korea , libya and iraq .

the bush administration stated that in the case of north korea , it will adhere to the legal requirement of providing congress with a 45-day notice before removal that would include the required certification .

congress has passed several resolutions on north korean support for terrorism since 2005 .

in january 2005 , the entire illinois delegation in congress sent a letter to north korea's united nations ambassador demanding information on the reverend kim dong - shik , who was kidnapped by north korean agents in china in 2000 .

the illinois delegation stated that it would oppose removing north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism until his fate is resolved .

h.r .

3650 , a bill introduced in the house of representatives in september 2007 with 27 sponsors as of december 10 , 2007 , would continue to designate north korea as a state sponsor of terrorism until north korea met a number of conditions related to cessation of nuclear and missile proliferation , arms and training to terrorist groups , the counterfeiting of u.s. currency ; and the release of kidnapped japanese and kim dong - shik and south korean prisoners of war from the korean war .

the fy2010 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

111-84 ) , contained a "sense of congress" that if the united states determines that the north korean government "has provided assistance to terrorists or engaged in state sponsored acts of terrorism," the secretary of state should re - list north korea .

a complex challenge facing those charged with compiling and maintaining the list is the degree to which diminution of hard evidence of a government's active involvement indicates a real change in behavior , particularly when a past history of active support or use of terrorism as an instrument of foreign policy has been well established .

for example , iraq , which was removed in 1982 , was again placed on the list in 1990 , to be again removed in 2004 .

some observers suggest that one reason that countries have not been dropped from the list is the reluctance of the executive branch to confront congress on the issue .

north korea was added to the "official" list of countries supporting terrorism because of its implication in the bombing of a south korean airliner on november 29 , 1987 , which killed 115 persons .

according to the state department , through the end of 2009 , north korea had not been conclusively linked to any terrorist acts since 1987 .

a north korean spokesman in 1993 condemned all forms of terrorism , and said his country resolutely opposed the encouragement and support of terrorism .

a similar statement was made in november 1995 and again in 2001 , in the wake of the 9 / 11 attacks .

country reports , 2006 , continued to contain language that could be used to justify retention of the dprk on the list of state supporters of terror: the dprk continued to harbor four japanese red army members who participated in a jet hijacking in 1970 .

the japanese government continued to seek a full accounting of the fate of the 12 japanese nationals believed to have been abducted by dprk state entities ; five such abductees have been repatriated to japan since 2002 .

using language similar to the 2006 report , country reports , 2005 , in a brief two - paragraph section on north korea states that the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk ) is not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since the bombing of a korean airlines flight in 1987 .

pyongyang in 2003 allowed the return to japan of five surviving abductees , and in 2004 of eight family members , mostly children , of those abductees .

questions about the fate of other abductees remain the subject of ongoing negotiations between japan and the dprk .

in november , the dprk returned to japan what it identified as the remains of two japanese abductees , whom the north had reported as having died in north korea .

the issue remained contentious at year's end .

there are also credible reports that other nationals were abducted from locations abroad .

the rok government estimates that approximately 485 civilians were abducted or detained since the 1950-53 korean war .

four japanese red army members remain in the dprk following their involvement in a jet hijacking in 1970 ; five of their family members returned to japan in 2004 .

perhaps most revealing of united states' policy rationale for keeping nations on the terrorism list is text contained in the "state sponsors of terror overview" section of country reports , 2005 , and partially reprinted in country reports , 2006 .

prominently mentioned are two factors: ( 1 ) maintaining ties to terrorist groups and ( 2 ) "the capability to manufacture wmd and other destabilizing technologies that can get into the hands of terrorists. .

libya and sudan continued to take significant steps to cooperate in the global war on terror .

cuba , iran , north korea , and syria , however , continued to maintain their ties to terrorist groups .

iran and syria routinely provide unique safe haven , substantial resources and guidance to terrorist organizations .

state sponsors of terrorism provide critical support to non - state terrorist groups .

without state sponsors , terrorist groups would have much more difficulty obtaining the funds , weapons , materials , and secure areas they require to plan and conduct operations .

most worrisome is that some of these countries also have the capability to manufacture wmd and other destabilizing technologies that can get into the hands of terrorists .

the united states will continue to insist that these countries end the support they give to terrorist groups .

[emphasis and italics added. .

in its "introduction," the patterns 1999 report cites north korea as a possible candidate for removal from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

the patterns 1999 report states: the designation of state sponsors is not permanent , however .

in fact , a primary focus of u.s. counterterrorist policy is to move state sponsors off the list by delineating clearly what steps these countries must take to end their support for terrorism and by urging them to take these steps... .

there have been some encouraging signs recently suggesting that some countries are considering taking steps to distance themselves from terrorism .

north korea has made some positive statements condemning terrorism in all its forms .

we have outlined clearly to the government of north korea the steps it must take to be removed from the list , all of which are consistent with its stated policies .

the report states that "if a state sponsor meets the criteria for being dropped from the terrorism list , it will be removed — notwithstanding other differences we may have with a country's other policies and actions. .

in june 15 , 2000 , testimony before the senate foreign relations committee , michael sheehan , the state department coordinator for counterterrorism , testified that we need to take into account all relevant considerations in connection with moving states onto or off of the list , and we also need to explore whether it would be appropriate in any cases to identify states as "not fully cooperating" rather than as state sponsors of terrorism if doing so was warranted by the facts and would advance u.s. counterterrorism objectives .. .

i have been considering what intermediate steps could be taken to give state sponsors a clearer look at how they might "graduate" off the list .

it may be possible that in appropriate cases state sponsors could step off the state sponsor list and be left only on the "not fully cooperating" list , with an eye towards stepping off of that list when they fully cooperate with u.s. antiterrorism efforts .

similarly , in july 12 testimony before the house international relations committee , ambassador sheehan confirmed that his earlier statements were intended as a clear signal to terrorist supporting countries that the united states would consider taking them off the list if they take the necessary steps to cease their support for terrorism .

patterns 2000 , issued in 2001 under the new bush administration , changed the tone .

it does state that "the department of state is engaged in ongoing discussion with north korea and sudan with the object of getting those governments completely out of the terrorism business and off the terrorism list. .

it cites the north korean statement in the u.s. - north korean joint statement of october 12 , 2000 , in which "the dprk reiterated its opposition to terrorism and agreed to support international actions against such activity. .

however , as stated previously , patterns 2000 was more specific in citing evidence of north korean support of other terrorist groups , particularly in the philippines .

the report also asserts that "the us has a long memory and will not simply expunge a terrorist's record because time has passed. .

patterns 2001 and patterns 2002 , arguably , softened language to designed to provide a rationale for retaining the dprk on the terror list .

for example , patterns 2002 , although noting that "pyongyang continued to sell ballistic missile technology to countries designated by the united states as state sponsors of terrorism , including syria and libya," concluded with the statement that "north korea is a party to six of the twelve international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism. .

contrast such language to patterns 2003 : "although it is a party to six international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism , pyongyang has not taken any substantial steps to cooperate in efforts to combat international terrorism .

[italics provided]" patterns 2003 , which covers the year north korea was designated a member of the "axis of evil" by president bush in his 2003 state of the union address , appears to take a somewhat more confrontational position .

the 2003 report begins with text to the effect that the dprk is not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since 1987 .

the report notes , however , that north korea continued to give sanctuary to hijackers affiliated with the japanese red army .

although patterns 2003 arguably indicates that north korea's support for international terrorism appears limited at present , it offers no promising language to suggest that dprk removal from the terrorism list may occur anytime soon .

country reports , 2004 , again offers no promising language to suggest that dprk removal from the terrorism list may occur anytime soon , but notes what can be interpreted as progress in resolving the issue of kidnapped japanese citizens .

again restated is language to the effect that the dprk is "not known" to have sponsored any acts of terrorism since 1987 .

pyongyang , however , is cited for lack of "substantial steps" in co - operating in efforts to combat international terrorism , although it has signed six international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism .

the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk ) is not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since the bombing of a korean airlines flight in 1987 .

at a summit with japanese prime minister koizumi in pyongyang in september 2002 , national defense commission chairman kim jong il acknowledged the involvement of dprk "special institutions" in the kidnapping of japanese citizens and said that those responsible had already been punished .

pyongyang in 2003 allowed the return to japan of five surviving abductees , and in 2004 of eight family members , mostly children , of those abductees .

questions about the fate of other abductees remain the subject of ongoing negotiations between japan and the dprk .

in november , the dprk returned to japan what it identified as the remains of two japanese abductees whom the north had reported as having died in north korea .

subsequent dna testing in japan indicated that the remains were not those of megumi yokota or kaoru matsuki , as pyongyang had claimed , and the issue remained contentious at year's end .

four japanese red army members remain in the dprk following their involvement in a jet hijacking in 1970 ; five of their family members returned to japan in 2004 .

although it is a party to six international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism , pyongyang has not taken substantial steps to cooperate in efforts to combat international terrorism .

in a dramatic shift in u.s. position regarding dprk removal from the terrorist list , country reports , 2006 , clearly states that the united states has agreed to begin the process of removing the dprk from the list of state supporters of terror: the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk ) was not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since the bombing of a korean airlines flight in 1987 .

the dprk continued to harbor four japanese red army members who participated in a jet hijacking in 1970 .

the japanese government continued to seek a full accounting of the fate of the 12 japanese nationals believed to have been abducted by dprk state entities ; five such abductees have been repatriated to japan since 2002 .

in the february 13 , 2007 initial actions agreement , the united states agreed to "begin the process of removing the designation of the dprk as a state - sponsor of terrorism. .

[emphasis added. .

the country reports , 2006 , reflected the new rice - hill strategy of linking removal of north korea to fulfillment of the february 2007 nuclear agreement .

while it mentions the japanese kidnapping issue , there is less discussion of it than in prior reports .

moreover , it did not describe progress or a settlement of the kidnapping issue as a condition for north korea's removal .

the state department's long - standing claim that north korea "was not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since 1987" was particularly important in 2007 in view of the clear goal of the rice - hill strategy to remove north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

however , questions about the accuracy of the claim are relevant in view of three types of reported information .

one is from the state department itself .

in the department's country reports , 2005 , the section on north korea discusses the japanese kidnapping issue and then states that there is "credible reports that other nationals were abducted from locations abroad. .

the state department does not appear to have provided clarification or details regarding these "credible reports. .

this assertion in country reports , 2005 could be seen as contradicting the assertion that north korea has not sponsored any terrorist acts since 1987 .

the second type of reports , coming from several diverse sources , asserts that north korea has provided arms and possibly training to hezbollah in lebanon and the tamil tigers in sri lanka and that it maintains an intimate relationship with the iranian revolutionary guard .

hezbollah and the tamil tigers are two of the most active terrorist groups on the u.s. list of international terrorist groups .

the iranian revolutionary guard has been designated by the state department as a supporter of terrorism .

a third , related body of more direct evidence appeared in the form of several intercepted shipments of north korean arms bound for iran in 2009 .

three vessels were intercepted , which contained north korean weapons that western intelligence and israeli intelligence officials and non - government experts believe were bound for hezbollah and hamas , terrorist groups on the official u.s. list of international terrorist organizations .

the largest of these shipments was aboard a ship that was searched in dubai before departing for iran in july 2009 .

all three ships contained north korean components for 122 mm grad rockets and rocket launchers .

the shipment intercepted in dubai contained 2,030 detonators for the grad rockets and related electric circuits and solid fuel propellant for rockets .

the 122 mm rockets have a range of about 25 miles .

iran , particularly the iranian revolutionary guards , is known to have supplied significant quantities of these rockets and rocket launchers to hezbollah and hamas , which have frequently fired them into israel .

in december 2009 , a shipment of 35 tons of north korean weapons was intercepted aboard an ilyushin - t76 transport aircraft .

the ilyushin had flown from pyongyang to bangkok , thailand , where the arms were seized .

the flight plan of the aircraft reportedly showed that its ultimate destination was iran .

the weapons reportedly included two m - 1958 multiple 240 mm rocket launchers , rocket launching tubes , 24 240 mm rockets , shoulder - launched missiles , and components of surface - to - air missiles .

israeli and lebanese newspapers quoted western intelligence sources as concluding that most of these weapons likely were bound for hezbollah .

charles vick , a noted expert on arms and the arms trade , observed that the rocket - related weapons in the shipment are used often by hezbollah and hamas against israel .

the bush administration's priority objective in removing north korea from the terrorism support list was to achieve the completion of the disablement of north korea's plutonium nuclear installations at yongbyon .

the shutting down of yongbyon would prevent north korea from producing more weapons grade plutonium for atomic bomb production .

north korea's resumption of disablement after the u.s. removal announcement of october 11 , 2008 , appeared to strengthen the prospect that disablement would be completed by the time president bush left office in january 2009 .

however , north korea suspended disablement in december 2008 over its disagreement with the bush administration over the content of the october 2008 agreement on verification .

christopher hill and others reportedly argued within the bush administration that the administration should give the highest priority in its north korea policy to limiting and eliminating north korea's plutonium program because the plutonium is the known source of north korea's production of atomic bombs ; other issues , such as the alleged north korean highly enriched uranium program and north korea's proliferation activities , therefore should be given less priority or deferred into the future .

removing north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism also opened the way for what assistant secretary of state hill described as a phase three of nuclear negotiations beyond the february 2007 six party nuclear agreement .

u.s. goals in a phase three negotiation would be the full dismantlement of yongbyon , securing control over north korea's plutonium stockpile , and eliminating north korea's stockpile of nuclear weapons .

some pointed out at the time , however , that this prospect was much more uncertain , since north korea was likely to present new demands for u.s. concessions from the obama administration as part of any deal for a further reduction of its plutonium program .

given north korea's long track record of seeking financial subsidies from other governments in nuclear and other negotiations , one of pyongyang's phase three demands could be for the united states to follow the removal of north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism with an "affirmative" act of proposing that the international monetary fund and the world bank extend financial aid to north korea .

removal from the terrorism support list ends the legislative requirement that the u.s. president oppose proposals of aid to north korea from international financial agencies .

there are potential negative consequences for u.s. policy in removing north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

japanese officials have warned that there would be short - term damage to u.s. relations with japan if the bush administration removes north korea without any substantive progress on the japanese kidnapping issue .

u.s .

ambassador thomas schieffer expressed such concerns after october 2007 .

some u.s. experts also believe there may be damage .

however , a sizeable number of members of japan's diet voiced opposition to the bush administration removing north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism .

japanese press and majority public opinion also appears to oppose the u.s. action .

there also could be potential for longer - term damage to the u.s. - japan alliance that could affect future japanese policies toward u.s. military bases in japan and support for future u.s. military operations against muslim terrorist groups .

removing north korea likely will encourage pyongyang to continue and possibly expand its support for terrorist groups and other state sponsors of terrorism in the middle east .

north korea's expansion of these activities since 2000 appear to constitute a major threat to u.s. national security policy interests in the middle east .

relatedly , the united states will no longer have the terrorism support list as a negotiating lever if it ever decided to address north korean activities in the middle east in negotiations with pyongyang .

indeed , a chief objective of north korean leader , kim jong - il , in prioritizing removal from the terrorism support list may be to weaken the u.s. diplomatic hand if the united states should decide to place north korea's activities in the middle east on its policy agenda .

h.r .

5350 ( ros - lehtinen ) .

the north korea sanctions and diplomatic nonrecognition act of 2010 .

contains a sense of congress provision that the secretary of state should re - designate north korea as a state sponsor of terrorism .

regardless of whether north korea is returned to the terrorism list , the bill would continue the restrictions imposed on north korea when it was on the list ( prior to october 11 , 2008 ) , unless the president certifies that north korea meets a number of conditions .

the bill would prohibit diplomatic recognition , including the establishment of a permanent presence or united states liaison office inside north korea .

introduced may 20 , 2010 ; referred to house committee on foreign affairs .

h.res .

1382 ( faleomavaega ) .

condemns and demands an apology from north korea for the sinking of the cheonan .

urges the international community to fully implement all united nations security council resolutions pertaining to north korea , and urges the united states and other countries to take "other appropriate actions. .

introduced may 20 , 2010 ; referred to house committee on foreign affairs .

h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 ( skelton ) .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 .

section 1255 requires the obama administration to submit a report examining whether north korea still did not meet the requirements for inclusion on the terrorism list , and contained a "sense of congress" that if the united states determines that the north korean government "has provided assistance to terrorists or engaged in state sponsored acts of terrorism," the secretary of state should re - list north korea .

house agreed to conference report , october 8 , 2009 ( 281-146 , roll no .

770 ) ; senate agreed to conference report , october 22 , 2009 ( 68-29 , record vote number: 327 ) ; signed by president , october 28 , 2009 .

on july 22 , 2009 , the senate passed a version of section 1255 , s.amdt .

1761 to s. 1390 ( 66-31 , record vote number: 238 ) .

s.res .

525 ( lieberman ) .

expresses sympathy to the families of those killed in the sinking of the cheonan and urges the international community to fully implement all united nations security council resolutions pertaining to north korea .

introduced and passed by unanimous consent , may 13 , 2010 .

