federal assistance targeted to homeless individuals and families was largely nonexistent prior to the mid - 1980s .

although the runaway and homeless youth program was enacted in 1974 as part of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( p.l .

93-415 ) , the first federal program focused on assisting all homeless people , no matter their age , was the emergency food and shelter ( efs ) program , established in 1983 through an emergency jobs appropriation bill ( p.l .

98-8 ) .

the efs program was and continues to be administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to provide emergency food and shelter to needy individuals .

in 1987 , congress enacted the stewart b. mckinney homeless assistance act ( p.l .

100-77 ) , which created a number of new programs to comprehensively address the needs of homeless people , including food , shelter , health care , and education .

the act was later renamed the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act ( p.l .

106-400 ) after its two prominent proponents — representatives stewart b. mckinney and bruce f. vento .

the programs authorized in mckinney - vento include the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) homeless assistance grants , the department of labor ( dol ) homeless veterans reintegration program , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) grants for the benefit of homeless individuals and health care for the homeless , and the department of education ( ed ) education for homeless children and youths program .

the way homelessness is defined largely determines who is served by a particular federal program .

this report discusses the definitions of homelessness used by targeted federal homeless programs .

in addition , the report describes the current federal programs that provide targeted assistance to homeless individuals and families ( other federal programs may provide assistance to homeless individuals but are not specifically designed to assist homeless persons ) .

these include those programs listed above , as well as others that congress has created since the enactment of mckinney - vento .

in addition , this report discusses federal efforts to end homelessness .

finally , table 2 at the end of this report shows funding levels for each of the ed , dhs , hhs , hud , dol , and department of justice ( doj ) programs that assist homeless individuals .

table 3 shows funding levels for va programs .

homelessness in the united states has always existed , but it did not come to the public's attention as a national issue until the 1970s and 1980s , when the characteristics of the homeless population and their living arrangements began to change .

throughout the early and middle part of the 20 th century , homelessness was typified by "skid rows": areas with hotels and single - room occupancy dwellings where transient single men lived .

skid rows were usually removed from the more populated areas of cities , and it was uncommon for individuals to actually live on the streets .

beginning in the 1970s , however , the homeless population began to grow and become more visible to the general public .

according to studies from the time , homeless persons were no longer almost exclusively single men , but included women with children ; their median age was younger ; they were more racially diverse ( in previous decades , the observed homeless population was largely white ) ; they were less likely to be employed ( and therefore had lower incomes ) ; they were mentally ill in higher proportions than previously ; and individuals who were abusing or had abused drugs began to become more prevalent in the population .

a number of reasons have been offered for the growth in the number of homeless persons and their increasing visibility .

many cities demolished skid rows to make way for urban development , leaving some residents without affordable housing options .

other possible factors contributing to homelessness include the decreased availability of affordable housing generally , the reduced need for seasonal unskilled labor , the reduced likelihood that relatives will accommodate homeless family members , the decreased value of public benefits , and changed admissions standards at mental hospitals .

the increased visibility of homeless people was due , in part , to the decriminalization of actions such as public drunkenness , loitering , and vagrancy .

in the 1980s , congress first responded to the growing prevalence of homelessness with several separate grant programs designed to address the food and shelter needs of homeless individuals .

these programs included the emergency food and shelter program ( p.l .

98-8 ) , the emergency shelter grants program ( p.l .

99-591 ) , and the transitional housing demonstration program ( p.l .

99-591 ) .

in 1983 , a federal interagency task force on food and shelter for the homeless was created to coordinate the federal response to homelessness .

among its activities was making vacant federal properties available as shelters .

congress began to consider comprehensive legislation to address homelessness in 1986 .

on june 26 , 1986 , h.r .

5140 and s. 2608 were introduced as the homeless persons' survival act to provide an aid package for homeless persons .

no further action was taken on either measure , however .

later that same year , legislation containing title i of the homeless persons' survival act — emergency relief provisions for shelter , food , mobile health care , and transitional housing — was introduced as the urgent relief for the homeless act ( h.r .

5710 ) .

the legislation passed both houses of congress in 1987 with large bipartisan majorities .

the act was renamed the stewart b. mckinney homeless assistance act after the death of its chief sponsor , stewart b. mckinney of connecticut ; it was renamed again on october 30 , 2000 , as the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act after the death of another prominent sponsor , bruce f. vento of minnesota .

in 1987 , president ronald reagan signed the act into law ( p.l .

100-77 ) .

the original version of the mckinney - vento act consisted of 15 programs either created or reauthorized by the act , providing an array of services for homeless persons and administered by various federal agencies .

the act also established the united states interagency council on homelessness , which is designed to provide guidance on the federal response to homelessness through the coordination of the efforts of multiple federal agencies covered under the mckinney - vento act .

since the enactment of the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act , there have been some legislative changes to programs and services provided under the act and new programs that target homeless individuals have been created .

specific programs covered under the mckinney - vento act , as well as other federal programs responding to homelessness , are discussed in this report .

there is no single federal definition of what it means to be homeless , and definitions among federal programs that serve homeless individuals may vary to some degree .

as a result , the populations served through the federal programs described in this report may differ depending on the program .

the definition of "homeless individual" that was originally enacted in the mckinney - vento act is used by a majority of programs to define what it means to be homeless .

the mckinney - vento act defined the term "homeless individual" for purposes of the programs that were authorized through the law ( see section 103 of mckinney - vento ) , though some programs that were originally authorized through mckinney - vento use their own , less restrictive definitions .

in 2009 , the mckinney - vento act definition of homelessness was amended by the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing ( hearth ) act , enacted as part of the helping families save their homes act ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

programs that use the definition in section 103 of the mckinney - vento act are hud's homeless assistance grants , fema's emergency food and shelter program , the va homeless veterans programs , and dol's homeless veterans reintegration program .

 ( throughout this section of the report , the term "section 103 definition" is used to refer to the original mckinney - vento act definition of homelessness. ) .

this section describes the original mckinney - vento act section 103 definition of homeless individual , how the definition compares to those used in other programs , and how it has changed under the hearth act and hud's implementing regulations .

the following subsections describe each of the federal programs targeted to assist homeless individuals , arranged by the agency administering the programs .

where relevant , there are references to other crs reports that go into more detail about the programs .

for nearly 10 years , since 2009 , agencies within the federal government have focused on ending homelessness among all people experiencing it by focusing on specific populations , including veterans , families with children , youth , and people considered chronically homeless .

however , efforts to bring about an end to homelessness began almost 20 years ago , when the concept was introduced in a report from the national alliance to end homelessness ( naeh ) , which outlined a strategy to end homelessness in 10 years .

the plan included four recommendations: developing local , data - driven plans to address homelessness ; using mainstream programs ( such as temporary assistance for needy families , section 8 , and supplemental security income ) to prevent homelessness ; employing a housing first strategy to assist most people who find themselves homeless ; and developing a national infrastructure of housing , income , and service supports for low - income families and individuals .

while the idea of ending homelessness for all people was embraced by many groups , the george w. bush administration and federal government focused on ending homelessness among chronically homeless individuals specifically .

initially , the term "chronically homeless" only included single , unaccompanied individuals .

the term was defined as "an unaccompanied homeless individual with a disabling condition who has been continually homeless for a year or more , or has had at least four episodes of homelessness in the past three years. .

the hearth act updated the definition to include families with a head of household who has a disability .

in the year following the release of the naeh report , then - hud secretary martinez announced hud's commitment to ending chronic homelessness at the naeh annual conference .

in 2002 , as a part of his fy2003 budget , president bush made "ending chronic homelessness in the next decade a top objective. .

the bipartisan , congressionally mandated millennial housing commission , in its report to congress in 2002 , included ending chronic homelessness in 10 years among its principal recommendations .

and , by 2003 , the united states interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) had been re - engaged after six years of inactivity and was charged with pursuing the president's 10-year plan .

for the balance of the decade , multiple federal initiatives focused funding and efforts on this goal .

however , the initiative to end chronic homelessness raised some concerns among advocates for homeless people that allocating resources largely to chronically homeless individuals is done at the expense of families with children who are homeless , homeless youth , and other vulnerable populations .

when it was enacted in 2009 , the hearth act mandated that the usich draft a federal strategic plan to end homelessness among all groups ( families with children , unaccompanied youth , veterans , and chronically homeless individuals ) within a year of the law's enactment , and to update the plan annually .

in addition to the usich plan , in november 2009 the va announced a plan to end homelessness among veterans within five years .

these plans — to end chronic homelessness , to end homelessness generally , and to end veterans' homelessness — are described below .

further , table 1 , following the descriptions of plans to end homelessness , presents numbers of homeless people , including people in families , veterans , and those experiencing chronic homelessness .

 table 2 shows final appropriation levels for fy2008-fy2019 for the targeted homelessness programs included in this report with the exception of programs administered by the va .

note that , as of the date of this report , not all federal agencies had received final appropriations for fy2019 .

as a result , table 2 only contains fy2019 funding numbers for programs in the departments of labor , health and human services , and education .

table 3 shows actual obligations for the department of veterans affairs targeted homeless programs for fy2005-fy2017 .

it does not contain fy2018 obligations because , as of the date of this report , only estimated obligations were available .

