the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ) of 1972 ( p.l .

92-522 , as amended ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1361 , et seq. ) .

was last reauthorized in 1994 by p.l .

103-238 .

the authorization of appropriations under the mmpa expired at the end of fy1999 .

the 104 th , 105 th , 106 th , 108 th , and 109 th congresses enacted additional amendments addressing single or limited issues ( see " miscellaneous mmpa amendments " ) ; no mmpa amendments were enacted by the 107 th congress .

at issue for congress are the terms and conditions of provisions to reauthorize and amend the mmpa to address a variety of concerns related to marine mammal management .

legislation introduced , but not enacted , in the 105 th , 106 th , 107 th , 108 th , and 109 th congresses suggests a number of issues that may be discussed during a reauthorization debate .

to identify a larger universe of potentially relevant concerns , the congressional research service queried commercial fishing , scientific research , public display , animal protection , native american , and environmental interests to identify issues that might surface during a reauthorization debate .

this report identifies these concerns and provides background to facilitate a better understanding of various positions on these issues .

these concerns , along with other factors , may be considered as congress determines whether and how to address mmpa reauthorization .

other than recommendations contained in reports to congress mandated by the mmpa amendments of 1994 ( discussed later in this report ) and in testimony presented at a june 29 , 1999 oversight hearing before the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans , the clinton administration did not release any comprehensive proposals related to mmpa reauthorization .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

4075 incorporated some of the mmpa amendments proposed by the bush administration .

congress has been active on marine mammal protection issues in recent years , responding primarily to balancing concerns of the commercial fishing industry and environmental interests .

congress generally views the mmpa as working well , but possibly needing changes to address an increasing number of concerns that have arisen since the 1994 amendments .

in the house , the committee on natural resources has jurisdiction over any mmpa reauthorization legislation .

in the senate , the committee on commerce , science , and transportation has jurisdiction over any legislation on this issue .

an array of groups and individuals hold common and conflicting interests in our nation's marine mammals .

despite their diversity , they generally share the goals of ensuring sustainable marine mammal populations and maintaining healthy marine ecosystems .

these groups , however , sometimes disagree about how best to achieve these goals and use these common resources , and thus , conflict is inevitable .

as congress considers reauthorization of the mmpa , these diverse groups will advocate a wide variety of policy proposals .

congress enacted the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ) in 1972 , due in part to the high level of dolphin mortality in the eastern tropical pacific tuna fishery ( estimated at more than 400,000 animals per year in the late 1960s ) .

the mmpa established a moratorium on the "taking" of marine mammals in u.s. waters and by u.s. nationals on the high seas .

the mmpa also established a moratorium on importing marine mammals and marine mammal products into the united states .

the mmpa protects marine mammals from "clubbing , mutilation , poisoning , capture in nets , and other human actions that lead to extinction. .

it also expressly authorized the secretaries of commerce and the interior to issue permits for the "taking" of marine mammals for certain purposes , such as scientific research and public display .

under the mmpa , the secretary of commerce , acting through the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs , in the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , also popularly referred to as "noaa fisheries" ) , is responsible for the conservation and management of whales , dolphins , porpoises , seals , and sea lions .

the secretary of the interior , acting through the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , is responsible for walruses , sea otters , polar bears , manatees , and dugongs .

this division of authority derives from agency responsibilities as they existed when the mmpa was enacted .

title ii of the mmpa established an independent marine mammal commission ( mmc ) and its committee of scientific advisors on marine mammals to oversee and recommend actions necessary to meet the requirements of the mmpa .

title iii authorized the international dolphin conservation program .

title iv authorized the marine mammal health and stranding response program .

title v implemented the agreement between the united states and the russian federation on the conservation and management of the alaska - chukotka polar bear population .

prior to passage of the mmpa , states were responsible for managing marine mammals on lands and in waters under their jurisdiction .

the mmpa shifted all marine mammal management authority to the federal government .

it provides , however , that management authority , on a species - by - species basis , could be returned to a state that adopts conservation and management programs consistent with the purposes and policies of the mmpa .

it also provides that the moratorium on taking can be waived by the federal government or states with management authority for specific purposes , if the taking will not disadvantage the affected species or population .

permits may be issued to take or import any marine mammal species , including depleted species , for scientific research or to enhance the survival or recovery of the species or stock .

non - depleted species may be taken or imported for purposes of public display .

the mmpa allows u.s. citizens to apply for and obtain authorization for taking small numbers of mammals incidental to activities other than commercial fishing ( eg , offshore oil and gas exploration and development ) , if the taking would have a negligible impact on any marine mammal species or stock , and if monitoring requirements and other conditions are met .

the mmpa's moratorium on taking does not apply to any resident alaskan indian , aleut , or eskimo who dwells on the coast of the north pacific ( including the bering sea ) or arctic oceans ( including the chukchi and beaufort seas ) , if such taking is for subsistence purposes or for creating and selling authentic native articles of handicrafts and clothing , and is not done wastefully .

however , such taking can be regulated or even prohibited if the secretary determines a stock is depleted .

the mmpa also provides for co - management of marine mammal subsistence use by alaska native groups , under which authority native commissions have been established .

the mmpa also authorizes the taking of marine mammals incidental to commercial fishing operations .

in 1988 , most u.s. commercial fish harvesters were exempted from otherwise applicable regulations and permit requirements for five years , pending development of an improved system to govern the incidental taking of marine mammals in the course of commercial fishing operations .

the taking of marine mammals incidental to the eastern tropical pacific tuna fishery is governed by specific and separate provisions in title iii of the mmpa .

the endangered species act of 1973 ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 , as amended ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1531 , et seq. ) .

provides additional protection for some marine mammal species that have been determined to be threatened or endangered with extinction .

when protective actions are taken under both esa and mmpa authorities , interactions between implementation efforts under these two statutes may increase management complexity and legal uncertainty in dealing with some species , such as the southern sea otter in california .

the 1988 commercial fishing exemption expired at the end of fy1993 , and new provisions were enacted in p.l .

103-238 , which reauthorized the mmpa through fy1999 .

these new provisions indefinitely authorized the taking of marine mammals incidental to commercial fishing operations and provided for ( 1 ) preparing assessments for all marine mammal stocks in waters under u.s. jurisdiction , ( 2 ) developing and implementing take reduction plans for stocks that may be reduced or are being maintained below their optimum sustainable population levels due to interactions with commercial fisheries , and ( 3 ) studying pinniped - fishery interactions .

in addition , the 1994 amendments substantially changed provisions relating to public display of marine mammals , authorized imports of polar bear trophies from canada , authorized the limited lethal removal of pinnipeds , and enacted a general authorization for research involving only low levels of harassment .

the remainder of this report reviews issues that may be raised during discussions on reauthorizing the mmpa .

the major issue categories include commercial fishing interactions with marine mammals , marine mammals in captivity , native americans and marine mammals , permits and authorizations , and program management and administration .

some of these issues could be addressed administratively , in regulations implemented by nmfs , fws , or the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis , department of agriculture ) .

others would require legislative action .

congress has enacted measures to protect marine mammals , including specifically the mmpa .

while the history of the mmpa's implementation includes numerous court challenges to agency interpretation of congressional intent , congress generally has been understanding of the difficulties in providing protection for this specific group of living resources .

the issues discussed in this report set before congress a varied array of concerns .

it is not yet clear which will gain prominence in any comprehensive reauthorization debate .

recent public sentiment , always a strong factor in marine mammal issues , has focused on concerns about noise in the marine environment , enhanced protection for whales , the appropriateness of makah whaling , and humane care for captive animals .

specific interests of native alaskans , fishermen , sport hunters , and animal protection groups may call attention to additional issues .

congressional oversight during the reauthorization process is likely to identify additional issues .

the requirements of the mmpa itself did not expire when the authorization of appropriations expired at the end of fy1999 .

with the delay in enacting a comprehensive reauthorization , congress has separately considered provisions to amend the mmpa on a number of selected issues .

during the 106 th congress , the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans held a general oversight hearing on the marine mammal protection act on june 29 , 1999 .

testimony presented by officials from nmfs , fws , aphis , and the mmc described progress in implementing the 1994 mmpa amendments and outlined possible areas for committee attention during reauthorization .

the same subcommittee held a second oversight hearing on april 6 , 2000 , specifically on the implementation of the 1994 amendments related to the take reduction process , cooperative agreements with alaska native organizations , and co - management of subsistence use of marine mammals by alaska native communities .

no other action was taken on mmpa reauthorization in the 106 th congress .

in the 107 th congress , the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans held a general oversight hearing on october 11 , 2001 , on reauthorizing the marine mammal protection act .

h.r .

4781 was the only reauthorization bill that was introduced ; the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans held a hearing on this bill on june 13 , 2002 , and marked up this measure on july 25 , 2002 .

no further action was taken .

in the 108 th congress , h.r .

2693 and h.r .

3316 would have amended and reauthorized the mmpa through fy2008 .

the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans held a hearing on h.r .

2693 on july 24 , 2003 ; on april 20 , 2004 , the house committee on resources reported ( amended ) this bill ( h.rept .

108-464 ) .

on july 16 , 2003 , the senate commerce subcommittee on oceans , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing on mmpa reauthorization issues .

on august 19 , 2003 , the house resources subcommittee on fisheries conservation , wildlife , and oceans held an oversight field hearing in san diego , california , on the increasing frequency of interactions between marine mammals and humans .

h.r .

5104 would have amended the mmpa and authorized appropriations for the john h. prescott marine mammal rescue assistance grant program through fy2009 ; this measure was reported by the house committee on resources on november 19 , 2004 ( h.rept .

108-787 ) .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

2130 and h.r .

4075 would have extensively amended the mmpa and authorized appropriations for several programs ; the house committee on resources reported h.r .

2130 ( amended ) on july 21 , 2005 ( h.rept .

109-180 ) .

the house passed h.r .

4075 ( amended ) on july 17 , 2006 .

title iv of s. 1224 would have amended the mmpa to encourage development of fishing gear less likely to take marine mammals , expanded fisheries required to participate in the mmpa incidental take program to include recreational fisheries , and authorized appropriations for stock assessments and observer programs ; in addition , title iii ( subtitle c ) directed negotiation of international agreements to better protect cetaceans from commercial fishing gear and authorized a grant program to develop less harmful fishing gear .

section 206 of h.r .

2939 would have transferred management of all marine mammals to noaa .

h.r .

3839 would have amended the mmpa to repeal the long - term goal for reducing to zero the incidental mortality and serious injury of marine mammals in commercial fishing operations , and to modify the goal of take reduction plans for reducing such takings .

h.r .

6241 would have amended the mmpa to authorize taking of california sea lions to reduce their predation on endangered columbia river salmon .

for updated information on legislative activities in the 110 th congress concerning marine mammals , see crs report rl33813 , fishery , aquaculture , and marine mammal legislation in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

two ocean commissions recently released reports relating to marine mammals .

the pew oceans commission report was released june 4 , 2003 , and the u.s. commission on ocean policy's preliminary report was issued on april 20 , 2004 .

marine mammal issues are only one aspect of the comprehensive ocean policy issues discussed in these reports ; the larger context includes governance , education , coastal development , human health , environmental quality , energy resources , and ocean science , among others .

for background on the reports and the larger context of these issues , see crs report rl33603 , ocean commissions: ocean policy review and outlook , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

table 1 summarizes these two reports' recommendations relating to marine mammals .

crs takes no position with respect to either report's recommendations .

