the senate's procedures are not based solely on its standing rules .

rather , the foundations of senate procedure also include the body's standing orders , published precedents , rulemaking statutes , constitutional mandates , committee rules , party conference rules , and informal practices .

various reference sources provide information about how and when these procedural authorities of the senate govern specific parliamentary situations , and together , they establish the framework by which the senate conducts its business .

this report discusses the contents , format , and availability of reference sources that provide information about contemporary procedures in the senate .

the report covers official documents that set forth the senate rules , precedents , or other sources of parliamentary authority , such as the senate manual , riddick's senate procedure , and the rules adopted by senate committees .

the report also discusses publications on procedure from committees and offices of the senate and the rules of the senate's party conferences .

prior to describing the individual parliamentary reference sources , this report reviews some principles of senate parliamentary procedure that are applicable when using and evaluating information from these sources .

the report then covers the senate's official parliamentary reference sources .

these are documents that set forth authoritative statements of senate rules , procedures , and precedents .

senators often cite these official sources when raising a point of order or defending against one .

finally , the report reviews the rules of the party conferences , as well as a number of additional publications of committees and other offices of the senate .

although these resources do not themselves constitute official parliamentary authorities of the senate , they nevertheless provide background information on official parliamentary authorities .

text boxes throughout the report provide information on how to consult a source , or group of sources , with an emphasis on online access .

this report aims to present access points to these reference sources that are relevant for senators and congressional staff and does not present an exhaustive list of websites and other locations where these references can be found .

two appendixes supplement the information on parliamentary reference sources provided throughout the report .

appendix a provides a selected list of crs products on senate procedure .

an overview of the two primary websites through which many of the resources included in this report can be accessed is provided in appendix b .

this report assumes a basic familiarity with senate procedures .

official guidance on senate procedure is available from the office of the senate parliamentarian .

crs staff can also assist with clarifying senate rules and procedures .

the senate applies the regulations set forth in its various parliamentary authorities in accordance with several principles that remain generally applicable across the entire range of parliamentary situations .

among these principles may be listed the following: ( 1 ) senate procedures derive from multiple sources ; ( 2 ) the senate has the constitutional power to make its own rules of procedure ; ( 3 ) senators must often initiate enforcement of their rules ; ( 4 ) the senate conducts much of its business by unanimous consent ; ( 5 ) the senate usually follows its precedents ; and ( 6 ) the senate adheres to many informal practices .

each of these principles is discussed below .

the senate manual compiles in a single document many of the chief official parliamentary authorities of the senate .

the publication , prepared under the auspices of the senate committee on rules and administration , appears periodically in a new edition as a senate document .

the current edition , which was issued in the 113 th congress , contains the text of the following parliamentary authorities ( the titles given are those found in the manual ) : standing rules of the senate ; nonstatutory standing orders not embraced in the rules , and resolutions affecting the business of the senate ; rules for regulation of the senate wing of the u.s. capitol and senate office buildings ; rules of procedure and practice in the senate when sitting on impeachment trials ; cleaves' manual of the law and practice in regard to conferences and conference reports ; general and permanent laws relating to the u.s. senate ; and constitution of the united states of america .

the following sections of this part of the report discuss each of these authorities in more detail .

the manual contains a general table of contents and an index .

some of the respective components in the manual have their own tables of contents and indices that provide additional details about that source .

individual provisions of each procedural authority are assigned section numbers that run throughout the manual in a single sequence and always appear in bold type .

the section numbers assigned to the standing rules correspond to the numbers of the rules themselves .

for example , paragraph 2 of senate rule xxii , which sets forth the cloture rule , is found at section 22.2 of the manual .

the indices to the manual direct readers to these section numbers .

the indices indicate , for example , that the motion to adjourn is covered in manual sections 6.4 , 9 , and 22.1 .

for this reason , the document is cited by section number rather than page number .

the rules of the conferences of the two parties in the senate are not adopted by the senate itself , and accordingly , they cannot be enforced on the senate floor .

conference rules may nevertheless affect proceedings of the senate , for they may cover topics such as the selection of party leaders , meetings of the conference , and limitations on committee assignments for conference members .

the senate republican conference adopted rules for the 116 th congress that are available online .

some publications prepared by committees and offices of the senate provide valuable information about senate parliamentary procedure and practices .

while these publications are not official parliamentary reference sources , they often make reference to official sources such as the senate's standing rules and published precedents .

senators and their staff may access , via webster ( which is not available to the public ) , the electronic senate precedents , a catalog of recent precedents compiled by the office of the parliamentarian .

these unofficial documents , provided by the office of the secretary of the senate , are updated periodically to reflect precedents on topics such as cloture and germaneness of amendments that were established after the publication of riddick's senate procedure ( 1992 ) .

a compendium of laws and rules of the congressional budget process , a print of the house committee on the budget , presents the text of the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 , the gramm - rudman - hollings act , and additional information related to the budget making process , such as house and senate rules affecting the budget process .

although this document was printed by the house budget committee , it presents valuable information related to the budgetary process in the senate .

senate cloture rule , a print prepared for the senate committee on rules and administration by crs , was last issued during the 112 th congress ( 2011-12 ) .

the print covers the rule's history and application through its publication and may be useful to those wanting a more detailed knowledge of the cloture rule .

significantly , however , this print does not capture precedents established during the 113 th ( 2013-14 ) and 115 th ( 2017-18 ) congresses that changed the vote thresholds for invoking cloture on various presidential nominations or the change to the post - cloture debate time established during the 116 th congress .

treaties and other international agreements: the role of the united states senate , was prepared as a print for the senate committee on foreign relations by crs .

the print provides detailed information about the senate's advice and consent role , covers the procedures that govern all stages of senate consideration of treaties and international agreements , and discusses congressional oversight of treaties and other international agreements .

the latest edition ( s.prt .

106-71 ) appeared in the 106 th congress .

enactment of a law presents a concise summary of the legislative process .

this document , prepared by robert b. dove , former parliamentarian of the senate , explains senate floor procedures and the functions of the various senate officials , such as the secretary of the senate , the sergeant at arms , and the senate parliamentarian .

how our laws are made , first published in 1953 by the house committee on the judiciary , provides a summary of the legislative process from the drafting of legislation to final approval and presidential action .

while this document focuses on house procedures , it includes a review of senate committee and floor procedures prepared by the office of the parliamentarian of the senate .

although the document is intended for nonspecialists , its summary descriptions of house procedures serve as a useful reference source .

appendix a .

selected crs products on senate procedure most of these reports are available to congressional staff through the crs home page at http: / / www.crs.gov .

these reports may also be accessed through the congressional process , administration , and elections section of the crs website at https: / / www.crs.gov / iap / congressional - process - administration - and - elections .

crs report 98-853 , the amending process in the senate , by christopher m. davis .

crs report r41003 , amendments between the houses: procedural options and effects , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report rl30862 , the budget reconciliation process: the senate's "byrd rule , " by bill heniff jr. crs report 96-708 , conference committee and related procedures: an introduction , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report rl30360 , filibusters and cloture in the senate , by valerie heitshusen and richard s. beth .

crs report 98-865 , flow of business: a typical day on the senate floor , by christopher m. davis .

crs report r43563 , "holds" in the senate , by mark j. oleszek .

crs report rs20668 , how measures are brought to the senate floor: a brief introduction , by christopher m. davis .

crs report 98-425 , invoking cloture in the senate , by christopher m. davis .

crs report 96-548 , the legislative process on the senate floor: an introduction , by valerie heitshusen .

crs report 98-306 , points of order , rulings , and appeals in the senate , by valerie heitshusen .

crs report r42929 , procedures for considering changes in senate rules , by richard s. beth .

crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report rl33939 , the rise of senate unanimous consent agreements , by walter j. oleszek .

crs report rl31980 , senate consideration of presidential nominations: committee and floor procedure , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report 98-308 , senate legislative procedures: published sources of information , by christopher m. davis .

crs report 98-311 , senate rules affecting committees , by valerie heitshusen .

crs report 96-452 , voting and quorum procedures in the senate , coordinated by elizabeth rybicki .

appendix b. senate parliamentary reference information available online the vast majority of the referenced links found throughout this report can be accessed through one of two "gateway" websites maintained by legislative branch organizations: congress.gov ( a website of the library of congress ) and govinfo.gov ( a website of gpo ) .

each of these sites provides an entry point for research into senate procedures .

the websites provided for the documents discussed in this report are current as of the report's publication date .

congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov congress.gov is the official website for u.s. federal legislative information .

the site is designed to provide access to accurate , timely , and complete legislative information for members of congress , legislative agencies , and the public .

congress.gov also contains information on topics such as nominations , public laws , communications , and treaties .

it is presented by the library of congress using data from the office of the clerk of the u.s. house of representatives , the office of the secretary of the senate , gpo , congressional budget office , and crs .

govinfo.gov https: / / www.govinfo.gov / govinfo.gov is a service of the gpo .

the website provides public access to official publications of the congress .

