one - minute speeches ( commonly called "one minutes" ) provide one of the few opportunities for non - legislative debate in the house , where debate is almost always confined to the pending legislative business .

recognition for one - minute speeches is the prerogative of the speaker .

a period for one minutes usually takes place at the beginning of the legislative day after the daily prayer , the pledge of allegiance , and approval of the previous day's journal .

during this time , representatives ask unanimous consent to address the house for one minute on a topic of their choice .

in addition , one minutes are often permitted after legislative business ends but before special order speeches begin .

this report examines current house practices governing recognition for one - minute speeches , the delivery of one minutes , and their insertion in the congressional record .

the report also discusses various uses of one minutes and reform proposals .

one - minute speeches are not provided for in the rules of the house .

instead , they have evolved as a unanimous consent practice of the chamber .

members must ask unanimous consent to address the house for one minute ( for more information , see " delivering one - minute speeches ," below ) .

during one - minute speeches , members must abide by the rules of the house , the chamber's precedents , and the "speaker's announced policies," in that order .

relevant house rules include those governing debate , decorum , and the speaker's power of recognition .

house precedents discuss how the chamber has interpreted and applied its rules .

under house precedents , for example , individual members can be recognized for a one - minute speech only once each legislative day .

the term speaker's announced policies refers to the speaker's policies on certain aspects of house procedure , such as decorum in debate , the conduct of electronic votes , and recognition for one minutes and special orders .

these policies are usually announced on the opening day of a new congress .

the speaker's current policies on recognition for one minutes are those that were first announced on august 8 , 1984 .

these policies have been followed in each succeeding congress .

recognition for one - minute speeches is the prerogative of the speaker .

under his power of recognition ( house rule xvii , clause 2 ) , the speaker decides when he will entertain unanimous consent requests to address the house for one minute , and how many one - minute speeches he will allow .

according to the speaker's announced policies , the chair "reserves the right to limit one - minute speeches to a certain period of time or to a special place in the program on any given day , with notice to the leadership. .

when pressing legislative business is before the house , the speaker may decide to limit the number of one - minute speeches , to postpone one minutes until after legislative business , or to forego them altogether .

a period for one - minute speeches ( hereinafter referred to as "the one - minute speech period" ) usually takes place at the beginning of each legislative day after the daily prayer , the pledge of allegiance , and approval of the previous day's journal .

the speaker determines the number of one minutes permitted during this period .

this number varies from day to day .

the speaker might allow an unlimited number of speeches one day and then limit the number the following day ( eg , allow only 10 one minutes on each side of the aisle ) .

the majority and minority leadership usually receive advance notification of any limitations .

a majority party representative appointed as "speaker pro tempore " usually presides in the chair during the one - minute speech period .

in recent practice , the chair often announces how many one minutes will be allowed before the one - minute speech period begins .

representatives seeking recognition for one minutes sit in the first row on their party's side of the chamber .

from the chair's vantage point , republican members sit on the left side of the chamber and democratic members on the right side .

in recognizing members for one minutes , the chair observes the following announced policies of the speaker: the chair will alternate recognition for one - minute speeches between majority and minority members , in the order in which they seek recognition in the well under present practice from the chair's right to the chair's left , with possible exceptions for members of the leadership and members having business requests .

because the chair moves from his right to left in recognizing members , the republican member seated closest to the center aisle is recognized first on the republican side , and the democratic member seated closest to the speaker's lobby is recognized first on the democratic side .

recognition alternates from majority to minority throughout the period for one minutes .

in addition to the one - minute speech period , members can usually ask unanimous consent to deliver a one minute after legislative business ends but before special order speeches begin .

members do not have to reserve one - minute speeches in advance through their party's leadership .

nevertheless , the party leadership communication arms — known as the "democratic message group" and the "republican theme team" — sometimes coordinate party members to deliver one minutes on the issue designated as the party's daily message .

on days when the number of one - minute speeches is limited , these party members usually receive priority seating for recognition purposes ( i.e. , on the right side of the party's first row ) .

the daily message usually presents the party's views on specific legislation before the house or its position on a policy or political issue .

when recognized by the chair , individual members ask unanimous consent to address the house for one minute and to revise and extend their remarks .

permission is almost always granted .

members speak from the well of the chamber .

they are limited to one minute and cannot ask unanimous consent for additional time .

when the chair announces that one minute has expired , the member can finish the sentence underway but must then stop speaking .

the chair's calculation of time consumed during a one - minute speech "is not subject to challenge on a point of order. .

when members cannot finish their remarks in one minute , the permission to extend allows them to complete their speech in writing in the congressional record .

the undelivered portion of their speech appears in a distinctive typeface .

permission to extend also authorizes members to insert extraneous material such as a newspaper article or a constituent letter during a one - minute speech .

the inserted material appears in a distinctive typeface .

joint committee on printing regulations for publication of the congressional record provide that "any extraneous matter included in any statement by a member" be printed in the "extensions of remarks" section of the congressional record but noted in the members' remarks .

this requirement is not always observed .

a review of 10 one minutes containing extraneous matter from january to july 1997 found that in each case the extraneous matter was printed in the house section ( not in the "extensions of remarks" ) of the congressional record along with the one - minute speech .

the joint committee on printing's regulations also require that one - minute speeches longer than 300 words "delivered during the morning business" ( i.e. , during the one - minute speech period at the start of the day ) be printed "following the business of the day. .

in practice , these one minutes usually appear in the house section of the congressional record immediately before the five - minute special orders .

instead of delivering a one - minute speech on the house floor , a member may insert the speech in the house section of the congressional record alongside the one minutes delivered on the floor that day .

the representative asks unanimous consent to insert the one - minute speech in the congressional record and yields back his time .

the inserted speech is published in a distinctive typeface .

the practical difference between inserting and delivering a one - minute speech is the speech's audience .

inserted one minutes are available to readers of the hard copy and online versions of the congressional record .

by contrast , delivered one minutes reach a larger audience through c - span's televised coverage of house floor proceedings .

the unrestricted content and short length of one - minute speeches make them an attractive communication tool for individual members and the party leadership .

in addition , the usual position of one minutes at the start of day means they can be covered by broadcast news organizations in time for evening news programs .

individual members often use one minutes to share information with colleagues such as announcing a new bill they have introduced or explaining a floor amendment they will offer later that day .

in practice , these one minutes serve as a visual "dear colleague" letter .

representatives also use one - minute speeches to deliver eulogies and tributes concerning individuals and organizations in their congressional district .

one minutes also provide members with an opportunity to express their views on bills , policy issues , and local , national , and international events .

for junior members , one - minute speeches provide a valuable debate opportunity .

representative chabot highlighted this point in a 105 th congress one - minute speech on the importance of one minutes: "as my colleagues know , a freshman or sophomore member might sit at a committee meeting for two hours before being able to pose one question to a witness .

he or she , if lucky , might get 30 seconds to debate a pending bill on the floor .

one - minute speeches give these members and the people they represent back home a chance to be heard. .

some representatives have made one - minute speeches a regular part of their media and communication strategy .

by delivering one minutes , they reach a national audience of c - span television viewers and webcast users , including constituents .

some members also disseminate their one - minute speeches through other channels , such as mailing constituents a copy of the speech printed in congressional record or providing local news organizations with a video press release .

as mentioned earlier , the democratic message group and the republican theme team sometimes use one - minute speeches as a vehicle for transmitting the party's daily message .

the one - minute speech period provides a forum where different members of the party can speak on the designated theme to a national audience .

this use of one minutes has been criticized by some representatives and congressional observers .

during a 104 th congress special order speech on civility in the house , one member stated that one minutes in the morning had "become theme - team efforts just to excite and aggravate , to get sound bites for television , rather than a healthy discourse on the issues. .

breaches in decorum during one - minute speeches in the 104 th and 105 th congresses have prompted some reform proposals that range from eliminating one minutes to postponing them until the completion of legislative business .

these proposals have been advanced in letters to the speaker , in testimony at congressional hearings , and in the civility in the house of representatives report that was prepared for the march 1997 bipartisan retreat of house members .

the 1999 report updated the data for the 105 th congress but did not contain recommendations .

in august 1996 , representative archer and former representative beilenson sent a letter to the speaker urging him to stop recognizing members for one - minute speeches at the start of the day .

signed by a bipartisan group of 50 members , the letter proposed that one minutes only be permitted after the completion of legislative business .

the letter noted that one minutes had increasingly become "a series of sound - bite assaults often prepared not by members themselves , but by republican and democratic political staff who have found this format to be highly conducive to the kinds of attacks that used to be reserved for campaign commercials. .

postponing one minutes until after legislative business , the letter's signatories argued , would reduce this manner of using one minutes .

on september 5 , 1996 , the proposal in the letter was discussed at a joint hearing of the two subcommittees of the house rules committee .

representative archer testified that "partisan and poisonous 1-minute speeches unfavorably set the tone for our legislative business... .

if we move 1-minutes to the conclusion of the day , members will be less inclined to focus on the negative , politically charged messages , and 1-minutes would once again turn to their original positive intent. .

in separate testimony , representative beilenson noted that one - minute speeches "often contain purposefully written , catchy phrases that make good sound bites. .

moving one minutes to the end of the day , he argued , would "negate their usefulness to news operations" and remove the incentive to envelop one - minute speeches in sound bites .

at the start of the 105 th congress , a letter advancing the same reform proposal was sent to the speaker and to the minority leader by representatives archer and hamilton .

a bipartisan group of 59 members signed the letter .

a similar letter was circulated in the 106 th congress .

civility in the house of representatives ( hereinafter referred to as civility ) examined the public's perception of rising incivility in the house and suggested ways to reduce both this perception and actual breaches in decorum .

the report point out that incivility was more likely to take place during one - minute and special order speeches than during other periods of house floor proceedings .

civility recommended that the house either eliminate one - minute speeches or move these speeches to another time of the day ( i.e. , to a time other than the start of the day ) .

holding one minutes in the morning , the report argued , "can set a hostile tone for debate. .

the report noted the "advent of theme teams" and the concerns that some members have about using one minutes to communicate a party's daily message .

external factors such as "the rise of sound - bite politics" and the incentive of media coverage were also cited as encouraging partisan attacks and breaches of decorum during house floor debate .

the house rules committee's subcommittee on rules and organization of the house held hearings on april 17 , 1997 , and may 1 , 1997 , to discuss issues raised in civility .

dr. kathleen hall jamieson , author of civility and dean of the annenberg school for communication at the university of pennsylvania , testified along with several other congressional experts .

by coincidence , the april 17 hearing was interrupted by a house vote on the question of striking unparliamentary words spoken in a one - minute speech .

witnesses and subcommittee members referred to this incident throughout the may 1 hearing .

civility's recommendation that one - minute speeches be either eliminated or postponed until after legislative business was examined at both hearings .

two alternative recommendations were advanced in testimony .

first , the idea of holding one - minute speeches only once a week was proposed .

second , it was recommended that the speaker allow one - minute speeches of a "factual nature" in the morning and those of a "political nature" after the completion of legislative business .

both hearings explored reinstating the so - called oxford - style debates — another civility recommendation — as a supplementary reform to changing house practices for one minutes .

in testimony on april 17 , 1997 , dr. jamieson recommended that "if we move or eliminate one - minute speeches , we conventionalize oxford debates as an additional forum available .

in oxford debate , strong partisanship would be the rule , but in an environment in which the debate structure increases the likelihood that one arbitrates evidence and doesn't engage in personalities. .

suggestions for improving future oxford - style debates , such as giving these debates a different name and allowing more members to participate in them , were offered by witnesses at both hearings .

the house rules committee held hearings on the 1999 report on april 29 , 1999 .

