on october 6 , conferees reached agreement on the fy2000 defenseappropriations bill , h.r .

2561 , and the conference report was filed onoctober 8 .

the house approved the conference agreement by a vote of 372-55 onoctober 13 , and the senate approved it by a vote of 87-11 on october 14 , and thepresident signed the bill into law , p.l .

106-79 , on october 25 .

the key issue in theconference concerned funding for the f - 22 fighter .

the conference agreementprovides a total of $2.522 billion for the program , including $1.222 billion for r&d,$1 billion for acquisition of test aircraft , and $300 million in advance fy2001appropriations for program termination liability .

the total amount is about $500million below the request ( $1.85 billion in procurement and $1.2 billion in r&d ) .

the conference agreement also prohibits award of an initial low - rate productioncontract unless certain testing is successfully completed .

congress provides funding for national defense programs in several annualappropriations measures , the largest of which is the defense appropriations bill .

congress also acts every year on a national defense authorization bill , whichauthorizes programs funded in all of the regular appropriations measures .

theauthorization bill addresses defense programs in almost precisely the same level ofdetail as the defense - related appropriations , and congressional debate about majordefense policy and funding issues usually occurs mainly in action on theauthorization .

because the defense authorization and appropriations bills are soclosely related , this report tracks congressional action on both measures .

the annual defense appropriations bill provides funds for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) - - including pay and benefits of militarypersonnel , operation and maintenance of weapons and facilities , weaponsprocurement , and research and development - - and for other purposes .

most of thefunding in the bill is for programs administered by the department of defense,though the bill also provides ( 1 ) relatively small , unclassified amounts for the centralintelligence agency retirement fund and intelligence community management , ( 2 ) classified amounts for national foreign intelligence activities administered by the ciaand by other agencies as well as by dod , and ( 3 ) very small amounts for some otheragencies .

five other appropriations bills also provide funds for national defenseactivities of dod and other agencies including: the military construction appropriations bill , which finances construction of military facilities and construction and operation of military familyhousing , all administered by dod ; the energy and water development appropriations bill , which funds atomic energy defense activities administered by the department ofenergy ; the va - hud - independent agencies appropriations bill , which finances civil defense activities administered by the federal emergency managementagency and activities of the selective service system ; the commerce - justice - state appropriations bill , which funds national security - related activities of the fbi ; and the transportation appropriations bill , which funds some defense - related activities of the coast guard .

the administration's fy2000 budget includes $280.8 billion for the national defense budget function , of which $262.9 billion is requested in the defense appropriationsbill .

congressional action on defense - related legislation began very early this year ; on february 24 , the senate approved s. 4 , a bill to provide pay raisesand improve benefits for military personnel ; in march both the senate and the houseapproved bills on missile defense policy ; and on april 15 , both the house and thesenate approved a conference agreement on the annual congressional budgetresolution .

on may 18 , the house , and on may 20 , the senate , approvedsupplemental appropriations for fy1999 .

by the beginning of the august recess,both houses had completed floor action on the annual defense authorization andappropriations bills , and the president has now signed both the defense authorizationbill , s. 1059 , and the defense appropriations bill , h.r .

2561 , into law .

the status of major legislation to date is as follows: military pay and benefits: on february 24 , by a vote of 91-8 , the senate passed s. 4 , a bill to provide pay raises and improve benefitsfor members of the armed forces .

the provisions of s. 4 were finallyaddressed in action on the fy2000 defense authorization .

missile defense policy: on march 17 , by a vote of 97-3 , the senate approved s. 257 , the "cochran - inouye national missile defenseact of 1999," a bill calling for deployment of a nationwide missile defense systemas soon as technologically feasible .

on march 18 , by a vote of 317-105 , the houseapproved h.r .

4 , a bill declaring it the policy of the united states todeploy a nationwide missile defense .

on may 18 , the senate took up h.r .

4 and substituted the text of s. 257 .

on may 20 , bya vote of 345-17 the house approved the senate version , and the president signed thebill into law , p.l .

106-38 , on july 22 .

supplemental appropriations for fy1999: on march 23 , the senate approved a bill , s. 544 , providing supplemental appropriationsfor fy1999 , including funds to respond to damage caused by hurricane mitch andhurricane georges and aid to jordan .

the house approved its version of the bill , h.r .

1141 , on march 24 .

on may 6 , the house approved h.r .

1664 , a second emergency supplemental appropriations bill toprovide funds for military operations in yugoslavia and for some other purposes.subsequently , senate and house conferees folded kosovo - related funding into h.r .

1141 and reported a conference agreement on may 13 .

 ( 1 ) the houseapproved the conference report on may 18 and the senate on may 20 , and thepresident signed the bill into law , p.l .

106-31 , on may 21 .

h.r .

1141 includes funds for a military pay raise and benefit increases and for defense readinessthat normally would be included in the regular fy2000 defense appropriationsbill .

fy2000 concurrent budget resolution: on march 24 , both the house and the senate approved versions of the fy2000 congressional budgetresolution - - h.con.res .

68 in the house and s.con.res .

20 in the senate .

on april 15 , both chambers approved a conference report on h.con.res .

68 .

defense authorization bill: on may 13 the senate armed services committee approved its version of the fy2000 defense authorization bill , s. 1059 , and the senate approved the bill by a vote of 92-3 on may 27 .

on may 19 , the house armed services committee approved its version of thefy2000 defense authorization bill , h.r .

1401 , and the house approvedthe bill by a vote of 365-38 on june 10 .

a conference agreement was reported on s. 1059 on august 5 .

the house approved the report by a vote of375-45 on september 15 , and the senate concurred by a vote of 93-5 on september22 .

the president signed the bill into law ( p.l .

106-65 ) on october5 .

defense appropriations bill: on may 25 , the senate appropriations committee approved its version of the fy2000 defenseappropriations bill , s. 1122 , and the senate approved the bill by a voteof 93-4 on june 8 .

on july 16 , the house appropriations committee approved itsversion of the bill , h.r .

2561 , and the house passed it by a vote of379-45 on july 22 .

a conference report was filed on october 8 .

the houseapproved the agreement by a vote of 372-55 on october 13 , and the senate approvedit by a vote of 87-11 on october 14 .

the president signed the bill into law , p.l.106-79 , on october 25 .

302 ( b ) allocations: on may 19 , the house appropriations committee approved its initial allocation of funds to the 13 subcommittees .

theallocations provided $270.292 billion in budget authority and $261.73 billion inoutlays to the defense subcommittee , a total consistent with the amounts allocated tothe national defense budget function in the budget resolution .

these allocations weresubsequently reduced , however , in order to allocate somewhat more money tonon - defense appropriations bills .

on may 25 , the senate appropriations committeeapproved its initial allocations , providing $265.193 billion in budget authority and$253.104 billion in outlays for the defense subcommittee .

these allocations , too,were later reduced - - allocations announced on september 15 provide $263.254billion in budget authority and $254.409 billion in outlays for defense .

a reallocationon september 28 further reduced the defense level to $255.167 billion in budgetauthority and $249.727 in outlays , but the difference has been made up bydesignating some funds in the bill as "emergency appropriations" not subject to capson total spending .

table 1 .

status of fy2000 defense appropriation .

in its february budget , the administration requested $280.8 billion ( $280.5billion as reestimated by the congressional budget office ) in new budget authorityfor national defense in fy2000 .

the department of defense ( dod ) projects modestgrowth in defense spending in following years .

compared to long - term defensedepartment projections last year , the proposal represented a significant increase infunding - - as the administration calculates it , the plan reflects an increase of $12.6billion in budget authority for defense programs in fy2000 and a total increase of$112 billion over the six - year fy2000-2005 period .

the main issue in congress washow to fit defense increases within overall federal budget constraints .

on april 15 , both the house and the senate approved a conference agreement on the fy2000 congressional budget resolution - - compared to the administrationrequest , the resolution provided an increase of $8.3 billion in budget authority fornational defense .

the conference agreement on the defense authorization billprovides $288.8 billion in budget authority , at the budget resolution level .

thehouse and senate versions of the defense appropriations bill , however , did not quitereach the budget resolution level , and the senate version was considerably lower thanthe house .

the senate - passed appropriations bill used about $4.9 billion of fundsprovided in the kosovo supplemental appropriations bill as an offset for defenseincreases and provided a total of $264.7 billion , $1.4 billion above the request .

[note:the defense appropriations bills are about $20 billion below the amount in theauthorization bills because they do not include military construction and departmentof energy defense - related activities. .

the house - passed bill , in contrast , provided$268.7 billion in new budget authority for the defense department and otheragencies .

the amount available to dod and other agencies in the house bill was$5.4 billion above the request and $4.0 billion above the senate level .

the appropriations conference agreement reported on october 8 provides $267.8 billion , $1 billion below the house level and $4.5 billion above the request .

of the total , $7.2 billion is provided as emergency appropriations , which will raisethe cap on total fy2000 discretionary funding by that amount .

in addition , $2.6billion of the total is considered to be offset by receipts from auctioning parts of theelectromagnetic spectrum .

table 2 provides an overview of funding in each of themajor defense bills for programs included in the defense appropriations measures .

in addition to debate about the level of defense spending , several other issues arose early in the session , including how much to increase military pay and benefits ; whether to require deployment of a nationwide missile defense ; and whether to approve military operations against yugoslavia andhow much money to provide for kosovo - related operations .

as action on annual defense authorization and appropriations bills progressed , several other issues came onto the agenda , including the following: whether to approve one or more additional rounds of military base closures: neither the house nor the senate versions of the defense authorizationbill approve new base closures .

whether to limit peacekeeping operations in kosovo and haiti: while operations against yugoslavia have been funded through the end of fy1999,future costs have not been addressed .

the house armed services committee ( hasc ) version of the authorization included a controversial measure to prohibit usefunds authorized in the bill for operations in kosovo , but that provision was removedin a floor vote after the white house said that it would seek supplementalappropriations to support a peacekeeping mission .

the house also voted to end theu.s .

peacekeeping mission in haiti , and the authorization conference agreementincludes that provision .

how to structure theater missile defense ( tmd ) programs: the authorization conference agreement rejects an administration plan to combinefuture funding for high - altitude theater missile defense programs - - the navy theaterwide program and the ground - based theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) system .

table 2: fy2000 defense authorization and appropriations by appropriations title ( budget authority in millionsof dollars ) sources : h.rept .

106-162 ; s.rept .

106-50 ; h.rept .

106-244 ; s.rept .

106-53 ; house appropriations committee ; crs calculations from h.rept .

106-301 ; crs calculations from h.rept .

106-371 ; congressional record , oct. 13 , 1999 , july 29 , 1999 , and september 27,1999 .

how to allocate additional funds for major weapons programs: all of the defense bills add money for weapons procurement and r&d .

most of thecongressional additions to the administration request are for programs identified inunfunded priorities lists from each of the services .

the senate appropriations bill,however , also added funds for four f - 15 aircraft .

the house appropriationscommittee rejected the administration request for $1.9 billion for f - 22 fighteraircraft procurement and allocated the money to several areas , including additionalf - 15 and f - 16 aircraft procurement .

the appropriations conference agreement,however , restored most of the f - 22 funding .

how to address perceived shortfalls in military readiness: the administration's proposed pay and benefits increases were designed to strengthenreadiness by improving personnel recruitment and retention .

congress added to thepay and benefits increases , and also added money for operation and maintenance ( o&m ) accounts most directly contributing to short - term readiness .

the kosovosupplemental appropriations bill added about $3.1 billion for o&m , and the fy2000authorization conference agreement sets aside $1.6 billion in additional funds .

theappropriations conference agreement , however , adds just $1.1 billion for o&m andthen reduces the total by $1.5 billion to offset amounts in the kosovo supplementalappropriations bill .

a more far - reaching issue is whether improved pay and benefitsand added o&m funds get at the root causes of perceivedproblems .

whether to restructure the cooperative threat reduction program with states of the former soviet union: the house - passed defenseauthorization bill reduced requested funding for chemical weapons demilitarizationand increased funds for some nuclear weapons projects .

the authorization andappropriations conference agreements follow suit .

strategic nuclear force levels: the sasc version of the authorization included a provision allowing a reduction in the number of deployedtrident submarine from 14 to 18 , but the bill also continued a prohibition onreductions of other systems until russia ratifies the start ii treaty .

the senaterejected a floor amendment by senator kerrey to repeal the restriction .

theauthorization conference agreement includes a compromise that may allowreductions in trident submarine deployment .

how to coordinate defenses against terrorism and other emerging threats: sasc established a new account in the authorization bill tocoordinate funding to cope with terrorism and other emerging threats and increasedfunding .

the authorization conference agreement , however , does not establish aseparate account .

social issues: both the house and the senate rejected amendments to the authorization bill to allow privately funded abortions for dodpersonnel at u.s. military health facilities abroad .

china policy / doe security: following the release of the report of the house select committee on u.s. national security and military / commercialconcerns with the people's republic of china , chaired by rep. cox , both the houseand the senate added provisions to their versions of the defense authorization tobolster security at department of energy ( doe ) labs and to further regulate relationswith china .

the authorization conference agreement went further , establishing anindependent organization within doe , called the national nuclear securityadministration ( nssa ) , to oversee security .

energy secretary bill richardsoninitially objected to this measure and said that he might recommend that the bill bevetoed .

subsequently , the president signed the bill into law but also designated thedoe secretary as head of the nssa .

most recently , secretary richardson haspromised that the administration will nominate a separate director of theorganization .

the following sections review the defense budget debate and then discuss major defense policy issues at more length .

 table a1 .

defense appropriations , fy1996 tofy2000 ( budget authority in billions of current year dollars ) a sources: office of management and budget , budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2000 , feb. 1999 , and prior years ; house appropriationscommittee for latest fy1999 estimate .

a .

these figures represent current year dollars , exclude permanent budget authoritiesand contract authority , and reflect subsequent rescissions and transfers .

table a2: congressional action on major weapons programs: fy2000 authorization andappropriations ( amounts in millions of dollars ) * notes : all amounts exclude initial spares and military construction .

for ballistic missiledefense , the military construction requestis $1.4 million , which is often reported as part of the total elsewhere .

for a full breakdown of ballistic missiledefense funding , see table 7 above .

table a3: national defense budget function byappropriations title under administration projections ( budgetauthority , current year dollars in billions ) source : fy1999-2004 from office of management and budget , historical tables: budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2000 , feb. 1999 ; fy2005 fromdepartment of defense .

table a4: congressional action on defense authorization by title ( budget authority in millions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

106-162 ; s.rept .

106-50 ; h.rept .

106-301 .

*notes: request reflects the congressional budget office reestimate of the administration proposal .

