the national security council ( nsc ) has been an integral part of u.s. national security policymaking since 1947 .

of the various organizations in the executive office of the president that have been concerned with national security matters , the nsc is the most important and the only one established by statute .

the nsc lies at the heart of the national security apparatus , being the highest coordinative and advisory body within the government in this area aside from the president's cabinet .

the cabinet has no statutory role , but the nsc does .

this study reviews the organizational history of the nsc and other related components of the executive office and their changing role in the national security policy process .

it is intended to provide information on the nsc's development as well as subsequent usage .

this study is not intended to be a comprehensive organizational history of all components of the national security policy process nor of the process itself as a whole .

moreover , the high sensitivity and security classification of the nsc's work and organization limit available sources .

it is also important to keep in mind the distinction between the nsc's statutory membership ( i.e. , the president , vice president , secretary of state , secretary of defense , and secretary of energy ) and its staff ( i.e. , the national security adviser and his assistants ) .

these two groups have very different roles and levels of influence .

largely because of the major influence in policymaking exerted by kissinger and brzezinski , the position of national security adviser has emerged as a central one .

brzezinski was even accorded cabinet status — the only national security adviser to be thus designated .

some observers over the years have argued that the position should be subject to senate confirmation and that the national security adviser should be available to testify before congressional committees as are officials from other government departments and agencies .

others argue that a president is entitled to confidential advice from his immediate staff .

they further suggest that making the position subject to confirmation would create confusion in the eyes of foreign observers as to which u.s. officials speak authoritatively on national security policy .

this latter argument is arguably undercut , however , by the practice of some recent national security advisers of appearing on television news programs .

national security advisers have come from various professions ; not all have had extensive experience in foreign and defense policy .

the report of the committees investigating the iran - contra affair recommended that the national security adviser not be a military officer on active duty , although no rationale was given for this recommendation .

most nsc staff members over the years have been career military officers , foreign service officers , or civil servants with backgrounds in foreign policy and defense issues .

a considerable number have been detailed to the nsc staff from various federal agencies , which continue to pay their salaries .

although occasionally criticized as allowing the expansion of the white house staff beyond congressional authorization ; nonetheless , the practice has continued with annual reports of the number of personnel involved being made to appropriations committees .

beginning with the kennedy administration , a concerted effort was made to bring outside experts into the nsc staff in order to inject fresh perspectives and new ideas into the policymaking process .

this effort has been continued to varying extents by successive administrations .

henry kissinger made a particular effort to hire academic experts , although some would eventually resign and become bitter critics .

the reagan nsc was occasionally criticized for filling nsc staff positions with political activists .

most of the nsc staff positions in the george h. w. bush administration were filled with government officials .

anthony lake , president clinton's first national security adviser , argues that the nsc staff should be made up of as many career officials as possible , with as much carryover between administrations as can be managed .

its experts should be good ( but not necessarily gray ) bureaucrats who know how to get things done and how to fight for their views , and who are serving the national interest more than the political interests of their president .

he cautioned that: a political appointee whose main credential is work on national security issues in political campaigns will have learned to think about national security issues in a partisan context .

the effect of his or her advice is likely to be to lengthen the period of time during which a president , at the outset of a term , tries to make policy on the basis of campaign rhetoric rather than international reality .

the most comprehensive source concerning the genesis and development of the nsc through 1960 is contained in a collection of hearings , studies , reports and recommendations complied by senator henry m. jackson and published as u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on government operations .

subcommittee on national policy machinery .

organizing for national security , 3 vols .

86 th and 87 th congress .

washington , government printing office .

[1961] .

presidential memoirs are also valuable .

other useful sources are: anderson , dillon .

"the president and national security. .

atlantic monthly , january 1966 .

bock , joseph g. "the national security assistant and the white house staff: national security policy decisionmaking and domestic political considerations , 1947-1984. .

presidential studies quarterly , spring 1986 .

pp .

258-279 .

bowie , robert r. and richard h. immerman .

waging peace: how eisenhower shaped an enduring cold war strategy .

new york: oxford university press.1998 .

brown , cody m. the national security council: a legal history of the president's most powerful advisers .

washington: project for national security reform.2008 .

brzezinski , zbigniew .

power and principle: memoirs of the national security adviser , 1977-1981 .

new york: farrar , straus , giroux .

1983 .

 — — "the nsc's midlife crisis" .

foreign policy , winter 1987-1988 .

pp .

80-99 .

bock , joseph g. , and clarke , duncan l. "the national security assistant and the white house staff: national security policy decisionmaking and domestic political considerations , 1947-1984. .

political science quarterly , spring 1986 .

pp .

258-279 .

brown , cody m. the national security council: a legal history of the president's most powerful advisers .

washington: project for national security reform .

2008 .

bumiller , elisabeth .

condoleezza rice: an american life: a biography .

new york: random house .

2007 .

burke , john p. honest broker: the national security advisor and presidential decision making .

college station , tx: texas a & m university press .

2009 .

caraley , demetrios .

the politics of military unification .

new york: columbia university press .

[1966] .

clark , keith c. , and laurence s. legere , eds .

"the president and the management of national security" .

report for the institute for defense analyses .

new york: praeger .

[1966] .

see especially pp .

55-114 .

commission on the organization of the executive branch of the government .

national security organization .

washington: government printing office .

[1949] .

commission on the organization of the government for the conduct of foreign policy .

report .

washington: government printing office .

[1975] .

cutler , robert .

no time for rest .

boston: little , brown .

1966 .

 — — "the development of the national security council" .

foreign affairs , april 1956 .

pp .

441-58 .

daalder , ivo h. , and destler , i.m .

in the shadow of the oval office: profiles of the national security advisers and the presidents they served — from jfk to george w. bush .

new york: simon and schuster .

2009 .

destler , i.m .

"can one man do ? .

foreign policy , winter 1971-72 .

pp .

28-40 .

 — — "national security advice to u.s. presidents: some lessons from thirty years. .

world politics , january 1977 .

pp .

143-76 .

 — — presidents , bureaucrats and foreign policy: the politics of organization .

princeton: princeton university press .

[1972] .

 — — lake , anthony ; and gelb , leslie h. our own worst enemy: the unmaking of american foreign policy .

new york: simon and schuster .

1984 .

falk , stanley l. , and theodore w. bauer .

"the national security structure. .

washington: industrial college of the armed forces .

[1972] .

gates , robert m. from the shadows: the ultimate insider's story of the five presidents and how they won the cold war .

new york: simon & schuster .

1996 .

greenstein , fred i. and richard h. immerman .

"effective national security advising: recovering the eisenhower legacy. .

political science quarterly , fall 2000 .

pp .

335-345 .

haig , alexander m. , jr. caveat: realism , reagan , and foreign policy .

new york: macmillan .

1984 .

hammond , paul y .

"the national security council as a device for interdepartmental coordination: an interpretation and appraisal" .

american political science review , december 1960 .

pp .

899-910 .

humphrey , david c. "nsc meetings during the johnson presidency" .

diplomatic history , winter 1994 .

pp .

29-45 .

hunter , robert e. organizing for national security .

washington: center for strategic and international studies .

1988 .

inderfurth , karl f. and johnson , loch k. , eds .

decisions of the highest order: perspectives of the national security council .

pacific grove , ca: brooks / cole publishing co. 1988 .

johnson , robert h. "the national security council: the relevance of its past to its future" .

orbis , fall 1969 .

pp .

709-35 .

kissinger , henry a .

white house years .

boston: little , brown .

1979 .

 — — years of renewal .

new york: simon & schuster .

1999 .

 — — years of upheaval .

boston: little , brown .

1982 .

kolodziej , edward a .

"the national security council: innovations and implications" .

public administration review .

november / december 1969 .

pp .

573-85 .

korb , lawrence j. and hahn , keith d. , eds .

national security policy organization in perspective .

washington: american enterprise institute .

1981 .

laird , melvin r. beyond the tower commission .

washington: american enterprise institute .

1987 .

lake , anthony .

6 nightmares .

boston: little , brown .

2000 .

 — — somoza failing .

boston: houghton mifflin .

1989 .

lay , james s. , jr. "national security council's role in the u.s. security and peace program" .

world affairs , summer 1952 .

pp .

33-63 .

leacacos , john p. "kissinger's apparat" .

foreign policy , winter 1971-72 .

pp .

3-27 .

lord , carnes .

"nsc reform for the post - cold war era," orbis , summer 2000 .

pp .

433-450 .

mcfarlane , robert c. "effective strategic policy. .

foreign affairs , fall 1988 .

pp .

33-48 .

 — — with richard saunders and thomas c. shull .

"the national security council: organization for policy making. .

proceedings of the center for the study of the presidency .

vol .

5 .

1984 .

pp .

261-273 .

 — — head , richard g. , and frisco w. short .

crisis resolution , presidential decision making in the mayaguez and korean confrontations .

boulder , co: westview press .

1978 .

menges , constantine c. inside the national security council: the true story of the making and unmaking of reagan's foreign policy .

new york: simon and schuster .

1988 .

mulcahy , kevin v. and crabb , cecil v. "presidential management of national security policy making , 1947-1987" .

in the managerial presidency , ed .

by james p. pfiffner .

pacific grove , ca: brooks / cole .

1991 .

pp .

250-264 .

nelson , anna kasten .

"president truman and the evolution of the national security council. .

journal of american history , september 1985 .

pp .

360-378 .

 — — "the 'top of the policy hill': president eisenhower and the national security council. .

diplomatic history , fall 1983 .

pp .

307-326 .

nixon , richard m. u.s. foreign policy for the 1970's: a new strategy for peace .

washington: government printing office .

[1970] .

 — — u.s. foreign policy for the 1970's: the emerging structure of peace .

washington: government printing office .

[1971] .

 — — u.s. foreign policy for the 1970's: building for peace .

washington: government printing office .

[1972] .

powell , colin l. "the nsc system in the last two years of the reagan administration" .

the presidency in transition .

ed .

by james p. pfiffner and r. gordon hoxie .

new york: center for the study of the presidency , 1989 .

pp .

204-218 .

prados , john .

keepers of the keys: a history of the national security council from truman to bush .

new york: william morrow .

1991 .

rice , condoleezza .

no higher honor: a memoir of my years in washington .

new york: crown publishers , 2011 .

rothkopf , david .

running the world: the inside story of the national security council and the architects of american power .

new york: public affairs.2004 .

rostow , walt whitman .

the diffusion of power: an essay in recent history .

new york: macmillan .

1972 .

sander , alfred d. "truman and the national security council , 1945-1947" .

journal of american history , september 1972 .

pp .

369-388 .

schlesinger , arthur , jr. "effective national security advising: a most dubious precedent. .

political science quarterly , fall 2000 .

pp .

347-351 .

shoemaker , christopher c. the nsc staff: counseling the council .

boulder , co: westview press .

1991 .

souers , sidney w. "policy formulation for national security" .

american political science review , june 1949 .

pp .

534-43 .

steiner , barry h. "policy organization in american security affairs: an assessment" .

public administration review , july / august 1977 .

pp .

357-67 .

thayer , frederick c. "presidential policy process and 'new administration': a search for revised paradigms" .

public administration review , september / october 1971 .

pp .

552-61 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on government operations .

subcommittee on national security and international operations .

the national security council: new role and structure .

91 st congress , 1 st session .

washington: government printing office .

1969 .

 — — select committee on secret military assistance to iran and the nicaraguan opposition .

house of representatives .

select committee to investigate covert arms transactions with iran .

100 th congress , 1 st session .

report of the congressional committees investigating the iran - contra affair with supplemental , minority , and additional views , senate report 100-216 / house report 100-433 .

washington: government printing office .

1987 .

 — — committee on government operations .

subcommittee on national security and international operations .

the national security council: comment by henry kissinger .

march 3 , 1970 .

91 st congress , 2d session .

washington: government printing office .

1970 .

u.s. department of state .

"the national security system: responsibilities of the department of state. .

department of state bulletin , february 24 , 1969 .

pp .

163-66 .

u.s. president's special review board .

report of the president's special review board .

washington: government printing office .

1987 .

west , bing .

the strongest tribe: war , politics and the endgame in iraq .

new york .

random house .

2008 .

yost , charles w. "the instruments of american foreign policy," foreign affairs , october 1971 .

pp .

59-68 .

zegart , amy b .

flawed by design: the evolution of the cia , jcs , and nsc .

stanford , ca: stanford university press , 1999 .

note: many of the above entries contain numerous footnotes that identify a wealth of primary and secondary sources too numerous to include here .

of special interest are the oral interviews of former nsc staff personnel conducted from 1998 to 2000 as part of the national security council project undertaken by the center for international and security studies at maryland and the brookings institution ; transcripts are available at http: / / www.cissm.umd.edu / projects / nsc.php .

also useful is the transcript of "a forum on the role of the national security adviser," cosponsored by the woodrow wilson international center for scholars and the james a. baker iii institute for public policy of rice university , available at http: / / wwics.si.edu / news / docs / nsa.pdf .

appendix a .

national security adviser .

