the consumer credit protection act was enacted on may 29 , 1969 , by p.l .

90-321 .

title i of the consumer credit protection act , known as the truth in lending act , was intended "to provide the american consumer with truth - in - lending and truth - in - advertising by providing full disclosure of the terms and conditions of finance charges both in credit transactions and in offers to extend credit. .

title ii of the act restricted the garnishment of wages , which congress found to be "a frequent element in the predatory extension of credit. .

title iii established the national commission on consumer finance "to study and make recommendations to the congress and to the president on the functions and structure of the consumer finance industry , as well as consumer credit transactions generally. .

congress enacted the consumer credit protection act after president johnson called for consumer credit protection in his message to congress dated february 16 , 1967 .

in this message , the president recommended legislation to assure "full and accurate information to the borrower ; and simple and routine calculations for the lender. .

he said that this legislation was "urgently needed to close an important gap in consumer information" and to "protect legitimate lenders against competitors who misrepresent credit costs. .

since its enactment , the consumer credit protection act has been amended several times to add provisions relating to debt collection , credit reporting , credit billing , consumer leasing , and electronic fund transfers .

provisions prohibiting discrimination in extending or approving credit were also added .

the major titles of the act are discussed individually below .

the truth - in - lending act ( tila ) was enacted in 1969 as title i of the consumer credit protection act .

the purpose of the tila is "to assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will be able to compare more readily the various credit terms available to him and avoid the uninformed use of credit. .

the tila requires creditors to disclose certain basic information about the transaction so that the consumer will be given the information needed "to compare the cost of credit and make the best informed decision on the use of credit. .

the tila does not apply to the following: credit transactions involving extensions of credit for primarily business , commercial or agricultural purposes ; transactions in securities or commodities accounts by a broker - dealer registered with the securities and exchange commission ; credit transactions , other than those in which a security interest is or will be acquired in real property or in personal property used as the principal dwelling and other than private education loans , in which the total amount financed exceeds $25,000 ; public utility services regulated by a state ; or loans made , insured , or guaranteed pursuant to title iv of the higher education act .

the fair credit billing act ( fcba ) was enacted on october 28 , 1974 , as an amendment to the consumer credit protection act .

the purpose of the fcba is "to protect the consumer against inaccurate and unfair credit billing and credit card practices. .

the law defines and establishes a procedure for resolving billing errors in consumer credit transactions .

the consumer leasing act ( cla ) was enacted in 1976 to "assure a meaningful disclosure of the terms of leases of personal property for personal , family , or household purposes so as to enable the lessee to compare more readily the various lease terms available to him , limit balloon payments in consumer leasing , enable comparison of lease terms with credit terms where appropriate , and to assure meaningful and accurate disclosures of lease terms in advertisements. .

the cla applies to leases exceeding four months , and not exceeding a total contractual obligation of more than $25,000 , primarily for personal , family , or household purposes .

the cla does not apply to leases for agricultural , business , or commercial purposes , or to a government or governmental agency or instrumentality , or to an organization .

the fair credit reporting act ( fcra ) was enacted on october 26 , 1970 .

the purpose of the fcra is "to require that consumer reporting agencies adopt reasonable procedures for meeting the needs of commerce for consumer credit , personnel , insurance , and other information in a manner which is fair and equitable to the consumer , with regard to the confidentiality , accuracy , relevancy , and proper utilization of such information. .

the fcra applies to the files maintained by "consumer reporting agencies," a term broadly defined to include anyone in the business of furnishing reports on the credit worthiness of consumers to third parties .

consumer credit reports generally include information about a consumer's "credit worthiness , credit standing , credit capacity , character , general reputation , personal characteristics , or mode of living. .

this information is gathered and sold to creditors , employers , landlords , and other businesses .

the fcra outlines a consumer's rights in relation to his or her credit report , as well as permissible uses for credit reports and disclosure requirements .

the fcra includes , inter alia , a number of provisions aimed at preventing identity theft and assisting victims .

the fair debt collection practices act ( fdcpa ) was signed into law on september 29 , 1977 , as an amendment to the consumer credit protection act .

the purpose of the fdcpa is to "eliminate abusive debt collection practices by debt collectors. .

a "debt collector" is generally defined as "any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or the mails in any business the principal purpose of which is the collection of any debts , or who regularly collects or attempts to collect , directly or indirectly , debts owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another. .

the fdcpa does not apply to creditors who are collecting their own debts , unless in the process of collecting debts , the creditor uses a name other than his own which would indicate that a third person is attempting to collect the debt on his behalf .

the fdcpa defines "debt collector" as not including private entities that administer certain pretrial diversion programs for bad check offenders under a contract with a state or district attorney .

under the fdcpa , debt collectors are prohibited from threatening or harassing debtors , and their contacts with debtors are restricted .

the equal credit opportunity act ( ecoa ) was enacted on october 28 , 1974 , by p.l .

93-495 , and became effective on october 28 , 1975 .

the purpose of the ecoa is to "promote the availability of credit to all creditworthy applicants without regard to race , color , religion , national origin , sex , marital status , or age ; to the fact that all or part of the applicant's income derives from a public assistance program ; or to the fact that the applicant has in good faith exercised any right under the consumer credit protection act. .

the ecoa prohibits discrimination on the basis of any of these factors in extending or approving an application for credit .

the electronic fund transfer act ( efta ) was enacted by title xx of p.l .

95-630 on november 10 , 1978 , as an amendment to the consumer credit protection act .

in general , the purpose of the efta is to "provide a basic framework establishing the rights , liabilities , and responsibilities of participants in electronic fund transfer systems. .

its primary objective is the provision of individual consumer rights .

the phrase "electronic fund transfer" is defined as "any transfer of funds , other than a transaction originated by check , draft , or similar paper instrument , which is initiated through an electronic terminal , telephonic instrument , or computer or magnetic tape so as to order , instruct , or authorize a financial institution to debit or credit an account. .

under the efta , the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfers involving a consumer's account must be disclosed at the time the consumer contracts for an electronic fund transfer service .

the disclosures must be "clear and readily understandable , in writing , and in a form the consumer may keep. .

required disclosures include a summary of the consumer's liability for unauthorized electronic fund transfers ; the telephone number and address of the person or office to be notified when the consumer believes that an unauthorized electronic fund transfer has been or may be made ; the financial institution's business days ; the type of electronic fund transfers that the consumer may make and any limitations on the frequency and dollar amount of transfers ; any fees imposed by the financial institution for electronic fund transfers or for the right to make transfers ; a summary of the consumer's right to receipts and periodic statements , and notices regarding preauthorized transfers ; a summary of the consumer's right to stop payment of a preauthorized electronic fund transfer and the procedure for placing a stop - payment order ; a summary of the financial institution's liability to the consumer for failure to make or stop certain transfers ; the circumstances under which , in the ordinary course of business , the financial institution may provide information concerning the consumer's account to third parties ; and a notice concerning error resolution .

the efta limits a consumer's liability for unauthorized electronic fund transfers .

if the consumer notifies the financial institution within two business days after learning of the loss or theft , the consumer's liability is limited to the lesser of $50 or the amount of the unauthorized transfers that occurred before notice was given to the financial institution .

if the consumer fails to notify the financial institution within two business days , the consumer's liability is limited to the lesser of $500 or the sum of $50 , or the amount of unauthorized transfers that occur within the two business days , whichever is less , and the amount of unauthorized transfers that occur after the close of two business days and before notice to the institution , provided the institution establishes that these unauthorized transfers would not have occurred had the consumer notified the institution within the two day period .

a consumer has a right to documentation of electronic fund transfers initiated by the consumer from an electronic terminal and to receive notice of preauthorized transfers .

at the time the consumer initiates an electronic fund transfer at an electronic terminal , the financial institution shall make a receipt available which contains the following information , as applicable: the amount of the transfer ; the date of the transfer ; the type of transfer , unless the access device used is able to access only one account ; a number or code to identify the consumer's account ; and the location of the terminal .

in addition , the financial institution must provide a periodic statement for each monthly cycle in which an electronic fund transfer occurred , and must send a periodic statement at least quarterly if no transfer has occurred .

periodic statements must include , as applicable , information about the electronic fund transfers , including the amount of the transfer , the date the transfer was credited or debited to the consumer's account , the type of transfer and type of account involved , the location of the terminal , and the name of any third party to or from whom funds were transferred ; the number of the account ; the amount of any fees assessed against the account during the statement period ; the balance in the account at the beginning and at the close of the statement period ; the address and telephone number to be used for inquiries or notice of errors ; and a telephone number the consumer may call to ascertain whether preauthorized transfers to the consumer's account have occurred , if the financial institution uses the telephone - notice option provided in the regulations .

in the case of preauthorized transfers , oral or written notice must be provided to the consumer within two business days after the transfer occurs , or within two business days after the date on which the transfer was scheduled to occur , but did not .

notice of preauthorized transfers can also be made by providing a readily available telephone line that the consumer may call to determine whether the transfer occurred .

the consumer may stop payment of a preauthorized transfer by notifying the financial institution orally or in writing at least three business days before the scheduled date of the transfer .

if notification is received by the financial institution orally , the consumer may be required to provide written confirmation of the stop - payment order within 14 days of the oral notification .

if a financial institution receives , within 60 days after providing documentation of electronic fund transfers to the consumer , an oral or written notice from the consumer indicating the consumer's belief that the documentation provided contains an error , the financial institution shall investigate the alleged error , determine whether an error has occurred , and report or mail the results of the investigation and determination to the consumer within ten business days .

the notice from the consumer to the financial institution must identify the name and account number of the consumer ; indicate the consumer's belief that the documentation contains an error and the amount of the error ; and set forth the reasons for the consumer's belief that an error has occurred .

in the event that the financial institution determines that an error has occurred , the financial institution must correct the error within one day of the determination in accordance with the provisions relating to consumer's liability for unauthorized charges .

the financial institution may provisionally recredit the consumer's account for the amount alleged to be in error pending the conclusion of its investigation and its determination of whether an error has occurred , if it is unable to complete the investigation within ten business days .

if the financial institution determines that an error did not occur , it must deliver or mail to the consumer an explanation of its findings within three business days after the conclusion of its investigation , and upon the request of the consumer , promptly deliver or mail to the consumer reproductions of all documents which the financial institution relied on in making its determination .

in general , a financial institution is liable to a consumer for all damage proximately caused by the financial institution's failure to make an electronic fund transfer , in accordance with the terms and conditions of an account , in the correct amount or in a timely manner when property instructed to do so by the consumer , except where "the consumer's account has insufficient funds ; the funds are subject to legal process or other encumbrance restricting such transfer ; such transfer would exceed an established credit limit ; an electronic terminal has insufficient cash to complete the transaction ; or as otherwise provided in regulations of the board. .

the financial institution is liable for damages proximately caused by the institution's failure to make an electronic fund transfer even when there are insufficient funds if the financial institution failed to credit a deposit of funds to the consumer's account which would have provided sufficient funds to make the transfer , or the institution failed to stop payment of a preauthorized transfer when instructed to do so .

a financial institution may not be liable for such damages if it shows by a preponderance of the evidence that its action or failure to act was caused by an act of god or other circumstances beyond its control , that it exercised reasonable care to prevent such occurrence , and that it exercised such diligence as the circumstances required .

a consumer is also entitled to any actual damage sustained as a result of a financial institution's failure to comply with any provision of the efta , plus an amount not less than $100 or more than $1,000 .

in a class action suit , the class is entitled to actual damages plus other damages the court may allow , not to exceed the lesser of $500,000 or 1% of the net worth of the defendant .

court costs and reasonable attorney's fees may also be awarded .

where a financial institution has failed to comply with error resolution provisions set forth in the efta , the consumer is entitled to treble damages .

financial institutions may also be subject to criminal liability for certain violations of the efta .

