congress has had a longstanding interest in mexico's counter - narcotics efforts .

beginning with legislationoriginally enacted in the mid - 1980s , congress has required the president to certify annually , subject to congressional review , thatdrug producing or drug - transit countries have cooperated fully with the united states in drug control efforts duringtheprevious year to avoid suspension of u.s. aid .

 ( 1 ) mexico has been fully certified each year , but congress has closelymonitored these certifications , and resolutions of disapproval to reverse the presidential certifications wereintroduced in1996 , 1997 , 1998 , and 1999 .

in 1996 , no floor action was taken ; in 1997 , each house passed separate weakenedresolutions ; in 1998 , a senate version was defeated in floor action ; and in 1999 , no action was taken on houseresolutions .

following the election of opposition candidate vicente fox as president of mexico in july 2000 , several memberscalledfor modification of the certification procedures or exemption of mexico from the process .

president bush certifiedmexicoas fully cooperative in drug control efforts on march 1 , 2001 , citing the arrest of key members of the tijuana - basedarellano felix organization , the aggressive eradication programs , and continuing cooperation with the united statesin anumber of areas .

 ( 2 ) .

according to estimates by the department of state's bureau for international narcotics and law enforcementaffairs,mexico is the primary transit point for cocaine entering the united states from south america , and is a majorsourcecountry for heroin , marijuana , and methamphetamine .

 ( 3 ) agency experts agree that mexico's share of illicit traffic in thevarious areas has remained high over the years , although there are variations in the estimates .

the methodology formakingthe estimates ( whether derived from seizures or some other means ) is not regarded as entirely adequate , and theestimatesmay be affected by changing trafficking patterns and demand as much as enforcement efforts .

in many cases,estimateshave not been provided in recent administration reports and congressional testimony with regard to cocaine , the major drug of concern , the state department's recent incsr report covering the year 2000cited dea estimates that 55% of the cocaine sold in the united states transits mexico .

about the same time , a deaofficial testified in march 2001 that 65% of south american cocaine reaches american cities via the u.s. - mexicoborder,while a u.s. customs official indicated that "more than 50%" entered via the southwest border .

 ( 4 ) these uncertain andvarying estimates are similar to the estimates in recent years .

with respect to heroin , the recent incsr report did not estimate the percentage of u.s. - bound heroin produced in mexico,but it noted that mexico produces only about two percent of the world's opium , nearly all destined for the unitedstates,and that production in mexico plummeted as a result of eradication efforts and a severe drought .

a u.s. customsofficialstated , in march 2001 hearings , that 14% of the heroin seized in the united states comes from mexico , while anindependent study indicated that mexico is the source of 29% of the heroin used in the united states .

 ( 5 ) in other areas , the recent incsr report noted that mexico - based transnational criminal organizations have become thelargest distributors in the united states of methamphetamine and precursor chemicals like ephedrine , withmethamphetamine seizures in the united states growing from 96 kilograms in 1998 to 358 kilograms in 1999 , and638kilograms in 2000 .

according to dea , "virtually all the marijuana smuggled into the united states , whether growninmexico or shipped through mexico from lesser sources such as central america , is smuggled across theu.s. - mexicoborder. .

 ( 6 ) mexico continues to be a majormoney - laundering center and in recent years international money launderershave turned increasingly to mexico for initial placement of drug proceeds into the global financial system , accordingto therecent inscr .

table 1 shows estimates of mexican drug control efforts in three areas - - seizures , arrests , and eradication - - from 1994to 2000 .

table 1 .

mexican counter - drug activities , 1994-2000 sources: except where indicated by asterisk , data is from the u.s. department of state , international narcotics controlstrategy report , march 2001 , pp .

v - 26-v - 36 , using the more up to date data in the text when in conflict withthe statisticschart .

seizures are measured in metric tons ( mt ) , and eradication is measured in hectares ( ha ) , with one hectareequaling2.47 acres .

eradication figures in the incsr are effective eradication estimates of the actual amount of cropdestroyed,factoring in replanting , repeated spaying in one area , etc , while the larger figures supplied by the mexicangovernmentshow raw estimates of areas sprayed .

data on ephedrine seizures were provided by the embassy of mexico for thereporting period december 1 , 1999 to november 30 , 2000 .

caution should be exercised in considering the changes in the various areas as an indication of mexico's seriousness incontrolling drug trafficking .

the trends may also be affected by the demand for the drugs , the amount of drugsproduced oravailable , the sophistication of the drug traffickers , the intelligence and capabilities of mexican counter - drugagencies , theeffectiveness of reporting and monitoring methods , the effect of weather conditions on eradication efforts , andcompetitionfrom alternative drug suppliers .

u.s. - mexico counter - narcotics cooperation increased substantially during the administration of presidentzedillo ( 1994-2000 ) , with the full range of law enforcement , military , and border and drug control agencies being involved .

whilethe flow of drugs from mexico remains high and incidences of corruption persist , the clinton administrationseemed to beconfident that president zedillo was committed to rooting out corruption and establishing a close workingrelationship withthe united states in this area .

at the highest diplomatic level , there is the binational commission , established in1977,which brings cabinet - level officials together once a year to discuss the full range of u.s. - mexico relations,including legaland anti - narcotics affairs .

with a specific focus on counter - narcotics issues , the high level contact group ( hlcg ) ,established in 1996 , provides for cabinet - level coordination twice a year .

subordinate hlcg working groups onmoneylaundering , demand reduction , arms trafficking , and interdiction meet several times per year to coordinate policies,exchange information , and promote conferences , such as the binational conferences on reduction of drug demand,heldin 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 .

the mexico - u.s. senior law enforcement plenary , coordinated by the two attorneysgeneral,also meets four or five times a year on law enforcement issues .

 ( 15 ) acting through these groups , the two countries agreed in may 1997 upon an anti - drug alliance during a visit to mexico bypresident clinton .

the leaders developed a draft joint strategy in november 1997 , when president zedillo visitedwashington , and the two presidents signed a protocol to permit temporary extradition of cross - border criminalsfor trial,and a hemispheric convention against illegal firearms trafficking .

more recently , the two leaders issued the jointanti - drugstrategy in early february 1998 , and they agreed on methods for coordinating activities in june 1998 despitemexicandispleasure with operation casablanca , a u.s. undercover operation aimed at money laundering operations .

thepresidentssigned agreements on law enforcement cooperation and implementation of performance measures of effectivenessfor thejoint strategy when president clinton visited mexico in mid - february 1999 , and the two governments decided innovember1999 to establish a new interdiction working group under the high level contact group .

in cooperative efforts tocontrolmoney laundering , mexico signed a memorandum of understanding with the united states in january 2000 tofacilitate thetracking of large sums of money between the countries , it joined the global financial action task force and theregionalcaribbean financial action task force in mid - year 2000 , and it passed domestic legislation to strengthen reportingof largevalue domestic currency transactions in january 2001 .

leaders of the two countries were also negotiating newagreementson cooperative chemical control efforts and on the reciprocal sharing of seized assets that will supersede a 1995agreement .

during the clinton administration , the united states government was actively involved in the training and screening ofmexicans involved in several important new law enforcement agencies , including the following: the mexicananti - drugagency , called the special prosecutor for crimes against health ( feads ) , the organized crime unit whichimplementsthe new organized crime law ; the anti - drug bilateral border task forces ( btfs ) ; and a financial intelligence unitwhichimplements new anti - money laundering legislation .

in addition , the two countries conducted exchanges of judgesandprosecutors in recent years .

in 1999 , to strengthen law enforcement efforts , the mexican congress passed legislationcodifying the use of assets seized in counter - narcotics operations , and created a new office in the ministry of thetreasuryto manage these assets .

the mexican government also issued regulations that specified reporting requirements fortheimportation of precursor chemicals , and shared information regularly with other governments .

in the area of military - to - military cooperation , the united states during the clinton administration provided unprecedentedcounter - narcotics training to mexican military personnel , and it provided some military equipment , although the73 hueyhelicopters provided in 1996 were returned to the united states in 1999 when they proved to be unsatisfactory .

in2000,the interdiction working group developed a protocol to facilitate communications between the countries , andcoordinationof maritime interdiction operations has increased significantly , according to the recent incsr report .

officials of mexico and the united states have also cooperated extensively on united nations ( u.n. ) and organization ofamerican states ( oas ) anti - drug activities in recent years .

they worked together with other governments on theagreement of the inter - american drug control commission ( cicad ) in october 1999 to adopt a multilateralevaluationmechanism ( mem ) to assess all member countries' counter - narcotics performance , and they participated in the firsttest ofthis system in 2000 .

following the recent elections and inaugurations of new presidents in the united states and mexico , president bush , on hisfirst foreign visit , met with president fox in guanajuato , mexico , in mid - february 2001 , and the two leaderspledged topursue a "partnership for prosperity. .

on drug trafficking issues , they agreed to strengthen law enforcementcooperation inaccordance with each country's national jurisdiction , and in the joint press conference , president bush indicated thathe hadconfidence in president fox's efforts to control corruption and drug trafficking in mexico .

on march 1 , 2001,presidentbush certified that mexico had cooperated fully with u.s. counter - narcotics efforts , citing arrests of drug traffickersandimpressive eradication results in 2000 .

according to the recent incsr report , the prospects for the future presenthope aswell as danger: "the fox administration has pledged its commitment to combating drug traffickers and endingimpunity... .

these commitments offer unprecedented opportunities for greater cooperation and mutual assistancewith the[united states] .

however , corruption and the ability to implement proposed reforms present significant hurdles forsuccessof the [government of mexico's] counterdrug strategy. .

