the president and the vice president of the united states are elected indirectly by an institution known as the electoral college .

the u.s. constitution , in article ii , section 1 , clause 2 , as amended by the 12 th amendment , together with a series of implementing federal statutes , provides the broad framework through which electors are appointed and by which they cast votes for the president and vice president .

proponents of presidential election reform cite several shortcomings in the electoral college as justifications for reform or abolition of the current system .

the arguments raised in defense of the electoral college , and those arrayed in support of direct popular election , are arguably profoundly different .

these basic differences are perhaps summed up in isaiah berlin's famous quotation of the greek poet archilochus: "the fox knows many things , but the hedgehog knows one big thing. .

the electoral college's defenders may be likened to archilochus's fox in that they deploy a wide range of arguments and assertions in support of their position: original intent , tradition , federalism , minority voting power , state voting power ( for both populous and less populated states ) , avoidance of post - election controversies , support of the two - party system , political moderation , and others .

proponents of the direct election alternative more closely resemble the hedgehog in that they focus largely , on the democratic principle of majority rule .

"many things" versus "one big thing": which is more likely to prevail ? .

despite various criticisms and controversies , the electoral college system has endured since the first presidential elections in 1789 .

over the past two centuries , it has evolved through the ratification of one constitutional amendment , the 12 th , the passage of various federal and state laws , and changing political party practices and traditions .

it has delivered the presidency to the popular and electoral vote winners in 46 out of 51 elections since it became operational in 1804 , and even in the case of "misfires," that is , cases in which a candidate was elected with a majority of electoral votes but a minority of popular votes , the results it has delivered have been widely , if not universally , accepted as legitimate .

interest in changing or abolishing the electoral college has arguably been dependent , at least in recent decades , on how accurately it has appeared to ratify the voters' choice .

during periods when the system seemed to be performing well , there was relatively little impetus for reform , although , as noted earlier , there was nearly always a steady stream of proposals for change .

following close elections in 1960 , 1968 , and 1976 , however , proposed constitutional amendments providing for direct election were actively considered in the house of representatives and the senate in the 91 st through 96 th congresses ; during these periods of heightened interest , a direct popular election amendment was approved in the house in 1969 , and debated , but not approved , in the senate in 1979 .

in neither of these instances , however , did the proposals achieve the momentum necessary to hurdle the difficult challenge faced by all would - be constitutional amendments: approval by two - thirds of the members of both chambers present and voting , followed by approval in three - fourths of the states .

during the ensuing two decades , the electoral college delivered substantial majorities of electoral votes to the popular vote winners in every presidential election .

once again , the system functioned as its defenders predicted , notwithstanding occasional concerns over close elections and the potential impact of independent or third party candidates , and there was little impetus for change during this period .

curiously , perhaps , the bitterly contested presidential election of 2000 , which many observers characterized as an electoral college "misfire," failed to galvanize support for direct popular election or electoral college reform .

anger over the election's outcome seemed more intensely directed against voting system inadequacies and failures in florida , and by extension , nationwide , that had thrust the election results into uncertainty and contention for over a month .

as noted earlier , the help america vote act of 2002 , which sought to remedy deficiencies in elections administration technology and procedures , owed its passage largely to these controversies .

the first , and perhaps largest single factor in the electoral college reform equation is article v of the constitution , which provides for its amendment , among other things .

as noted previously in this report , the founders intentionally made it difficult to alter the nation's fundamental charter , establishing what is the only double requirement of super majorities in the document: a proposed amendment must win proposed by two thirds majorities in both houses of congress , and must then be approved by three fourths of the states .

in practice , the hurdle has been raised even higher , since it is customary to attach a seven - year deadline for ratification of proposed amendments .

second , most successful attempts to change the constitution have depended on the stimulus of sudden great events , or have benefitted from the "ripeness" of an idea that had been before the public for many years .

sometimes both factors have contributed to the successful passage and ratification of an amendment .

another common element in successful amendments has generally been a widespread public awareness of a problem to be addressed and a broad national consensus that reform was necessary and desirable .

moreover , such an awareness has usually extended well beyond congress into the nation at large .

for instance , the only previous constitutional revision of the electoral college , the 12 th amendment , was spurred by a profound constitutional crisis , the events surrounding the presidential election of 1800 .

although "public opinion" in its modern sense can scarcely be said to have existed at the time , america's political elites had been strongly influenced by the election and its aftermath .

in this case , congress acted with considerable dispatch for the era , proposing an amendment less than two years later , in december , 1803 .

the states moved even more quickly to approve the proposal: the 12 th amendment's ratification process was completed in either june or july of 1804 , depending on whether the legislature of new hampshire or tennessee is considered to have cast the decisive vote .

more recently , proposal and ratification of the 25 th and 26 th amendments was facilitated by trends and developments representative of those cited above .

the 25 th amendment , which revamped presidential succession procedures , emerged almost directly from the events surrounding the assassination of president john f. kennedy in 1963 , which incontestably stunned and galvanized both congress and the nation .

the vice presidency was vacant for 14 months , with the designated presidential successors during this period being the 71-year - old speaker of the house of representatives , john w. mccormack , and the 86-year - old president pro tempore of the senate , carl f. hayden .

the obvious need for constitutional procedures to replace a vice president who had succeeded to the presidency , or left office for some other reason , coupled with the shock following president kennedy's death , led to a broad national consensus for change , both in congress and among the public .

an amendment was proposed to the states on july 6 , 1965 , and was declared to have been ratified less than 19 months later , on february 23 , 1967 .

the 26 th amendment , which effectively set 18 as voting age in the united states , had been under consideration in various proposals beginning in the 1940s , and throughout the post - war era , a public consensus favorable to lowering the voting age began to emerge .

it is arguable , however , that the great upsurge in political involvement among young people that began with president kennedy's summons to public service in the early 1960s , and continued , albeit down many different roads , during the vietnam war and the general cultural upheaval that characterized the latter part of the 1960s , also strongly contributed to the amendment's success .

the 26 th amendment was proposed by congress on march 23 , 1971 , and was declared to have been ratified less than four months later , on july 10 of the same year .

notwithstanding the results of the presidential election of 2000 , proposals for direct popular election or reform of the electoral college in the subsequent 107 th and 108 th congresses never benefitted from a comparable sense of urgency or high level of public awareness and consensus on the need for reform .

finally , the success of amendments has often depended on the support of congressional leaders who helped guide such proposals to passage by congress , and proposal to the states .

for instance , both the 25 th and 26 th amendments enjoyed the approval and very active support of house judiciary committee chairman emmanuel celler and senator birch bayh , chairman of the senate judiciary committee's subcommittee on the constitution .

the cause of electoral college reform has not had such champions since senator bayh guided a direct election proposal to the senate floor in 1979 .

given the high hurdles faced by proposed constitutional amendments , it is arguable that the electoral college system will likely remain in place unless or until its alleged failings become so compelling that large concurrent majorities in the public , the congress , and the states , are prepared to undertake its reform or abolition .

