since 1995 , at least thirty - one states have enacted laws banning the so - called "partial - birth" abortion procedure .

although many of these laws have not taken effect because of permanent injunctions , they remain contentious to both pro - life advocates and those who support a woman's right to choose .

the concern over partial - birth abortion has been shared by congress .

congress passed bans on the partial - birth abortion procedure in both the 104 th and 105 th congresses .

unable to overcome presidential vetoes during both congressional terms , the partial - birth abortion ban act was reintroduced in each successive congress until its enactment in 2003 .

s. 3 , the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 , was passed by congress in october 2003 .

the measure was signed by the president on november 5 , 2003 .

the u.s. supreme court has also addressed the performance of partial - birth abortions .

in stenberg v. carhart , a 2000 case , the court invalidated a nebraska statute that prohibited the performance of such abortions .

prior to this decision , the u.s. courts of appeals remained divided on the legitimacy of state statutes banning partial - birth abortions .

in gonzales v. carhart , a 2007 case , the court upheld the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 , finding that , as a facial matter , it is not unconstitutionally vague and does not impose an undue burden on a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy .

this report discusses the court's decisions and the partial - birth abortion measures in the 106 th , 107 th , and 108 th congresses .

the supreme court has held that a woman has a constitutional right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy .

although a state cannot prohibit a woman from having an abortion , it can promote its interest in potential human life by regulating , and even proscribing , abortion after fetal viability so long as it allows an exception for abortions that are necessary for the preservation of the life or health of the mother .

in planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v. casey , the court expanded a state's authority to regulate abortion by permitting regulation at the pre - viability stage so long as such regulation does not place an "undue burden" on a woman's ability to have an abortion .

the term "partial - birth abortion" refers generally to an abortion procedure where the fetus is removed intact from a woman's body .

the procedure is described by the medical community as "intact dilation and evacuation" or "dilation and extraction" ( "d & x" ) depending on the presentation of the fetus .

intact dilation and evacuation involves a vertex or "head first" presentation , the induced dilation of the cervix , the collapsing of the skull , and the extraction of the entire fetus through the cervix .

d & x involves a breech or "feet first" presentation , the induced dilation of the cervix , the removal of the fetal body through the cervix , the collapsing of the skull , and the extraction of the fetus through the cervix .

this report uses the term "d & x" to encompass both procedures .

d & x is one of several abortion methods .

the principal methods of abortion are suction curettage , induction , and standard dilation and evacuation ( "d & e" ) .

the decision to perform one abortion method over another usually depends on the gestational age of the fetus .

during the first trimester , the most common method of abortion is suction curettage .

suction curettage involves the evacuation of the uterine cavity by suction .

the embryo or fetus is separated from the placenta either by scraping or vacuum pressure before being removed by suction .

induction may be performed either early in the pregnancy or in the second trimester .

in this procedure , the fetus is forced from the uterus by inducing preterm labor .

d & e is the most common method of abortion in the second trimester .

suction curettage is no longer viable because the fetus is too large in the second trimester to remove by suction alone .

d & e involves the dilation of the cervix and the dismemberment of the fetus inside the uterus .

fetal parts are later removed from the uterus either with forceps or by suction .

d & x is typically performed late in the second trimester between the twentieth and twenty - fourth weeks of pregnancy .

although the medical advantages of d & x have been asserted , the nature of the procedure has prompted pro - life advocates to characterize d & x as something akin to infanticide .

in women ' s medical professional corporation v. voinovich , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit discussed the differences between the d & e and d & x procedures in reference to an ohio act that banned partial - birth abortions: the primary distinction between the two procedures is that the d & e procedure results in a dismembered fetus while the d & x procedure results in a relatively intact fetus .

more specifically , the d & e procedure involves dismembering the fetus in utero before compressing the skull by means of suction , while the d & x procedure involves removing intact all but the head of the fetus from the uterus and then compressing the skull by means of suction .

in both procedures , the fetal head must be compressed , because it is usually too large to pass through a woman's dilated cervix .

in the d & e procedure , this is typically accomplished by either suctioning the intracranial matter or by crushing the skull , while in the d & x procedure it is always accomplished by suctioning the intracranial matter .

the procedural similarities between the d & e and d & x procedures have contributed to the concern that the language of partial - birth abortion bans may prohibit both methods of abortion .

plaintiffs challenging partial - birth abortion statutes have generally sought the invalidation of such statutes on the basis of two arguments: first , that the statutes are unconstitutionally vague , and second , that the statutes are unconstitutional because they impose an undue burden on a woman's ability to obtain an abortion .

the supreme court has held that an enactment is void for vagueness if its prohibitions are not clearly defined .

vague laws are found unconstitutional because they fail to give people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibited and thus allow them to act lawfully .

moreover , the inability to provide explicit standards is feared to result in the arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement of a statute .

the undue burden standard was adopted by the court in casey .

in that case , the court held that a state could enact abortion regulations at the pre - viability stage so long as an "undue burden" is not placed on a woman's ability to have an abortion .

any regulation which "has the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion" creates an undue burden and is invalid .

the sixth circuit was the first to consider whether a ban on partial - birth abortions imposes an undue burden on a woman's ability to have an abortion .

in voinovich , the court found that an ohio statute that attempted to ban the d & x procedure was unconstitutional under casey .

the court determined that the language of the statute targeted the d & x procedure , but encompassed the d & e procedure .

because the d & e procedure is the most common method of second trimester abortions , the court contended that the statute created an undue burden on women seeking abortions at this point in their pregnancies .

in stenberg v. carhart , a nebraska physician who performed abortions at a specialized abortion facility sought a declaration that nebraska's partial - birth abortion ban statute violated the u.s. constitution .

the nebraska statute provided: no partial birth abortion shall be performed in this state , unless such procedure is necessary to save the life of the mother whose life is endangered by a physical disorder , physical illness , or physical injury , including a life - endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself .

the term "partial birth abortion" was defined by the statute as "an abortion procedure in which the person performing the abortion partially delivers vaginally a living unborn child before killing the unborn child and completing the delivery. .

the term "partially delivers vaginally a living unborn child before killing the unborn child" was further defined as "deliberately and intentionally delivering into the vagina a living unborn child , or a substantial portion thereof , for the purpose of performing a procedure that the person performing such procedure knows will kill the unborn child and does kill the unborn child. .

violation of the statute carried a prison term of up to twenty years and a fine of up to $25,000 .

in addition , a doctor who violated the statute was subject to the automatic revocation of his license to practice medicine in nebraska .

among his arguments , dr. carhart maintained that the meaning of the term "substantial portion" in the nebraska statute was unclear and thus , could include the common d & e procedure in its ban of partial - birth abortions .

because the nebraska legislature failed to provide a definition for "substantial portion," the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit interpreted the nebraska statute to proscribe both the d & x and d & e procedures: "if 'substantial portion' means an arm or a leg - and surely it must - then the ban ... encompasses both the d & e and the d & x procedures. .

the eighth circuit acknowledged that during the d & e procedure , the physician often inserts his forceps into the uterus , grasps a part of the living fetus , and pulls that part of the fetus into the vagina .

because the arm or leg is the most common part to be retrieved , the physician would violate the statute .

the state argued that the statute's scienter or knowledge requirement limited its scope and made it applicable only to the d & x procedure .

according to the state , the statute applied only to the deliberate and intentional performance of a partial birth abortion ; that is , the partial delivery of a living fetus vaginally , the killing of the fetus , and the completion of the delivery .

however , the eighth circuit found that the d & e procedure involves all of the same steps: "the physician intentionally brings a substantial part of the fetus into the vagina , dismembers the fetus , leading to fetal demise , and completes the delivery .

a physician need not set out with the intent to perform a d & x procedure in order to violate the statute. .

the supreme court affirmed the eighth circuit's decision by a 5-4 margin .

the court based its decision on two determinations .

first , the court concluded that the nebraska statute lacked any exception for the preservation of the health of the mother .

second , the court found that the statute imposed an undue burden on the right to choose abortion because its language covered more than the d & x procedure .

despite the court's previous instructions in roe and casey , that abortion regulation must include an exception where it is "necessary , in appropriate medical judgment , for the preservation of the life or health of the mother," the state argued that nebraska's partial - birth abortion statute did not require a health exception because safe alternatives remained available to women , and a ban on partial - birth abortions would create no risk to the health of women .

although the court conceded that the actual need for the d & x procedure was uncertain , it recognized that the procedure could be safer in certain circumstances .

thus , the court stated , "a statute that altogether forbids d & x creates a significant health risk .

 .

 .

[t]he statute consequently must contain a health exception. .

in its discussion of the undue burden that would be imposed if the nebraska statute was upheld , the court maintained that the plain language of the statute covered both the d & x and d & e procedures .

although the nebraska state attorney general offered an interpretation of the statute that differentiated between the two procedures , the court was reluctant to recognize such a view .

because the court traditionally follows lower federal court interpretations of state law and because the attorney general's interpretative views would not bind state courts , the court held that the statute's reference to the delivery of "a living unborn child , or a substantial portion thereof" implicated both the d & x and d & e procedures .

because the stenberg court was divided by only one member , justice o'connor's concurrence raised concern among those who support a woman's right to choose .

justice o'connor's concurrence indicated that a state statute prohibiting partial - birth abortions would likely withstand a constitutional challenge if it included an exception for situations where the health of the mother is at issue , and if it was "narrowly tailored to proscribing the d & x procedure alone. .

justice o'connor identified kansas , utah , and montana as having partial - birth abortion statutes that differentiate appropriately between d & x and the other procedures .

within two days of the act's signing , federal courts in nebraska , california , and new york blocked its enforcement .

on april 18 , 2007 , the court upheld the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 , finding that , as a facial matter , it is not unconstitutionally vague and does not impose an undue burden on a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy .

in gonzales v. carhart , the court distinguished the federal statute from the nebraska law at issue in stenberg .

according to the court , the federal statute is not unconstitutionally vague because it provides doctors with a reasonable opportunity to know what conduct is prohibited .

unlike the nebraska law , which prohibited the delivery of a "substantial portion" of the fetus , the federal statute includes "anatomical landmarks" that identify when an abortion procedure will be subject to the act's prohibitions .

the court noted: "[i]f an abortion procedure does not involve the delivery of a living fetus to one of these 'anatomical landmarks' — where , depending on the presentation , either the fetal head or the fetal trunk past the navel is outside the body of the mother — the prohibitions of the act do not apply. .

the court also maintained that the inclusion of a scienter or knowledge requirement in the federal statute alleviates any vagueness concerns .

because the act applies only when a doctor "deliberately and intentionally" delivers the fetus to an anatomical landmark , the court concluded that a doctor performing the d & e procedure would not face criminal liability if a fetus is delivered beyond the prohibited points by mistake .

the court observed: "the scienter requirements narrow the scope of the act's prohibition and limit prosecutorial discretion. .

in reaching its conclusion that the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 does not impose an undue burden on a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy , the court considered whether the federal statute is overbroad , prohibiting both the d & x and d & e procedures .

the court also considered the statute's lack of a health exception .

relying on the plain language of the act , the court determined that the federal statute could not be interpreted to encompass the d & e procedure .

the court maintained that the d & e procedure involves the removal of the fetus in pieces .

in contrast , the federal statute uses the phrase "delivers a living fetus. .

the court stated: "d&e does not involve the delivery of a fetus because it requires the removal of fetal parts that are ripped from the fetus as they are pulled through the cervix. .

the court also identified the act's specific requirement of an "overt act" that kills the fetus as evidence of its inapplicability to the d & e procedure .

the court indicated: "this distinction matters because , unlike [d&x] , standard d&e does not involve a delivery followed by a fatal act. .

because the act was found not to prohibit the d & e procedure , the court concluded that it is not overbroad and does not impose an undue burden a woman's ability to terminate her pregnancy .

according to the court , the absence of a health exception also did not result in an undue burden .

citing its decision in ayotte v. planned parenthood of northern new england , the court noted that a health exception would be required if it subjected women to significant health risks .

however , acknowledging medical disagreement about the act's requirements ever imposing significant health risks on women , the court maintained that "the question becomes whether the act can stand when this medical uncertainty persists. .

reviewing its past decisions , the court indicated that it has given state and federal legislatures wide discretion to pass legislation in areas where there is medical and scientific uncertainty .

the court concluded that this medical uncertainty provides a sufficient basis to conclude in a facial challenge of the statute that it does not impose an undue burden .

although the court upheld the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 without a health exception , it acknowledged that there may be "discrete and well - defined instances" where the prohibited procedure "must be used. .

however , the court indicated that exceptions to the act should be considered in as - applied challenges brought by individual plaintiffs: "in an as - applied challenge the nature of the medical risk can be better quantified and balanced than in a facial attack. .

justice ginsburg authored the dissent in gonzales .

she was joined by justices stevens , souter , and breyer .

describing the court's decision as "alarming," justice ginsburg questioned upholding the federal statute when the relevant procedure has been found to be appropriate in certain cases .

citing expert testimony that had been introduced , justice ginsburg maintained that the prohibited procedure has safety advantages for women with certain medical conditions , including bleeding disorders and heart disease .

justice ginsburg also criticized the court's decision to uphold the statute without a health exception .

justice ginsburg declared: "not only does it defy the court's longstanding precedent affirming the necessity of a health exception , with no carve - out for circumstances of medical uncertainty .

 .

 .

it gives short shrift to the records before us , carefully canvassed by the district courts. .

moreover , according to justice ginsburg , the refusal to invalidate the partial - birth abortion ban act of 2003 on facial grounds was "perplexing" in light of the court's decision in stenberg .

justice ginsburg noted: "[i]n materially identical circumstances we held that a statute lacking a health exception was unconstitutional on its face. .

finally , justice ginsburg contended that the court's decision "cannot be understood as anything more than an effort to chip away at a right declared again and again by [the] court — and with increasing comprehension of its centrality to women's lives. .

citing the language used by the court , including the phrase "abortion doctor" to describe obstetrician - gynecologists and surgeons who perform abortions , justice ginsburg maintained that "[t]he court's hostility to the right roe and casey secured is not concealed. .

she argued that when a statute burdens constitutional rights and the measure is simply a vehicle for expressing hostility to those rights , the burden is undue .

