public concern and confusion regarding the proper respect shown to the united states flag has given rise to many questions on the law relating to the flag's handling , display , and use .

both the state governments and the federal government have enacted legislation on this subject .

on the national level the federal flag code provides uniform guidelines for the display of and respect shown to the flag .

in addition to the code , congress has by statute designated the national anthem and set out the proper conduct during its presentation .

the code is designed "for the use of such civilian groups or organizations as may not be required to conform with regulations promulgated by one or more executive departments" of the federal government .

thus , the flag code does not prescribe any penalties for non - compliance nor does it include enforcement provisions ; rather the code functions simply as a guide to be voluntarily followed by civilians and civilian groups .

the federal flag code does not purport to cover all possible situations .

although the code empowers the president of the united states to alter , modify , repeal , or prescribe additional rules regarding the flag , no federal agency has the authority to issue "official" rulings legally binding on civilians or civilian groups .

consequently , different interpretations of various provisions of the code may continue to be made .

the flag code itself , however , suggests a general rule by which practices involving the flag may be fairly tested: "no disrespect should be shown to the flag of the united states of america. .

therefore , actions not specifically included in the code may be deemed acceptable as long as proper respect is shown .

in addition to the flag code , a separate provision contained in the federal criminal code established criminal penalties for certain treatment of the flag .

prior to 1989 , this provision provided criminal penalties for certain acts of desecration to the flag .

in response to the supreme court decision in texas v. johnson ( which held that anti - desecration statutes are unconstitutional if aimed at suppressing one type of expression ) , congress enacted the flag protection act of 1989 to provide criminal penalties for certain acts which violate the physical integrity of the flag .

this law imposed a fine and / or up to one year in prison for knowingly mutilating , defacing , physically defiling , maintaining on the floor , or trampling upon any flag of the united states .

in 1990 , however , the supreme court held that the flag protection act was unconstitutional as applied to a burning of the flag in a public protest .

on june 22 , 1942 , president franklin d. roosevelt approved house joint resolution 303 codifying the existing customs and rules governing the display and use of the flag of the united states by civilians .

amendments were approved on december 22 nd of that year .

the law included provisions of the code adopted by the national flag conference , held in washington , d.c. on june 14 , 1923 , with certain amendments and additions .

the code was reenacted , with minor amendments , as part of the bicentennial celebration .

in the 105 th congress , the flag code was removed from title 36 of the united states code and re - codified as part of title 4 .

the pledge of allegiance is set forth in 4 u.s.c .

§ 4 .

in 1954 , congress added to the "pledge of allegiance" the phrase "under god" after "nation. .

questions about the "pledge of allegiance" usually involve practices and requirements of local and state statutes mandating participation in the recitation of the "pledge" in some manner ( eg , flag salute and pledge , standing quietly , standing at attention ) in schools .

provisions involving compulsory participation in "pledge" activities are usually attacked as violations of the free speech clause of the first amendment or the free exercise of religion clause .

in 1943 , the supreme court held that a state - required compulsory flag salute - pledge of allegiance violated the first amendment rights of members of the jehovah's witnesses religious group .

in 2002 , a three - judge panel of the ninth circuit had held both the 1954 federal statute adding the words "under god" to the pledge of allegiance and a california school district policy requiring teachers to lead willing school children in reciting the pledge each school day to violate the establishment clause of the first amendment .

a subsequent modification eliminated the holding regarding the federal statute but retained the ruling holding that the california statute coerces children into participating in a religious exercise .

the supreme court , on flag day 2004 , reversed the ninth circuit , finding that newdow lacked standing to challenge the school district's policy .

the flag code is a codification of customs and rules established for the use of certain civilians and civilian groups .

no penalty or punishment is specified in the flag code for display of the flag of the united states in a manner other than as suggested .

cases which have construed the former 36 u.s.c .

§ 175 have concluded that the flag code does not proscribe conduct , but is merely declaratory and advisory .

there is no absolute prohibition in federal law on flying the flag 24 hours a day .

the flag code states: it is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open .

however , when a patriotic effect is desired , the flag may be displayed 24 hours a day if properly illuminated during hours of darkness .

there are eight sites in the united states where the flag is flown day and night under specific legal authority: fort mchenry national monument , baltimore , maryland ; flag house square , baltimore , maryland ; the united states marine corps iwo jima memorial , arlington , virginia ; lexington , massachusetts ; the white house ; the washington monument ; united states customs ports of entry ; and valley forge state park , pennsylvania .

the reports that accompanied these official acts indicate that the specific authority was intended only as a form of tribute to certain historic sites rather than as exceptions to the general rule of the code .

as a matter of custom , and without specific statutory or official authorization , the flag is flown at night at many other sites , including the united states capitol .

it would seem that display of the flag in a respectful manner with appropriate lighting does not violate the spirit of the flag code since the dignity accorded to the flag is preserved by lighting that prevents its being enveloped in darkness .

the flag code states: the flag should not be displayed on days when the weather is inclement , except when an all weather flag is displayed .

the language of this section reflects the now - popular use of flags made of synthetic fabrics that can withstand unfavorable weather conditions .

it is not considered disrespectful to fly such a flag even during prolonged periods of inclement weather .

however , since the section speaks in terms of "days when the weather is inclement," it apparently does not contemplate that on an otherwise fair day , the flag should be lowered during brief periods of precipitation .

the flag code sets out detailed instructions on flying the flag at half - staff on memorial day and as a mark of respect to the memory of certain recently deceased public officials .

this section embodies the substance of presidential proclamation no .

3044 , entitled "display of flag at half - staff upon death of certain officials and former officials. .

the section provides that the president shall order the flag flown at half - staff for stipulated periods "upon the death of principal figures of the united states government and the governor of a state , territory , or possession. .

after the death of other officials or foreign dignitaries , the flag may be flown at half - staff according to presidential instructions or in accordance with recognized custom not inconsistent with law .

in addition , the governor of a state , territory , or possession , or the mayor of the district of columbia , may direct that the national flag be flown at half - staff , in the event of the death of a present or former official of the respective government or in the event of the death of a member of the armed forces from that jurisdiction .

presidents also have ordered the flag to be flown at half - staff on the death of leading citizens , not covered by law , as a mark of official tribute to their service to the united states .

martin luther king , jr. is among those who have been so honored .

again , the provisions of the flag code on flying the flag at half - staff are , like all the code's provisions , a guide only .

they do not apply , as a matter of law , to the display of the flag at half - staff by private individuals and organizations .

no federal restrictions or court decisions are known that limit such an individual's lowering his own flag or that make such display alone a form of desecration .

the flag code is silent as to ornaments ( finials ) for flagstaffs .

we know of no law or regulation which restricts the use of a finial on the staff .

the eagle finial is used not only by the president , the vice - president , and many other federal agencies , but also by many civilian organizations and private citizens .

the selection of the type finial used is a matter of preference of the individual or organization .

the placing of a fringe on the flag is optional with the person or organization , and no act of congress or executive order either requires or prohibits the practice .

fringe is used on indoor flags only , as fringe on flags used outdoors would deteriorate rapidly .

the fringe on a flag is considered an "honorable enrichment only" and its official use by the army dates from 1895 .

a 1925 attorney general's opinion states: the fringe does not appear to be regarded as an integral part of the flag , and its presence cannot be said to constitute an unauthorized addition to the design prescribed by statute .

an external fringe is to be distinguished from letters , words , or emblematic designs printed or superimposed upon the body of the flag itself .

under the law , such additions might be open to objection as unauthorized ; but the same is not necessarily true of the fringe .

the flag code states: the flag , when it is in such condition that it is no longer a fitting emblem for display , should be destroyed in a dignified way , preferably by burning .

the act is silent on procedures for burning a flag .

it would seem that any procedure which is in good taste and shows no disrespect to the flag would be appropriate .

the flag protection act of 1989 , struck down albeit on grounds unrelated to this specific point , prohibited inter alia "knowingly" burning of a flag of the united states , but excepted from prohibition "any conduct consisting of disposal of a flag when it has become worn or soiled. .

the flag code sets out rules for position and manner of display of the flag in 4 u.s.c .

§ 7 .

the question as to the propriety of flying the flag of another nation at an equal level with that of the flag of the u.s. is not clear from the face of the statute .

section 7 contains two subsections on point and these provisions appear to be contradictory .

subsection 7 ( c ) states: ( c ) no other flag or pennant should be placed above or , if on the same level , to the right of the flag of the united states of america , except during church services conducted by naval chaplains at sea , when the church pennant may be flown above the flag during church services for the personnel of the navy .

no person shall display the flag of the united nations or any other national or international flag equal , above , or in a position of superior prominence or honor to or in place of the flag of the united states or any territory or possession thereof: provided , that nothing in this section shall make unlawful the continuance of the practice heretofore followed of displaying the flag of the united nations in a position of superior prominence or honor , and other national flags in positions of equal prominence or honor , with that of the flag of the united states at the headquarters of the united nations .

subsection 7 ( g ) states: ( g ) when flags of two or more nations are displayed , they are to be flown from separate staffs of the same height .

the flags should be of approximately equal size .

international usage forbids the display of the flag of one nation above that of another nation in time of peace .

the wording of § 7 ( g ) is identical to that of the original flag code enacted in 1942 .

the second sentence of § 7 ( c ) prohibiting flying international flags equal in height to the flag of the united states was not in the original flag code .

this provision was added in 1953 .

the legislative history of this amendment clearly states that is purpose was to "make it an offense against the united states to display the flag of the united nations or any other national or international flag equal to , above , or in a position of superior prominence or honor to , or in place of , the flag of the united states at any place within the united states or any possession or territory thereof,...." the only exception recognized is at the headquarters of the united nations .

when a statute contains apparently contradictory provisions , the rules of statutory construction first mandate an attempt to interpret the provisions so both can be given effect .

if this proves futile , the usual rule is to give effect to the latest in time .

the reasoning is that this represents the most recent statement of the will of the legislature .

following this second rule of construction would lead to the conclusion that flying a flag of another nation at the same height as the flag of the united states may not be proper etiquette under the federal flag code , but this creates no right of action in private individuals .

when the united states flag is displayed with the flags of states of the union or municipalities and not with the flags of other nations , the federal flag , which represents all states , should be flown above and at the center of the other flags .

where there is only one flag pole , the federal flag should be displayed above state or municipal flags .

the flag code addresses the impropriety of using the flag as an article of personal adornment , a design on items of temporary use , and item of clothing .

the evident purpose of these suggested restraints is to limit the commercial or common usage of the flag and , thus , maintain its dignity .

the 1976 amendments to the code recognized the wearing of a flag patch or pin on the left side ( near the heart ) of uniforms of military personnel , firemen , policemen , and members of patriotic organizations .

the code also states that the flag should never be used for advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever .

while wearing the colors may be in poor taste and offensive to many , it is important to remember that the flag code is intended as a guide to be followed on a purely voluntary basis to insure proper respect for the flag .

it is , at least , questionable whether statutes placing civil or criminal penalties on the wearing of clothing bearing or resembling a flag could be constitutionally enforced in light of supreme court decisions in the area of flag desecration .

in the past , the supreme court has held that states may restrict use of pictures of the flag on commercial products .

there is a federal criminal prohibition on the use of the flag for advertising purposes in the district of columbia .

while commercial speech does not receive the full protection of the first amendment , the status of these statutes and cases can not be taken for granted in light of eichman and johnson .

questions on size and dimensions usually arise in the context of the display of huge flags .

the flag code is silent on recommendations for proper flag size and dimensions .

regulations governing size and dimensions and other requirements for flags authorized for federal executive agencies can be found in executive order no .

10834 .

these regulations provide that the length of the flag should be 1.9 times the width .

the freedom to display the american flag act of 2005 prohibits a condominium , cooperative , or real estate management association from adopting or enforcing any policy or agreement that would restrict or prevent a member of the association from displaying the flag in accordance with the federal flag code on residential property to which the member has a separate ownership interest .

the secretary of the department of veterans' affairs is required to supply a united states flag to drape the casket of each deceased veteran .

the secretary may not procure any flag for this purpose that is not wholly produced in the united states .

the secretary may only waive this requirement if he determines that the requirement cannot be reasonably met or that compliance with the requirement would not be in the national interest of the united states .

in the case of such determination , the secretary is required to submit to congress written notice not later than 30 days after the date on which such determination is made .

a flag shall be considered to be wholly produced in the united states only if the materials and components of the flag are entirely grown , manufactured , or created in the united states ; the processing ( including spinning , weaving , dyeing , and finishing ) of such materials and components is entirely performed in the united states ; and the manufacture and assembling of such materials and components into the flag is entirely performed in the united states .

