in april 2003 , the sequence of the human genome was deposited into public databases .

scientists involved in the human genome project ( hgp ) reported that the finished sequence consists of overlapping fragments covering 99% of the coding regions of the human genome , with an accuracy of 99.999% .

these rapid advances provide powerful tools for determining the causes , and potentially the cures , for many common , complex diseases such as diabetes , heart disease , parkinson's disease , bipolar illness , and asthma .

in congressional testimony dr. francis collins , the director of the national human genome research institute , described the potential the information generated by the hgp holds for medicine and public health .

he stated that "the human genome sequence provides foundational information that now will allow development of a comprehensive catalog of all of the genome's components , determination of the function of all human genes , and deciphering of how genes and proteins work together in pathways and networks .

completion of the human genome sequence offers a unique opportunity to understand the role of genetic factors in health and disease , and to apply that understanding rapidly to prevention , diagnosis , and treatment .

this opportunity will be realized through such genomics - based approaches as identification of genes and pathways and determining how they interact with environmental factors in health and disease , more precise prediction of disease susceptibility and drug response , early detection of illness , and development of entirely new therapeutic approaches. .

as collins stated , with completion of the human genome sequence , scientists will now focus on understanding the clinical and public health implications of the sequence information .

all disease has a genetic component and therefore genomic research has the potential to substantially reduce the collective burden of disease in the general population .

clinical genetic tests are becoming available at a rapid rate , with 1,013 clinical genetic tests currently available .

in addition , private insurers are beginning to include some clinical genetic tests in their health insurance benefits packages as evidence of the tests' clinical validity accumulates .

for example , some health plans have coverage policies for specific conditions , such as hereditary cancer testing , cystic fibrosis , tay sachs disease , and hereditary hemochromatosis .

these scientific advances in genetics , while promising , are not without potential problems .

the ethical , social and legal implications of genetic research have been the subject of significant scrutiny and a portion of the funds for the human genome project are set aside to support the analysis and research of these issues .

as scientific knowledge about genetics becomes increasingly widespread , numerous researchers and commentators , including dr. francis collins , have expressed concerns about how this information will used .

in congressional testimony , dr. collins stated: "while genetic information and genetic technology hold great promise for improving human heath , they can also be used in ways that are fundamentally unjust .

genetic information can be used as the basis for insidious discrimination....the misuse of genetic information has the potential to be a very serious problem , both in terms of people's access to employment and health insurance and the continued ability to undertake important genetic research. .

this concern has encompassed fear of discrimination in many aspects of life , including employment and health and life insurance .

a study on discrimination found that a number of institutions , including health and life insurance companies , health care providers , blood banks , adoption agencies , the military and schools , were reported to have engaged in genetic discrimination against asymptomatic individuals .

the discriminatory practices included allegedly treating a genetic diagnosis as a preexisting condition for insurance purposes , refusal by an adoption agency to allow a woman at risk for huntington's disease to adopt based on the woman's genetic risk , and termination from employment after disclosure of a risk of huntington's disease .

similarly , another study reported that twenty - two percent of the respondents indicated that they or a family member were refused health insurance as a result of a genetic condition .

both the u.s. chamber of commerce and america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) have countered that there is no convincing evidence that employers or insurers engage in genetic discrimination and that federal legislation to prohibit discrimination based on genetic information is unnecessary .

larry lorber , representing the u.s. chamber of commerce , stated in congressional testimony that "there is little to no evidence of employer collection or misuse of genetic information in today's workplace .

this is despite continued predictions that , in the absence of a bill , the fear of increased insurance costs , absenteeism , and low productivity would inevitably drive vast numbers of employers to genetic testing of the workforce and employment discrimination based on genetic makeup .

whether it is due to the threat of liability under existing protections , fear of public backlash , moral concerns or simply a lack of interest , employer collection and misuse of genetic information remains largely confined to the pages of science fiction. .

he goes on to state that , "the current body of federal law , including the ada , title vii of the civil rights act , hipaa and other federal laws are more than ample to deal with any misuse of genetic information. .

in discussions with the secretary's advisory committee on genetics , health and society ( sacghs ) , the chamber stated that while it does not believe that employers are engaging in genetic discrimination , it does recognize that the fear of potential discrimination may warrant a legislative solution .

in addition , america's health insurance plans states that , "as a matter of practice , health insurance plans do not use or disclose such private health information [genetic information] for purposes outside of normal insurance coverage activities .

moreover , federal and state laws currently prohibit the inappropriate use of genetic information. .

legal cases of genetic discrimination have been few .

however , studies have shown that public fear of discrimination is substantial and negatively influences the uptake of genetic testing and the use of genetic information by consumers and health professionals .

sacghs learned that 68% of americans are concerned about who would have access to their personal genetic information ; 31% state this concern would prevent them from having a genetic test ; and 68% agree that insurers would do everything possible to use genetic information to deny health coverage .

a 2004 survey conducted by the genetics and public policy center found that 92% of americans oppose employer access to personal genetic information and 80% oppose access to this information by health insurers .

in addition , sacghs as well as its predecessor committee , the secretary's advisory committee on genetic testing ( sacgt ) , sponsored two public forums to gather perspectives on genetic discrimination .

many comments were received from patients , consumers , health professionals , scientists , genetic test developers , educators , industry representatives , policymakers , lawyers , students and others representing a wide range of diverse ethnic and racial groups .

the comments and testimony revealed several anecdotal cases of discrimination .

sacgt sent two letters to the secretary of hhs urging support for nondiscrimination protections: during consultations with the public sacgt heard from many americans who are concerned about the misuse of genetic information by third parties , such as health insurers and employers , and the potential for discrimination based on that information .

many stated that fear of genetic discrimination would dissuade them from undergoing a genetic test or participating in genetic research studies .

others stated that they would pay out of pocket for a genetic test to prevent the results from being placed in their medical record .

such concerns are a deterrent to advances in the field of genetic testing and may limit the realization of the benefits of genetic testing .

the sacghs held a half day session where it heard testimony from members of the public , health care providers , insurers , employers and other stakeholders .

this testimony revealed actual cases of genetic discrimination as well as considerable fear of genetic discrimination and altered behavior due to this fear .

the committee compiled the comments it received both orally and in writing , produced a dvd highlighting the oral testimony it received , and provided an extensive legal analysis concluding that current law does not provide adequate protection against genetic discrimination in health insurance and employment .

this information was shared with the secretary of hhs , with a recommendation that it also be shared with key members of congress .

the committee was interested in independently investigating the claims made by opponents that genetic discrimination was not occurring and that current law provides adequate protection against discrimination .

a joint report by the department of labor , the department of health and human services , the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) and the department of justice summarized the various studies on discrimination based on genetic information and argued for the enactment of federal legislation .

the report stated that "genetic predisposition or conditions can lead to workplace discrimination , even in cases where workers are healthy and unlikely to develop disease or where the genetic condition has no effect on the ability to perform work" and that "because an individual's genetic information has implications for his or her family members and future generations , misuse of genetic information could have intergenerational effects that are far broader than any individual incident of misuse. .

concluding that existing protections are minimal , the report went on to call for the enactment of legislation which states that ( 1 ) employers should not require or request that employees or potential employees take a genetic test or provide genetic information as a condition of employment or benefits , ( 2 ) employers should not use genetic information to discriminate against , limit , segregate , or classify employees , and ( 3 ) employers should not obtain or disclose genetic information about employees or potential employees under most circumstances .

according to the labor department report , employers should be able to ( 1 ) use genetic information for monitoring for the effects of a particular substance in the workplace under certain circumstances , and ( 2 ) disclose genetic information for research and other purposes with the written , informed consent of the individuals .

in addition , the report states that the statutory authority of federal agencies or contractors to promulgate regulations , enforce workplace safety and health laws , or conduct occupational or other health research should not be limited .

the national council on disability ( ncd ) , an independent federal agency that advises the president and congress on issues affecting individuals with disabilities , published a position paper arguing for the enactment of federal legislation prohibiting genetic discrimination on march 4 , 2002 .

the ncd argues that recent advances in genetic research have brought an increasing potential for genetic discrimination , that genetic discrimination is a historical and current reality , that genetic discrimination undermines the purposes of genetic research and testing , that genetic test information has little value for purposes of making employment decisions and insurance decisions , and that existing laws are insufficient to protect individuals from genetic discrimination .

president bush has also made the prohibition of genetic discrimination one of the key components of his health care reform agenda .

in his june 2001 radio address to the nation , the president stated that , "genetic discrimination is unfair to workers and their families .

it is unjustified - among other reasons , because it involves little more than medical speculation .

a genetic predisposition toward cancer or heart disease does not mean the condition will develop .

to deny employment or insurance to a healthy person based only on a predisposition violates our country's belief in equal treatment and individual merit. .

the administration has indicated that it favors enactment of legislation to prohibit the improper use of genetic information in health insurance and employment .

it should be emphasized that legal issues relating to genetics may vary depending on whether insurance , employment or other types of discrimination , or medical research are involved .

approaches to addressing the issues raised in these contexts vary from taking no legislative action , addressing certain specific concerns ( as was done in the health insurance portability and accountability act ) , or more far reaching approaches such as comprehensive legislation on genetics or legislation focused on all medical records , including genetic information .

generally legal issues raised regarding genetics have been based on two main concepts: privacy and discrimination .

the privacy interests of an individual in his or her genetic information have been seen as significant and protecting these interests is seen as making discriminatory actions based on this information less likely .

however , another approach would be to prohibit this potential misuse of the information by prohibiting discrimination .

some statutes , like the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 12101 et seq. , take a two - pronged approach to similar issues regarding medical information about disabilities by both protecting the confidentiality of the information and by prohibiting discriminatory acts .

currently there are no federal laws that directly and comprehensively address the issues raised by the use of genetic information .

there are , however , a few laws that address parts of these issues but the only federal law that directly addresses the issue of discrimination based on genetic information is the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) .

on february 8 , 2000 , president clinton issued an executive order prohibiting discrimination against federal employees based on protected genetic information .

on december 20 , 2000 , the department of health and human services issued final regulations on medical privacy which are not specific to genetics but cover all personal health information , including genetic information .

this rule went into effect on april 14 , 2001 but was amended in 2002 .

in addition , many states have enacted laws which vary widely in their approaches to the protection of genetic information .

on february 9 , 2000 , president clinton signed executive order 13145 prohibiting genetic discrimination against employees in federal executive departments and agencies .

in announcing the executive order at a meeting of the american association for the advancement of science , the president stated that "this extraordinary march of human understanding imposes on us a profound responsibility to make sure that the age of discovery can continue to reflect our most cherished values. .

many commentators lauded the executive order , and quoted with approval its description as "preventive policy making — to put in place the kind of protections that the public needs and deserves before we find ourselves in a needless crisis situation. .

however , it has also been criticized both on a philosophical level and in the details of its coverage .

the eeoc has issued guidance on the executive order .

the executive order defines "protected genetic information" as " ( a ) information about an individual's genetic tests ; ( b ) information about the genetic tests of an individual's family members ; or ( c ) information about the occurrence of a disease ; or medical condition or disorder in family members of the individual. .

current health status information would not be protected under this executive order unless it was derived from the information described above .

the executive order requires executive departments and agencies to implement the following nondiscrimination requirements: the employing entity shall not discharge , fail or refuse to hire , or otherwise discriminate against any employee because of protected genetic information or because of information about a request for or receipt of genetic services ; the employing entity shall not limit , segregate or classify employees in any way that would deprive or tend to deprive any employee of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect that employee's status because of protected genetic information or because of information about a request for or receipt of genetic services ; the employing entity shall not request , require , collect , or purchase protected genetic information with respect to an employee or information about a request for or receipt of genetic services ; the employing entity shall not disclose protected genetic information with respect to an employee or information about a request for or receipt of genetic services with certain exceptions ; the employing entity shall not maintain protected genetic information or information about a request for or receipt of genetic services in general personnel files .

such materials shall be treated as confidential medical records and kept separate from personnel files .

there are certain exceptions to these prohibitions .

for example , the employing entity may request or require information if such current condition could prevent the applicant or employee from performing the essential functions of the job , or where it is to be used exclusively to determine whether further medical evaluation is needed to diagnose a current disease .

genetic monitoring of biological effects of toxic substances in the workplaces are permitted in certain circumstances .

although there is limited federal law relating to the use of genetic information , many states have enacted statutes dealing with various aspects of these issues .

early state statutes focused on particular genetic conditions .

the first statute to prohibit discrimination based on a genetic trait was enacted in north carolina and prohibited employment discrimination based on the sickle cell trait .

in 1991 wisconsin became the first state to enact a comprehensive law to prohibit discrimination based on genetic test results .

currently , the states vary in their provisions with some prohibiting discrimination in employment while others deal solely with discrimination in insurance .

a recent survey of state law found that thirty - four states have enacted genetic nondiscrimination in employment laws .

these laws vary and the national conference of state legislatures noted: all laws prohibit discrimination based on the results of genetic tests ; many extend the protections to inherited characteristics , and some include test results of family members , family history and information about genetic testing , such as the receipt of genetic services .

most states also restrict employer access to genetic information , with some prohibiting employers from requesting , requiring and obtaining genetic information or genetic test results , or directly or indirectly performing or administering genetic tests .

some states may also make exceptions to statutory requirements if , for example , genetic information may identify individuals who may be a safety risk in the workplace .

a related survey found that forty - seven states have passed laws pertaining to the use of genetic information in health insurance .

many state genetic laws also include specific provisions relating to genetic privacy .

in a recent survey , twenty - seven states were found to require consent to disclose genetic information while seventeen states require informed consent for a third party to perform or require a genetic test or obtain genetic information .

eighteen states were found which establish specific penalties for violating genetic privacy laws .

although these state statutes do provide some types of coverage , they do not cover employer self - funded plans providing private health insurance for employees and their dependents .

these plans are exempt from state insurance laws due to the preemption provision in the federal employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) .

since it has been estimated that over one - third of the nonelderly insured population obtains its coverage through self - funded plans and these types of plans are increasing , the erisa exemption limits the application of state laws significantly .

h.r .

493 , the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2007 ( gina ) , was introduced by representative slaughter and 143 cosponsors on january 16 , 2007 .

after being reported out of the house education and labor committee , the house energy and commerce committee , and the house ways and means committee , the bill passed the house on april 25 , 2007 , by a vote of 420 to 3 .

h.r .

493 , as passed by the house , contains provisions prohibiting genetic discrimination in health insurance ( title i ) and in employment ( title ii ) .

on march 5 , 2008 , the text of h.r .

493 as passed by the house was added to the end of the paul wellstone mental health and addiction equity act of 2007 ( h.r .

1424 ) in the engrossment of h.r .

1424 .

on april 24 , 2008 , the senate took up h.r .

493 , replaced the existing language with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , and passed the measure , as amended , by a vote of 95-0 .

h.r .

493 , as amended and passed by the senate , is very similar to the version passed by the house last year .

the most significant difference is new language strengthening the "firewall" between title i and title ii of the act .

the house is expected to pass h.r .

493 ( as amended ) during the week of april 28 , 2008 .

senator snowe , joined by 22 cosponsors , introduced s. 358 , a companion bill to h.r .

493 , on january 22 , 2007 .

senator snowe noted in her introductory remarks that "in june of 2003 , after sixteen months of bipartisan negotiation , we achieved a unified , bipartisan agreement to address genetic discrimination .

today we again introduce the legislation encompassing that agreement , which the senate has twice passed .. .

unanimously. .

s. 358 , which , like h.r .

493 , contains provisions prohibiting genetic discrimination in health insurance ( title i ) and in employment ( title ii ) , was reported out of the senate health , education , labor , and pensions committee on march 29 , 2007 .

h.r .

493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , prohibits health insurance plans from denying enrollment or charging higher premiums to individuals or groups based on an individual's or family member's genetic information .

it also prohibits health insurance plans from requesting or requiring that any individual , or family member of an individual , undergo a genetic test .

in addition , it contains privacy provisions amending the hipaa statute to require revisions in the hippa privacy rule prohibiting certain uses and disclosures of genetic information .

h.r .

493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , provides that references to genetic information include genetic information on a fetus carried by a pregnant woman and , with respect to an individual utilizing assisted reproductive technology , includes genetic information of any embryo legally held by the individual or family member .

h.r .

493 allows group health plans to obtain genetic information for purposes of payment , and allows a plan to request that an individual undergo a genetic test for the purposes of research , but the plan must make clear that this would be entirely voluntary on the part of the individual and would not be used for underwriting purposes .

h.r .

493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , also prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information .

if such information is obtained , the bill requires that it be treated as part of a confidential medical record and provides that an employer is considered to be in compliance with the maintenance of information requirements if the genetic information is treated as a confidential record under § 102 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the americans with disabilities act .

in addition , the bill does not prohibit an entity covered by regulations promulgated pursuant to part c of title xi of the social security act or section 264 of the health insurance portability and accountability act from any use or disclosure of health information that is authorized by those regulations .

h.r .

493 adds a provision in title ii , like that in title i , relating to the genetic information of a fetus or embryo .

there are detailed provisions on enforcement that generally apply the remedies available in existing civil rights laws such as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000e - 4 et seq .

on january 17 , 2007 , the white house issued a statement calling upon congress to pass genetic nondiscrimination legislation .

the administration praised the senate for passing a bipartisan genetic nondiscrimination bill in the 109 th congress and noted that "the administration looks to build on that success and work with both houses of congress , and the business community , to pass a bill the president can sign into law. .

the news release noted the importance of genetic nondiscrimination protections for the ability to use new genetic technologies , and observed that "the president believes it is critical that an individual's personal genetic information not be used by an employer to deny a job....[and] that insurance companies do not use genetic information to deny an application for coverage. .

in the 109 th congress , s. 306 , the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2005 , was introduced by senator snowe on february 7 , 2005 .

the senate health , education , labor and pensions committee reported s. 306 out with an amendment in the nature of a substitute by a voice vote .

the bill was passed , with an amendment , on february 17 , 2005 by a vote of 98-0 .

the amendment deleted former section 103 which would have added a prohibition of discrimination based on genetic information or services in church health insurance plans to the internal revenue code .

the administration indicated that it favored enactment of legislation to prohibit the improper use of genetic information in health insurance and employment and supported the enactment of s. 306 , 109 th congress .

a companion bill , h.r .

1227 , was introduced in the house on march 10 , 2005 by representative biggert .

h.r .

1227 was referred to the house committees on education and the workforce , energy and commerce , and ways and means .

s. 306 was similar to s. 1053 , which passed the senate in 2003 .

it prohibits health insurance plans from denying enrollment or charging higher premiums to individuals based on the individual's or family member's genetic information .

in addition , it contains privacy provisions prohibiting certain uses and disclosures of genetic information as well as prohibiting the collection of genetic information for insurance underwriting purposes .

s. 306 also prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information .

if such information is obtained , the bill requires that it be treated as part of a confidential medical record .

there are detailed provisions on enforcement which generally apply the remedies available in existing civil rights laws such as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000e - 4 et seq .

another bill , h.r .

6125 , 109 th congress , was introduced in the house on september 20 , 2006 by representative paul .

this bill would have prohibited discrimination based on genetic information by certain group health plans and in employment by federal , state or local entities or recipients of federal financial assistance or contractors .

employees or family members who have been adversely effected would have had a cause of action in federal court for compensatory and punitive damages , with the punitive damages limited to no more than 30% of compensatory damages .

several bills were introduced in the 108 th congress to address genetic discrimination and privacy .

for example , s. 16 , the equal rights and equal dignity for americans act of 2003 introduced by senator daschle on january 17 , 2003 , contained nondiscrimination provisions relating to insurance and employment .

on may 1 , 2003 , representative slaughter introduced h.r .

1910 , the genetic nondiscrimination in health insurance and employment act , which prohibited genetic discrimination in insurance and employment .

h.r .

1910 was a companion to s. 1053 , introduced by senator snowe on may 13 , 2003 , in the senate .

on october 14 , 2003 , the senate passed the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2003 ( s. 1053 ) .

this bill prohibited health insurance plans from denying enrollment or charging higher premiums to individuals based on the individual's or family member's genetic information .

in addition , the bill banned the collection , use and disclosure of genetic information for insurance underwriting purposes .

in the employment context , this bill prohibited the use of genetic information in employment decisions , such as hiring , firing , job assignments and promotions .

the bill also prevented the acquisition and disclosure of genetic information as well as applies the procedures and remedies authorized under the civil rights act of 1964 to cases of genetic discrimination .

although president bush supported genetic discrimination legislation and the house held a hearing in july 2004 , the house did not pass a bill in the 108 th congress .

legislation relating to genetic discrimination and privacy was a major issue in the 107 th congress .

the senate version of the patient protection act , s. 1052 , which passed the senate on june 29 , 2001 , contained an amendment prohibiting certain genetic discrimination by group health plans and health insurance issuers .

it also contains a provision relating to confidentiality .

congress did not pass the legislation prior to the adjournment of the 107 th congress .

other senate legislation in the 107 th took various approaches .

s. 318 , introduced by senator daschle , would have prohibited genetic nondiscrimination in health insurance and employment .

s. 1995 sponsored by senators snowe , frist and jeffords , also would have prohibited genetic discrimination in insurance and employment but was less broad that s. 318 .

s. 19 , the protecting civil rights for all americans act introduced by senator daschle , contained nondiscrimination provisions relating to insurance and employment .

senator snowe also introduced s. 382 , the genetic information nondiscrimination in health insurance act of 2001 , which would have prohibited discrimination in insurance .

s. 450 , the financial institution privacy protection act of 2001 introduced by senator nelson , contained provisions protection the privacy of health information , including genetic information .

in the house , representative slaughter introduced h.r .

602 , the genetic nondiscrimination in health insurance and employment act , which would have prohibited genetic discrimination in insurance and employment .

h.r .

602 was paralleled by s. 318 in the senate .

although legislation specifically relating to genetic discrimination and privacy was not enacted during the 106 th congress , a provision relating to health insurance was considered in the conference on h.r .

2990 .

the senate amended h.r .

2990 as passed by the house , striking all the language after the enacting clause and substituting the language in s. 1344 .

this senate bill would have amended erisa , the public health service act and the internal revenue code to prohibit health plans or health insurance issuers , in both group and individual markets , from using predictive genetic information to set premiums .

it also contained confidentiality provisions .

senator daschle had offered a more comprehensive amendment to the fy2001 labor - hhs appropriations bill , s. 2553 .

it would have prohibited insurance companies from raising premiums or denying coverage on the basis of genetic tests and would have also barred employers from using predictive genetic information to make employment - related decisions .

the amendment was defeated by a vote of 54-44 .

