the primary legislative function of standing committees in the house of representatives is to evaluate the thousands of bills and resolutions that members introduce during each congress .

this evaluation process typically begins with an initial screening by which the majority party leaders and staff of each committee identify the relatively small percentage of measures referred to it that may merit more consideration .

the committee or one of its subcommittees may conduct one or more days of public hearings to receive testimony about the issue and the merits of the legislation proposed to address it .

if the committee decides that it may want to recommend that the house take legislative action , the hearings are followed by markup meetings at which committee members propose and vote on amendments to a bill ( or the draft of a bill ) .

these meetings are called markups because committee members mark up the legislation before them as they decide what amendments to propose to the house .

finally , the committee votes to order the bill reported back to the house for consideration on the floor .

this report focuses on the markup stage of the legislative process in committee .

it discusses the selection of the text to be marked up , the procedures for proposing and debating amendments to that text , the voting and quorum procedures that govern markups , and the final stages of ordering the marked - up text reported to the house for its consideration .

a key initial decision that can shape the course and outcome of a markup is the selection of the text that the committee considers .

essentially , there are two choices .

first , the committee may mark up the text of one of the bills that members had introduced and that the house parliamentarian , acting for the speaker , had referred to the committee .

second , the committee may mark up the draft of a bill that has not yet been formally introduced and referred to the committee .

the chair can direct the committee's staff to prepare the draft of a bill , usually written with the assistance of attorneys in the house's office of legislative counsel , that reflects the chair's policy preferences .

the committee then may mark up this draft bill , which , in its printed form , may be called a staff draft , discussion draft , or chair's mark .

this last phrase originated in committee consideration of budget resolutions , but it now is commonly used to denote any draft that constitutes the legislative starting point from which a committee chair thinks a markup should begin .

in either case , the text that a committee marks up already may have been marked up by one or more of the committee's subcommittees .

if there has been a subcommittee markup , the subcommittee then makes its legislative recommendations to its parent committee .

in turn , the committee most often uses the product of the subcommittee's markup as the starting point for its own markup .

the selection of the text — or the base text or vehicle , as members sometimes call it — that the committee will mark up is important because it sets the framework within which the markup , and the policy debates it inspires , will take place .

each provision of the selected text will survive the markup and be recommended to the house for passage unless a committee member takes the initiative to propose an amendment to it that the committee adopts .

the burden is on those who would change the provisions of the base text ; it is up to them to devise alternatives to that text and convince a majority of their committee colleagues to vote for those alternatives .

clearly , then , it is advantageous to be able to select the vehicle from among the bills that were referred to the committee , or to devise the vehicle by drafting a new text that very well may draw on selected provisions of the introduced bills on which the committee held hearings .

under house rule xi , clause 2 ( g ) ( 4 ) , the text of the legislation to be marked up by a committee generally must be made publicly available in electronic form at least 24 hours prior to the meeting .

a general discussion of the markup process in house committees will provide a context for subsequent sections of this report that discuss the individual stages of the process .

as mentioned above , the rules of the house of representatives are ambiguous with respect to the procedures that standing committees are to follow at markup meetings .

clause 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of rule xi generally provides that "the rules of the house are the rules of its committees and subcommittees so far as applicable ... " ( italics added ) .

and clause 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the same rule directs each standing committee to adopt written rules governing its procedures that " may not be inconsistent with the rules of the house.... " ( italics added ) .

two problems arise in interpreting these rules .

first , they do not provide criteria to judge whether committee rules are not inconsistent with house rules .

second , they do not define which house rules are applicable to committees and subcommittees .

the house's rules make available different sets of procedures that the house uses under different circumstances to consider various bills and resolutions on the floor .

it would not be possible for all of these procedures to be applicable to committees at the same time .

by the same token , it would not be possible for committees to adopt rules that avoid being inconsistent with any of these procedures .

the house parliamentarian provides important guidance when he notes in the commentary accompanying section xxx of jefferson's manual that "[t]he procedures applicable in the house as in the committee of the whole generally apply to proceedings in committees of the house of representatives. .

he also points out several exceptions to this general statement that are discussed below .

the phrase "the house as in committee of the whole" refers to a distinctive set of procedures that the house may , but rarely does , use to consider measures on the floor .

these procedures are not stated in the house's standing rules , but they are a matter of well - established precedent .

as its name suggests , the procedures applicable in the house as in committee of the whole combine elements of the procedures that apply in the house and those that are followed in committee of the whole .

to summarize what is discussed in more detail below , when a standing committee begins a markup , the text to be considered first is to be read in full , although this reading usually can be waived by majority vote .

the text then is considered for amendment , section by section .

each section is read , unless the reading of one or all sections is waived by unanimous consent .

committee members may offer amendments to each section after it is read but before the next section is read .

each amendment must be in writing and is to be read before debate on it begins .

an amendment may be withdrawn without the need for unanimous consent ( on the floor unanimous consent is needed ) unless the committee has acted on it .

committee members may speak on the bill and amendments under a five - minute rule , meaning that each member may speak for five minutes on each amendment unless the committee votes to bring the debate to an end .

there are two motions available to end debate .

members may vote either to close the debate or to order the previous question on ( 1 ) a pending amendment or ( 2 ) the entire bill after the last section of the bill has been read or considered as read .

however , members may move only to close the debate , not to order the previous question , on the pending section of the bill ( and all amendments to it ) .

both motions are decided by simple majority vote .

the difference lies in the fact that ordering the previous question ends the debate and precludes additional amendments , while the motion to close debate does only that — it ends the debate , but it does not prevent members from offering additional , non - debatable amendments that otherwise are in order .

it should be emphasized that the rules of the house do not specifically describe these procedures and require committees to follow them .

however , the house's standing committees typically follow these procedures during markups , unless the committee agrees otherwise by unanimous consent .

a committee markup meeting usually begins with the chair calling the committee to order and announcing the matters that the committee is expected to consider at that meeting .

the chair also may announce that the requisite quorum of members is present .

the chair begins the markup itself by announcing that the committee will proceed to the consideration of the bill , resolution , or draft that is scheduled for consideration .

the chair also may note that the requirements in house rules for prior notification of the meeting and the availability of the base text have been satisfied .

after opening statements and after the first reading of the bill has been completed or dispensed with , the committee begins the markup process per se by entertaining , debating , and voting on amendments .

throughout this process , committee members often talk about how the committee is or is not amending the bill .

in fact , the committee is not amending the bill .

instead , it is voting on what amendments , if any , the committee will recommend that the house adopt when it considers the bill on the floor .

only the house as a whole ( meeting as the house , not in committee of the whole ) actually has the authority to change the text of bills that members have introduced .

during committee markups , chairs and amendment sponsors sometimes signal , by their words or demeanor , that they believe the committee should be ready to vote on the pending amendment or other question .

if such signals prove ineffective , there are two different non - debatable motions that members can offer to conclude debates during markup .

these are ( 1 ) the motion to order the previous question , and ( 2 ) the motion to close debate .

the two motions are not in order under all circumstances , and they have somewhat different effects if adopted .

in presiding over a markup , the chair participates freely in the debate , unlike the speaker and other members who preside over floor sessions of the house .

like the speaker , however , the chair is responsible for maintaining order , insisting on proper decorum , and enforcing applicable procedures .

committee chairs are somewhat more likely than the speaker to take the initiative in declining to recognize members who are about to say or do something in violation of proper procedure .

in general , though , it is the responsibility of committee members to protect their rights by making points of order whenever they believe that appropriate procedures are being violated to their detriment .

it bears repeating that no house committee has the authority to actually change the text of a measure that has been introduced and referred to it , nor do committees vote directly on the merits of bills and resolutions .

the committee votes instead on the amendments that it will recommend to the house .

the house then considers and votes on these committee amendments when it acts on the bill itself .

markups may begin with an amendment in the nature of a substitute being offered by or on behalf of the chair , sometimes for the tactical reasons discussed above .

members then offer their amendments to that complete substitute , rather than to the text of the underlying bill .

in such a case , the final vote the committee takes on amendments is on agreeing to the amendment in the nature of a substitute , as it may have been amended .

when the committee reports the bill back to the house , the bill will be accompanied by only that one amendment in the nature of a substitute , even though the committee may have adopted several or even many amendments to it during the course of the markup .

the committee does not conclude its markup by voting on the bill itself .

after voting on the last amendment to be offered , the chair recognizes a majority party member to move that the committee order the bill reported to the house with whatever amendments the committee has adopted during the markup , and with the recommendation that the house agree to those amendments and then pass the bill as amended .

the bill is actually reported ( as opposed to the committee ordering it reported ) when the committee chair takes the bill and the accompanying committee report to the floor when the house is in session , files the report , and returns the bill to the house .

the committee report then is printed , the bill is reprinted to show the committee's action and its recommended amendments , and the bill is listed on the union calendar if it authorizes or appropriates funds or affects revenues , or otherwise on the house calendar .

a house committee has several options in deciding how it will report to the house after it has completed a markup .

if the committee has marked up a bill that was introduced and referred to it — h.r .

1 , for example — the committee may vote to order h.r .

1 reported with one or more amendments .

if , as its last vote on amendments , the committee agreed to an amendment in the nature of a substitute ( perhaps as amended ) , the committee may vote to order h.r .

1 reported with that one amendment , even though the amendment constitutes an entirely new text of the bill that may not resemble the text of h.r .

1 as it was introduced and referred to the committee .

if the committee has marked up h.r .

1 and agreed to several different amendments to it , each amendment affecting a different provision of the bill , the committee may vote to order h.r .

1 reported with those separate amendments .

instead , though , the committee may authorize the chair to incorporate those amendments into a single amendment in the nature of a substitute .

the reason for doing so is that it is more convenient for the house , when considering a bill on the floor , to act on a single committee substitute than to act on a series of discrete committee amendments .

the committee may agree to a unanimous consent request that the committee report an amendment in the nature of a substitute instead of the several amendments .

alternatively , a member may offer the amendment in the nature of a substitute as the last amendment to be considered during the markup .

 ( in the latter case , however , any committee member has the right to insist that the substitute actually be drafted and available in writing at the time it is offered. ) .

alternately , the committee may vote to report what is known as a clean bill instead of reporting h.r .

1 with one or more amendments .

a clean bill is a new bill that has a new number instead of h.r .

1 and that typically lists as its sponsor the committee chair , not the member who had introduced h.r .

1 .

this new bill is known as a clean bill because it incorporates all the amendments that the committee adopted during its markup of h.r .

1 .

for this reason , the committee reports the new bill without amendment ; in this sense , it is clean .

the effect of reporting a clean bill is much the same as reporting the marked - up bill with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

in either case , all the committee's proposed changes in the marked up text are incorporated into a single new text .

then why would a committee report a clean bill ? .

there are at least two reasons .

first , if the committee has marked up a staff draft ( discussion draft , chair's mark ) instead of h.r .

1 , that marked - up text must be introduced and reported as a bill before the house can consider it .

second , there are instances in which the committee ( or its chair ) decides to assume complete responsibility ( and credit ) for the bill it orders reported .

imagine , for example , that the committee has marked up h.r .

1 in ways that the original sponsor of the bill finds unacceptable .

in that case , the sponsor may wish to disavow further responsibility for h.r .

1 , and so welcomes the committee's decision to report a clean bill instead of reporting h.r .

1 with a committee substitute .

in other cases , the chair may prefer a clean bill in order to have his or her name most closely associated with it .

technically , the committee must have the clean bill in its possession before it can vote to order the bill reported .

this means that , at the conclusion of the markup , the marked - up text must be prepared as a bill , it must be introduced while the house is in session , and the newly introduced , clean bill must be numbered and referred back to the committee before the committee may act on it .

in the past , committees sometimes short - circuited this process if no one objected .

immediately after the committee completed its markup , it authorized the chair to report the clean bill .

so long as the clean bill was introduced on that same calendar day , the official records of the house's proceedings did not indicate whether the clean bill actually was introduced and referred to committee before or after the committee's markup ended .

immediately after the committee votes to order the bill reported , the ranking minority member or another minority party member usually claims the right for all committee members to submit their own supplemental , minority , or dissenting views for printing as part of the committee's report on the bill .

clause 2 ( l ) of rule xi provides: if at the time of approval of a measure or matter by a committee ( other than the committee on rules ) a member of the committee gives notice of intention to file supplemental , minority , additional , or dissenting views for inclusion in the report to the house thereon , that member shall be entitled to not less than two additional calendar days after the day of such notice ( excluding saturdays , sundays , and legal holidays except when the house is in session on such a day ) to file such views , in writing and signed by that member , with the clerk of the committee .

if and when the time comes to take a bill to conference , the house often agrees to a unanimous consent request that the house create a conference committee with the senate to negotiate a compromise between their differing positions on the bill .

if unanimous consent cannot be secured , one option is to obtain a special rule from the rules committee for that purpose .

a second alternative lies in rule xxii , clause 1: a motion to disagree to senate amendments to a house bill or resolution and to request or agree to a conference with the senate , or a motion to insist on house amendments to a senate bill or resolution and to request or agree to a conference with the senate , shall be privileged in the discretion of the speaker if offered by direction of the primary committee and of all reporting committees that had initial referral of the bill or resolution ( italics added ) .

under the terms of this rule , the committee chair can make this motion on the house floor only if the committee has authorized him or her to do so .

some committees have adopted rules , explicitly permitted under house rule xi , clause 2 ( a ) ( 3 ) , allowing a chair to make such a motion whenever appropriate .

in other words , some committees have given their chair the authorization required by clause 1 of rule xxii in a blanket form that applies to all of the bills that the committee may order reported during the course of the congress .

if a committee rule does not grant this authority to the chair , then the committee must agree to authorize the chair to make the motion necessary to go to conference with respect to each bill or resolution on which it may eventually want to go to conference .

the vote in committee on this motion requires that a majority of the committee actually be present , as does the vote to order the bill reported back to the house .

by adopting the motion to go to conference at the same meeting at which the committee has marked up the bill and voted to order it reported , the committee avoids the need to schedule another meeting and assemble a majority of the committee's members when the time actually arrives , perhaps months later , to arrange for the conference with the senate .

