on june 6 , 2000 , president bill clinton and king 'abdullah ii announced that the united statesand jordan would begin negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement ( fta ) , ( 1 ) eventually leadingto reciprocal duty - free trade in goods .

the united states and jordan conducted three main roundsof negotiations before signing the fta on october 24 , 2000 .

the first round took place inwashington during the week of june 26 , 2000 and was headed by then united states traderepresentative ( ustr ) charlene barshefsky and jordanian deputy prime minister and minister ofstate for economic affairs dr. muhammad al - halayqah .

the second and third rounds were heldin amman , jordan during the week of august 1 , 2000 , and in washington during the week ofseptember 11 , 2000 , respectively .

during the october 2000 summit meeting at sharm al - sheikh,egypt , king 'abdullah reportedly expressed to president clinton his desire to conclude thenegotiations as rapidly as possible .

 ( 2 ) soon after , thetwo negotiating teams completed their talks andthe fta was signed on october 24 , 2000 .

 ( 3 ) according to the agreement , the fta's entry into force is "subject to the completion of necessary domestic legal procedures by each party. .

the clinton administration submitted theagreement to the 107th congress on january 6 , 2001 , and bills to implement the fta were introducedin the senate ( s. 643 ) on march 28 , 2001 , and in the house ( h.r .

1484 ) on april 4 , 2001 ( for further details , see the sub - section entitled u.s. - jordan fta in the congressional interest section ) .

the jordanian parliament reportedly ratified the fta by a vote ofacclamation on may 9 , 2001 .

 ( 4 ) the agreement willenter into force two months after the partiesexchange written notification that the necessary domestic legal procedures have been completed .

as noted above , the u.s. - jordan fta was signed on october 24 , 2000 .

this section highlightsselected provisions of the fta and is based on the text , annexes , schedules , and relatedunderstandings of the agreement as published by the ustr .

 ( 28 ) this section does not offer a legalinterpretation of the rights and obligations that the fta entails .

those who are interested in furtherdetails on specific provisions of the agreement are urged to consult the full - text of the agreement,which is accessible via the hyperlink provided in the footnote below .

the subsequent sectiondiscusses some of the potential economic and political effects of the fta .

trade in goods and services .

the fta provides for a 10-year transitional period during which duties on almost all goods will be phased - out , leadingto duty - free trade in goods between the united states and jordan .

the duties on many goods willbe phased - out prior to the end of the 10-year transitional period .

the fta also provides for aliberalization of bilateral trade in services , stating that "each party shall accord to services andservice suppliers of the other party , in respect of all measures affecting the supply of services,treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers .

" ( article 3.2 ( b ) ) the parties undertook specific market - opening commitments in various servicesectors , such as business , communications , construction and engineering , distribution , education,environment , finance , health , tourism , recreation , and transportation .

intellectual property rights ( iprs ) .

the fta obligates the united states and jordan to give effect to various articles in several world intellectualproperty organization ( wipo ) multilateral agreements .

the fta provides protections fortrademarks , copyrights , and patents , and specifically mentions the protection of software andpharmaceuticals , two categories of products whose copyrights and patents are especially prone toviolation .

the fta also provides for the enforcement of the iprs that it protects: article 4.24states , in part , that each country "shall ensure that its statutory maximum fines are sufficiently highto deter future acts of infringement with a policy of removing the monetary incentive to theinfringer. .

the agreement stipulates that the protection of some of the iprs will take effectimmediately from the date of entry into force while others will take effect between six months andthree years from that date .

the united states and jordan also signed a memorandum ofunderstanding on issues related to the protection of iprs , specifying that jordan will raise itscriminal penalties for the infringement of iprs to approximately $8500 ( 6000 jordanian dinars ) inorder to deter future infringements .

environment .

in the fta , the united states and jordan recognize the principle that it is "inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domesticenvironmental laws .

accordingly , each party shall strive to ensure that it does not waive orotherwise derogate from , or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from , such laws as anencouragement for trade with the other party. .

 ( article 5.1 ) the agreement also recognizes the rightof each country to establish its own levels of domestic environmental protection , policies , andpriorities .

the fta states that "a party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental laws,through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction , in a manner affecting trade between theparties. .

 ( article 5.3 ( a ) ) the united states and jordan also issued a joint statement onenvironmental technical cooperation .

the joint statement establishes a joint forum onenvironmental technical cooperation , which will work to "advance environmental protection injordan by developing environmental technical cooperation initiatives , which take into accountenvironmental priorities , and which are agreed to by the two governments , consistent with the u.s.country strategic plan for jordan , and complementary to u.s. - jordanian policy initiatives. .

anannex to the joint statement details ongoing and future u.s. - jordanian environmental technicalcooperation programs .

labor .

 ( 29 ) under the fta , the united states andjordan reaffirm their obligations as members of the international labor organization ( ilo ) and theircommitments under the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and itsfollow - up .

mirroring the language used in the section on environmental standards , the fta statesthat "the parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic labor laws .

accordingly , each party shall strive to ensure that it does not waive or otherwise derogate from , oroffer to waive or otherwise derogate from , such laws as an encouragement for trade with the otherparty. .

 ( article 6.2 ) the agreement also recognizes the right of each country to establish its owndomestic labor standards , laws , and regulations , striving to ensure that these are consistent withinternational recognized labor rights .

the fta states that "a party shall not fail to effectivelyenforce its labor laws , through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction , in a manneraffecting trade between the parties. .

 ( article 6.4 ( a ) ) electronic commerce .

the fta states that the united states and jordan will seek to refrain from deviating from the existing practice of notimposing customs duties on electronic transmissions or imposing unnecessary barriers on electronictransmissions .

safeguard measures .

the fta contains safeguard measures to ensure that if the implementation of the agreement leads to "a substantialcause of serious injury , or threat thereof" to a domestic industry , either country may temporarilysuspend further tariffs reductions on the affected goods .

if either country decides to implement asafeguard measure , its duration cannot exceed 4 years or the 10-year transitional period , and nomeasure shall be maintained "except to the extent and for such time as may be necessary to preventor remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment. .

 ( article 10.2 .

 ( a ) ( i ) ) the fta also recognizesthe special challenges faced by "infant industries" during a period of trade liberalization and thattherefore neither country should create obstacles to "infant industries" that seek the imposition ofsafeguard measures .

joint committee .

the fta establishes a joint committee whose functions include reviewing the general functioning of the agreement ; improvingtrade relations ; avoiding and settling disputes ; amending the agreement ; developing guidelines,explanatory material , and rules on the implementation of the agreement ; and reviewing theenvironmental impact studies conducted by both countries .

the joint committee will be headed bythe ustr and by "jordan's minister primarily responsible for international trade" and will make alldecisions by consensus .

the committee will consider "the views of interested members of the publicin order to draw upon a broad range of perspectives in the implementation of this agreement" and"seek the advice" of non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

dispute settlement .

the fta sets out a multi - step procedure for dispute settlement .

first , the united states and jordan "shall make everyattempt to arrive at a mutually agreeable resolution through consultations" if a dispute arises .

if theparties do not resolve the dispute within 60 days through consultations , either party has the right torefer the dispute to the joint committee .

if the joint committee does not solve the dispute within90 days , the dispute may be referred to a specially appointed three - person dispute settlement panel .

the dispute settlement panel is authorized to make non - binding recommendations to resolve thedispute .

after the dispute settlement panel issues its recommendations within 90 days , the jointcommittee "shall endeavor to resolve the dispute , taking the report into account. .

if the jointcommittee stills fails to resolve the dispute within 30 days , then "the affected party shall be entitledto take any appropriate and commensurate measure. .

the united states and jordan also signed amemorandum of understanding on transparency in dispute settlement , obligating the parties to"solicit and consider the views of members of their respective publics in order to draw upon a broadrange of perspectives. .

according this memorandum , if a dispute panel is established , anysubmission made to it shall be made available publicly ; oral presentations before the panel shall beopen to members of the public ; the panel shall "accept and consider" amicus curiae submissions byindividuals , legal persons , and ngos ; and the panel shall release its report to the public .

jordanian american business association ( jaba ) , "the proposed free trade agreement betweenthe united states of america and the hashemite kingdom of jordan: expected impact andbenefits. .

office of the u.s. trade representative .

draft environmental review of the proposed agreement on the establishment of a free trade area between the government of the united states andthe government of the hashemite kingdom of jordan .

 - - the u.s. - jordan free trade agreement .

u.s. agency for international development , access to microfinance and improved implementation of policy reform ( amir program ) .

"economic impact and implications for jordan of theu.s. - jordan free trade agreement," february 2001 .

 - - "environmental review of the jordan - u.s. free trade agreement - a preliminary appraisal: final report," july 2000 .

u.s. international trade commission .

"economic impact on the united states of a u.s. - jordan free trade agreement. .

itc investigation no .

332-418 .

u.s. senate .

committee on finance .

hearing on the u.s. - jordan free trade agreement , march 20,2001 .

crs report 98-39 ( pdf ) , foreign investment treaties: impact on direct investment , by [author name scrubbed],january 12 , 1998 .

crs report 97-389 , generalized system of preferences , by [author name scrubbed] , updated january8 , 2001 .

crs issue brief ib93085 , jordan: u.s. relations and bilateral issues , by [author name scrubbed] , updatedregularly .

crs info pack ip445n , nafta: the north american free trade area , updated as needed .

crs report rs20529 , united states - israel free trade area: jordanian - israeli qualifying industrial zones , by [author name scrubbed] , updated march 29 , 2001 .

crs report rs20968 , jordan - u.s. free trade agreement: labor issues , by [author name scrubbed] , july19 , 2001 .

appendix a .

public comments received by ustr on u.s. - jordan fta source : united states trade representative reading room .

appendix b .

public comments received by ustr on environmental impact of u.s. - jordan fta source: united states trade representative reading room .

