concerning the serious case of china's suspected acquisition of the w88 data that becamepublic in early 1999 , there were concerns about china's modernization of its nuclear - armed ballisticmissile force and implications for u.s. national security .

this modernization for the military , thepeople's liberation army ( pla ) , reportedly has included efforts to develop a miniaturized nuclearwarhead and more reliable and mobile missiles , possibly with multiple independently targetablereentry vehicles ( mirvs ) .

china reportedly deployed over 100 nuclear warheads , with morewarheads in storage and a stockpile of fissile material .

 ( 22 ) of particular concern were about 20 df - 5a strategic , long - rangeicbms ( 13,000 km .

 ; 8,000+ mi. ) .

that could reach the united states .

china has developed a newdf - 31 solid - fuel , mobile icbm , with a range of about 5,000 miles , reportedly with a smallerwarhead ( 700 kg ; 1,500 lb. ) .

than the df - 5a icbms .

in addition , china has pursued programs todevelop a next - generation jl - 2 slbm and a longer - range icbm .

 ( 23 ) .

congress has voiced long - standing concerns about security at the nuclear weapon labs .

someattention focused on the foreign visitor program , which was reportedly not the primary concern inthe public cases involving alleged leaks by u.s. scientists to china .

in 1988 , senator john glenn,chairman of the senate governmental affairs committee , held a hearing , and the generalaccounting office ( gao ) presented a report on the extent to which foreign nationals work at thenuclear weapon labs and the effectiveness of security checks there .

senator glenn also said that backin october 1979 , his committee began to examine access by foreign visitors to mistakenlydeclassified documents at the public library at the los alamos lab .

 ( 41 ) later , the house national security committee requested in may 1996 that the gao againstudy controls over foreign visitors at the labs .

 ( 42 ) in october 1998 , congressman hunter held a hearing on doe'sforeign visitor program .

 ( 43 ) the national defense authorization act for fy1997 ( p.l .

104-201 ) prohibited doe fromusing funds for cooperative activities with china related to nuclear weapons or nuclear weaponstechnology , including stockpile stewardship , safety , and use control .

 ( stockpile stewardship relatesto the evaluation of nuclear weapons without testing. ) .

the national defense authorization act forfy1998 ( p.l .

105-85 ) banned the doe's use of funds for activities with china in cooperativestockpile stewardship , and similar legislation for fy1999 ( p.l .

105-261 ) made the ban permanent .

the los alamos controversy led to several reassessments and to consideration ofintelligence - related legislation .

 ( 255 ) as discussed above , the intelligence community undertookan assessment of potential damage to national security from possible leaks of nuclear weaponssecrets .

dci tenet asked a group of outside experts headed by retired admiral david jeremiah,former vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , to review the in - house effort , and they concurredwith its judgments .

efforts to formalize the government's counterintelligence efforts began after the arrest ofaldrich ames , the cia official convicted of espionage .

a presidential directive was signed in may1994 placing the policy and coordinating machinery of counterintelligence in the hands of the nscand created a national counterintelligence policy board composed of representatives of the principallaw enforcement and intelligence agencies , reporting to the national security advisor .

the boardwas subsequently given a statutory charter in the fy1995 intelligence authorization act ( p.l.103-359 ) .

a major goal in establishing the counterintelligence policy board was coordination of ciaand fbi efforts with a focus on counterintelligence at intelligence agencies ; concerns about doelaboratories were not publicly discussed in 1994 .

it was generally agreed that coordination amonglaw enforcement and intelligence agencies improved significantly .

as a result , however , of concernsdating from at least 1995 that china may have acquired sensitive information from los alamos,pdd - 61 was issued in february 1998 , mandating a stronger counterintelligence program within doelaboratories .

according to energy secretary richardson , writing in march 1999 , steps taken inresponse to pdd - 61 included new counterintelligence professionals based at the laboratories , adoubling of the budget for counterintelligence , a new screening and approval process for foreignscientists seeking access to the laboratories , and more extensive security reviews - - including the useof polygraphs - - for scientists working in sensitive programs .

 ( 256 ) .

in addition to questions about counterintelligence and modernization of prc weapondesigns , there were policy implications posed by china possibly passing u.s. nuclear weapon secretsto other countries .

as discussed above , in the late 1970s to 1980s , the prc reportedly acquired u.s.data on the neutron bomb from livermore and passed it to pakistan .

the united states and othercountries have been concerned about prc nuclear weapon proliferation , especially in pakistan andiran .

 ( 257 ) advancedu.s .

warheads have features of value to would - be nuclear weapon states .

these features mightpermit a nation to develop more efficient warheads , in which case it could build more bombs withits supply of uranium or plutonium .

they might solve engineering problems or suggest productionshortcuts .

if china passed u.s. nuclear weapon information to another country , it could developand deploy a more potent nuclear force faster .

the cia's damage assessment , that was briefed to congress and the administration on april21 , 1999 , cited a greater concern for nuclear proliferation .

it acknowledged that china could passu.s .

nuclear weapon secrets to other countries , although it was not known whether china had doneso .

the assessment cautioned that , now that the prc has more modern u.s. nuclear weaponinformation , it "might be less concerned about sharing [its] older technology. .

 ( 258 ) india or another country concerned about the advancement of prc nuclear weapons mightpursue further development of nuclear weapons and the missiles to deliver them in response toreports that china may have acquired designs for the w88 .

citing security concerns about china,india conducted several nuclear tests in may 1998 and has not signed the ctbt .

citing concerns about nuclear proliferation , members looked at curtailing the u.s. - chinalab - to - lab program that the clinton administration initiated in july 1994 and formalized in a june1998 official agreement .

leading a delegation to the los alamos national lab , senator shelby,chairman of the intelligence committee , said on april 12 , 1999 , that a "tourniquet" was needed tobe placed on the "hemorrhaging" of bomb secrets to foreign countries .

 ( 259 ) if there were securitygaps at the labs stemming from foreign exchanges , congress had a role in ensuring that adequatecounterintelligence measures were in place .

 ( see legislation above. ) .

the intelligence community's april 1999 damage assessment stated concerns , highlightedby some , about prc "technical advances" based on contact with scientists from the united statesand other countries , among a variety of sources of information .

 ( other countries may includerussia. ) .

the review panel's note on the damage assessment also warned of the dangers of exchangesbetween u.s. and prc or russian nuclear weapon specialists , urging that a separate net assessmentbe done on such formal and informal contacts .

yet , the panel also noted that "the value of thesecontacts to the u.s. , including to address issues of concern - - safety , command and control , andproliferation - - should not be lost in our concern about protecting secrets. .

another report on prc espionage included warnings about exchanges at the labs .

accordinga 1999 report by the cia and fbi , "prc scientists , through mutually beneficial scientific exchangeprograms , gather [science and technology] information through u.s. national laboratories. .

 ( 260 ) china's nuclear weapon facilities have included the china academy of engineering physics ( caep ) , also known as the ninth academy , at mianyang , sichuan province ; institute of appliedphysics and computational mathematics ( iapcm ) , in beijing ; high power laser laboratory , inshanghai ; and northwest institute of nuclear technology ( nint ) , near xian .

 ( 261 ) china's nuclearweapon installations were reorganized as part of changes in the defense industrial sector in 1998 thatincluded the civilianization of the commission of science , technology , and industry for nationaldefense ( costind ) solely under the state council .

prc nuclear weapon facilities then becamepartly subordinated to the people's liberation army ( pla ) 's general equipment department thatwas set up in april 1998 to centralize and improve control over research and development,production , and deployment of weapons .

placing restrictions on the foreign visitor program , however , entailed implications for u.s.policy on arms control and nonproliferation .

the administration argued that foreign exchanges havenot compromised u.s. security and have not involved weapon secrets .

moreover , contacts withforeign nuclear scientists have allowed u.s. nuclear weapon labs to learn about the secretive nuclearweapon establishment in china - - especially as it was undergoing changes .

in october 1998 , johnbrowne , director of los alamos , testified that "access to classified information by foreign nationalsis not allowed" in doe's foreign visitor program .

 ( 262 ) the administration said that engagement of prc and otherscientists have fostered support for arms control and nonproliferation objectives as well as advancedu.s .

interests in making sure that foreign nuclear powers have sufficient control over nuclearmaterials to prevent leaks to rogue states .

 ( 263 ) the former director of los alamos argued that "any contactwith china's nuclear weapons establishment needed to be clearly focused to avoid aiding theirweapons program .

hence , the department of energy authorized only small , restricted interactionson nuclear materials protection and verification technologies for arms control treaties .

theseactivities were and still are clearly in our national security interest. .

 ( 264 ) testifying before thecox committee in october 1998 , c. paul robinson , director of sandia , stated that "the lab - to - labprogram with china has been beneficial in several ways .

it provides the united states with perhapsits only window on the chinese nuclear weapons program .

 .

 .

moreover , the program has helpedpromote the establishment of an arms control program in china. .

 ( 265 ) .

the disclosures about suspected prc espionage at the u.s. labs further complicated theadministration's policy of engagement with china .

vice president gore said on march 9 , 1999 , that"having a relationship with [china] within which we can try to affect their behavior and improvehuman rights , eliminate unfair trade practices , and bring about the kinds of changes that will leadto further democratization in china , these things are in our interest. .

 ( 266 ) on march 11 , 1999,president clinton first defended his policy against charges of laxity in dealing with china andasserted that engagement "has paid dividends" for u.s. interests in weapon nonproliferation , korea,and the asian financial crisis .

he also argued against an "isolated no - contact" relationship withbeijing .

 ( 267 ) in amajor speech on china policy on the eve of prc premier zhu rongji's visit , president clinton againexplained that seeking to resolve differences with china cannot be achieved "by confronting chinaor trying to contain her," but through a "policy of principled , purposeful engagement with china'sleaders and china's people. .

 ( 268 ) some critics charged that the w88 case showed that engagement did not adequately protectu.s .

national security interests , and a more confrontational policy - - some called containment - - should be pursued .

they said that the credibility of the white house on china policy had beenfurther eroded and that engagement had brought more harm than benefits to u.s. interests .

senatorhelms wrote on july 8 , 1999 , that the cox report presented "damning disclosures on the clintonadministration's `engagement' policy toward beijing" and urged a "fundamental reassessment"ofu.s .

policy toward china .

 ( 269 ) still other critics pointed out that prc espionage and china's military had and will continueto challenge u.s. interests and the question was not whether the united states needed to remainengaged with china - - as the president said , but how that long - standing policy of engagement wascarried out .

according to them , engagement - - but with a tougher approach - - remained the mostappropriate policy .

for example , james lilley , former ambassador and cia station chief in china,argued that while both prc spying and american spying will continue , exposing prc espionage"should not derail our relationship with china. .

 ( 270 ) concerns over prc nuclear espionage spurred even some supporters of engagement tocriticize the clinton white house's pursuit of what it called a "constructive strategic partnership"with china .

 ( 271 ) henry kissinger , credited in part with the opening to china , wrote that "a sustainable sino - americanrelationship requires something beyond presidential invocations of 'engagement' that imply thatcontact between the two societies will automatically remove all latent tensions , or of a 'strategicpartnership' whose content is never defined. .

 ( 272 ) besides the immediate concerns about lab - to - lab exchanges , the w88 case also hadramifications for other aspects of the relationship with china .

in march 1999 , representativesgilman and rohrabacher wrote letters to defense secretary william cohen questioning exchangeswith the pla .

 ( 273 ) the pentagon has pursued military - to - military ties with the pla as a means to deter plaprovocations , increase mutual understanding , and expand relations with important leaders in china .

some observers were also concerned that a worsened political atmosphere would affect traderelations , including assessments about china's entry into the world trade organization ( wto ) .

