the federal government has employed government corporations to achieve policy goals for over a century .

among members of congress , the executive branch , and the scholarly community , interest in the government corporation option , and variations on this class of agency , has increased in recent decades .

in the typical contemporary congress , several bills are introduced to establish government corporations .

at the time of publication of this report , two bills had been introduced in the 112 th congress to improve u.s. infrastructure by establishing government corporations — h.r .

404 and s. 652 .

similarly , in the 111 th congress , government corporations bills included ones that would have created an indian development finance corporation ( h.r .

1607 ) , a green bank ( h.r .

1698 ) , and a national infrastructure development bank ( h.r .

2521 ) .

at least three factors may contribute to the interest in government corporations .

first , the restrictive character of the federal budget encourages agencies to develop new sources of revenue ( eg , outsourcing services to the private sector and to other agencies ) and to attempt to avoid increasing outlays .

second , experience suggests that it is politically easier for corporate bodies to be exempted by congress from the federal government's general management laws ( eg , the freedom of information act and employee compensation restrictions ) than it is for traditional agencies .

finally , the corporate concept appears to many , correctly or otherwise , to be supportive of the "new public management" that emphasizes entrepreneurship , risk - taking , and private sector practices in federal administration .

the continuing interest in the government corporation prompts questions as to their legal character , their utility vis - à - vis traditional agencies , and their limitations as units of governmental institutions .

a government corporation is not always an the optimal administrative entity for achieving governance objectives .

there are times when it may be an appropriate choice and times when it may not .

understanding the unique character of government management , based as it is upon tenets of public law , provides guidance in weighing these choices .

what is a federal government corporation , and what are the essential characteristics of a government corporation ? .

as defined in this report , a federal government corporation is an agency of the federal government , established by congress to perform a public purpose , which provides a market - oriented product or service and is intended to produce revenue that meets or approximates its expenditures .

by this definition , there are 17 entities that are government corporations .

the u.s. code does not provide a single definition of the term "government corporation. .

title 5 of the u.s. code defines a "government corporation" as "a corporation owned or controlled by the government of the united states" ( 5 u.s.c .

103 ) .

meanwhile , the government corporation control act ( ( gcca ) 31 u.s.c .

9101-10 ) states that the term "government corporation" means "a mixed - ownership government corporation and a wholly - owned government corporation. .

it then lists 28 entities — some , like the pennsylvania avenue development corporation , now defunct — as being "government corporations" for the purposes of chapter 91 of title 31 .

in addition to the enumeration of corporations provided in the gcca , there have been several other listings of corporations available , each different and based upon the definition employed by the compiler .

corporations cover the spectrum from such large , well - known corporations as the united states postal service and the federal deposit insurance corporation to such small , low - visibility corporate bodies as the federal financing bank in the treasury department and federal prison industries ( unicor ) in the justice department .

the number of federal corporations is in moderate flux .

new corporations are established from time to time ( eg , the valles caldera trust in 2000 ) , and existent ones are dissolved ( eg , the rural telephone bank in 2008 ) .

government corporations should not be confused with quasi governmental entities , such as government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) .

a gse ( eg , fannie mae ) is a privately owned , federally chartered financial institution with nationwide scope and lending powers that benefits from an implicit federal guarantee to enhance its ability to borrow money .

gses are important institutions worthy of separate analysis , but they are not discussed , except in passing , in this report .

unlike government corporations , with gses and other quasi governmental entities , the legal and political lines of accountability can be ambiguous .

in 1996 , for instance , the office of personnel management ( opm ) created the united states investigation services corporation as an employee stock - ownership plan ( esop ) , an entry into the quasi government category that sparked debate regarding its status and authority .

historically , the federal government has been involved in few commercial enterprises .

there were some early instances of the federal government participating in otherwise private corporate enterprises on a shared ownership basis , most notably the first and second banks of the united states .

this practice came into question , however , as a consequence of a supreme court ruling in 1819 .

from that time to today , the federal government has tended to avoid sharing ownership with private entities .

the first time the federal government acquired a corporation outright occurred in 1903 , when the panama railroad company was purchased from the french panama canal company .

since then , a number of corporate bodies have been established as part of the federal government , with growth in that number tending to come in spurts and generally in response to emergencies .

the first large - scale use of the corporate option accompanied the mobilization for world war i .

later , the depression of the 1930s fostered numerous corporations ( eg , the reconstruction finance corporation , and the tennessee valley authority ) .

finally , world war ii prompted the establishment of additional federal corporations .

after the passing of each of these emergencies , many of the corporations that dealt with them were abolished or absorbed into the permanent executive branch agencies .

in 1945 , partly in response to the proliferation of corporate bodies created for the war effort , congress passed the government corporation control act ( gcca ; 59 stat .

841 ; 31 u.s.c .

9101-9110 ) .

the act standardized budget , auditing , debt management , and depository practices for corporations .

notwithstanding unusual provisions that may be present in their enabling statute , government corporations remain "agencies" of the united states , and are therefore subject to all laws governing agencies , except where exempted from coverage by provisions of general management laws .

the gcca is not a general incorporation act such as is in effect in the states .

the charter for each federal government corporation is the separate enabling legislation passed by congress .

the gcca also does not offer a general definition of what constitutes a government corporation .

it simply enumerates the organizations covered by the act .

in addition to the enumeration of corporations in the gcca , there have been several other listings of corporations available , each different and based upon the definition employed by the compiler .

the corporations cover the spectrum from such large , well - known corporations as the united states postal service and the federal deposit insurance corporation to such small , low - visibility corporate bodies as the federal financing bank and federal prison industries ( unicor ) .

in the absence of a general incorporation act with organizational definitions , how is one to know when a government corporation is the most suitable option , and what criteria should be met before a government corporation is established ? .

in an effort to provide criteria to determine when the corporate option was appropriate , president harry truman , in his 1948 budget message , stated: experience indicates that the corporate form of organization is peculiarly adapted to the administration of government programs which are predominately of a commercial character — those which are revenue producing , are at least potentially self - sustaining and involve a large number of business - type transactions with the public .

in their business operations such programs require greater flexibility than the customary type of appropriations budget ordinarily permits .

as a rule , the usefulness of a corporation rests on its ability to deal with the public in a manner employed by private enterprise for similar work .

that said , congress has created many entities titled "government corporations" and "corporations" that do not meet these criteria .

the legal services corporation ( lsc ) , the corporation for public broadcasting ( cpb ) , and the newly established international clean energy foundation are examples of "corporations" that do not perform commercial functions and rely upon annual appropriations .

a principal intention behind assigning this status and title was to provide considerable insulation from oversight by the central management agencies and the application of the general management laws .

no two federal government corporations are completely alike .

however , there are sufficient commonalities among the several corporations , that it is possible to make some generalizations about their authorities , organization , mission , and behavior .

there is , at present , little central management agency oversight or supervision of government corporations as a category of agency in the executive branch .

nor is there any central unit charged with designing government corporations from the perspective of presidential or central management interests .

government corporations today are largely perceived as discrete entities , each with its own political and administrative requirements , and each with its own route and degree of political accountability .

individual corporations come under scrutiny from time to time by omb and congress , or more precisely , a congressional committee responsible for oversight .

more often than not , the immediate impetus for the oversight follows from indications that a corporation is operating at financial risk or there is an appearance of wrongdoing .

the current absence of systematic oversight of corporations as a class runs counter to the intentions of the sponsors of the gcca .

the bureau of the budget ( bob ) , predecessor organization to omb , was instrumental in the passage of the gcca , and created a separate office to oversee the formation , and monitor the operation , of government corporations on behalf of the president .

during the 1960s , this specialized staff function atrophied until at some point in the 1970s it is fair to conclude that there was little remaining central executive staff capacity to provide information , expert advice , or oversight of government corporations or to develop and implement consistent policies governing their formation , authorities , and operations .

government corporations are not considered by omb to be a category of organization to be supervised collectively .

omb , in support of its position , contends: the responsibility for oversight of government corporations was not changed by the omb 2000 reorganization .

that is , government corporations will continue to be reviewed by the resource management office ( rmo ) which has responsibility for the functional area most closely associated with the corporation's mission.... omb does not review government corporations separately from other government organizations that perform similar functions .

the executive branch treatment of management responsibilities respecting government corporations as a class of organization tends to place additional burdens on congress and its committees to determine if the corporations are respecting the provisions of the general management laws ( eg , the national environmental protection act , 42 u.s.c .

4321 ) .

one corollary of limited central management oversight of government corporations is the lack of answers to fundamental issues regarding when and how government corporations ought to be created and utilized .

there are at least two schools of thought respecting the proper use of the government corporation option relating to its structure , authority , and financial systems .

one school holds that government corporations , including agencies called corporations but which do not perform commercial activities , should be encouraged , provided maximum policy and financial autonomy , and be subject to such oversight as is appropriate for other agencies and instrumentalities in the same policy field .

the legal responsibilities of the corporation should be located in its enabling statute .

the position of the second school is that government corporations should be established only when appropriate criteria and standards , developed by a central management agency , are met .

such standards should be reflected in a national incorporation law and apply to all proposed and functioning corporate bodies properly defined .

government corporations should be considered to be part of the executive branch , but with recognition of their distinctive needs and oversight requirements as a category of institutions .

the government corporation concept may be considered a useful alternative to privatization of some agency , or it may be employed as a transition step toward eventual full privatization .

our interest here is limited to the corporation as a transition option .

the principal utility of the transitional government corporation is that it can demonstrate marketability and asset value , critical elements in any successful privatization venture .

an early successful example of the government corporation concept as a transition vehicle involved conrail .

conrail was created by congress as a government corporation in 1976 from the remnants of seven private , bankrupt railroads .

it took some 10 years and an investment of $8 billion by the federal government to bring conrail up to industry standards before entertaining a reasonable expectation that the railroad would be attractive to private investors .

the federal government received approximately $2 billion from the sale , but the real payoff was that the northeastern region of the country was once again provided a viable freight rail system .

the transition period as a government corporation was necessary to develop a record as a potentially profit - making venture prior to a successful privatization ( divestiture ) effort .

more recently , the u.s. enrichment corporation ( usec ) has completed its transitional process toward full privatization , with mixed results .

the usec , until 1993 a regular agency in the department of energy ( doe ) , operated uranium enrichment plants in kentucky and ohio .

in the 1950s , the plants produced highly enriched uranium ( heu ) for defense purposes .

times changed and the united states was successfully challenged by new international entrants into the market .

the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 ; 106 stat .

2776 ) established the u.s. enrichment corporation as a wholly owned government corporation .

the general intent of the legislation was to "privatize" the two plants and let them compete in the world market .

a privatization plan was delivered by the usec to the president and congress in 1995 .

the plan suggested that there were two primary methods of corporate divestiture: an initial public offering ( ipo ) and a merger or acquisition with another corporation or group of corporations .

after considerable discussion , the ipo option was selected , as it had been with conrail .

the ipo of stock was completed on july 28 , 1998 , and raised an estimated $1.9 billion for the federal government .

the usec transition process highlighted , however , one of the perennial problems in privatization efforts .

congress may intend a corporation to be private , but it also may want the corporation to continue to be involved in public policy implementation .

in this instance , congress wanted the corporation to participate in implementing a foreign policy objective , which was to purchase at above market rates a substantial amount of russian enriched uranium otherwise destined for russian weapons .

under the heu agreement , the usec received enriched uranium from russian nuclear weapons and , in addition to its payment for the material , returned an equivalent amount of natural ( unenriched ) uranium to russia to sell on the world market .

this arrangement , from the corporation's perspective , was not viable and in october 1999 , the usec solicited congress for "relief. .

another characteristic of a private corporation , legally organized and defined as such , is the right to cancel a program or withdraw from an activity if it is not deemed in the fiduciary interests of the shareholders .

to the consternation of doe officials , such a decision was reached recently by the usec board of directors .

one of the assets transferred from the doe to the usec in the divestiture was the right to commercialize a new enrichment technology called "atomic vapor laser and isotope separation" ( avlis ) , a technology in which doe had invested over $2 billion .

on june 9 , 1999 , the board of directors of the usec determined that avlis was not commercially viable and canceled the program .

the board's decision made manifest the fiduciary distinctions between a government and private corporation .

the federal government may , for whatever reason , choose to directly divest itself of a commercial activity or asset and not follow the transition corporation option to establish its value in the market .

although a transition corporation had been recommended by an outside study , the department of energy determined to directly divest itself of the california fields of the elk hills national petroleum reserves .

the government corporation form of federal agency is a useful option to consider when establishing or reorganizing an agency with revenue potential .

it is helpful to bear in mind , however , that there is no general provision in law that defines what , precisely , government corporations are .

when writing the gcca , congress and the executive branch simply viewed the various corporate bodies , and defined them by enumeration , rather than by required characteristics .

this relatively unstructured approach has meant that some corporate bodies ( eg , the u.s .

postal service ) are not included in the gcca enumeration , whereas other bodies , arguably non - corporate in function and authority ( eg , the corporation for national and community service ) are listed .

there is little managerial oversight at present of government corporations as an institutional category by either the president or congress .

what oversight there is tends to be corporation - specific .

in the case of congress , corporations are assigned to committees of subject - matter jurisdiction .

a gao report recommended that corporations properly require both subject matter and management oversight , and that the gcca should be reconstituted to establish in law the characteristics of various types of corporate bodies .

government corporations may be viewed as permanent agencies to perform a continuing governmental function ( eg , the federal deposit insurance corporation ) ; a temporary agency ( eg , the pennsylvania avenue development corporation ) ; or a transition agency to facilitate the process whereby a governmental agency or program is divested and transferred to the private sector ( eg , the u.s. enrichment corporation ) .

these options indicate the flexibility of the government corporation concept and may provide models for extending the corporate organization to other appropriations - funded agencies ( eg , the u.s. patent and trademark office and the u.s. mint ) .

both the latter agencies and their programs meet the basic criteria for a government corporation and suggestions to this effect have been made .

the future of government corporations as a category of federal organization appears generally bright although they are not widely understood in executive management circles .

the need for the executive branch and congress to develop new organizational structures that take into account both the public law requirements of governmental status , and the flexibility that properly accompanies corporate bodies dependent upon revenues for services may increase .

the managerial quality of the law establishing a corporation , may be a critical variable in determining the success or failure of that enterprise .

if the conceptual basis of the law establishing a corporation or economic assumptions therein are faulty , as was allegedly the case with the synthetic fuels corporation in the late 1970s , a government corporation may become a liability to the executive branch and face a short tenure .

on the other hand , if a federal government corporation is designed to conform with public law , governmental management principles , and sound economics , a corporate agency may provide a creative instrument to promote the public policy objectives of elected officials .

although it has been the purpose of this report to emphasize the distinctive characteristics of federal government corporations , it is important to conclude with a statement of their shared characteristics with other federal agencies .

the mission of both regular , appropriations - financed agencies and of government corporations is the same , to implement the laws passed by congress .

