medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health services for most persons 65 years of age and older and for most permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 .

part a of the program , the hospital insurance program , covers hospital services , up to 100 days of post - hospital skilled nursing facility services , post - institutional home health visits , and hospice services .

part b , the supplementary medical insurance program , covers a broad range of medical services including physician services , laboratory services , durable medical equipment , and outpatient hospital services .

part b also covers some home health visits .

part c ( also known as medicare advantage , or ma ) provides private plan options , such as managed care , for beneficiaries who are enrolled in both parts a and b .

part d provides optional outpatient prescription drug coverage .

in general , the total payment received by a provider for covered services provided to a medicare beneficiary is composed of two parts: a program payment from medicare plus any beneficiary cost - sharing that is required .

 ( the required beneficiary out - of - pocket payment may be paid by other insurance , if any. ) .

medicare has established specific rules governing its program payments for all covered services as well as for beneficiary cost sharing as described below .

because of its rapid growth , both in terms of aggregate dollars and as a share of the federal budget , the medicare program has been a major focus of legislative attention , as outlined below .

with a few exceptions , savings in program spending have been achieved largely through reductions in the updates to provider payments , primarily hospitals , physicians , and ma plans .

however , even when payments are frozen ( as has been the case in some years with payments to acute care hospitals , inpatient rehabilitation facilities , long term care hospitals , and with the physician fee schedule ) , medicare spending continues to increase each year as the number of beneficiaries increases , and the number and complexity of services becomes greater .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 as amended , aca ) , is estimated to achieve substantial program savings through , permanent reductions in the maximum amount paid to ma plans , and reductions in the annual updates to medicare's fee - for - service ( ffs ) providers ( other than physicians' services ) , among other provisions .

the anticipated savings from payment changes to ffs providers is substantially due to the application of a productivity adjustment .

 ( productivity , in general , is a measure of output produced relative to the amount of work required to produce it. ) .

the aca productivity adjustment marks a departure from most previous legislative actions to reduce medicare program spending in two specific respects .

first , it is a permanent , rather than time - limited , adjustment to ( non - physician ) payment updates .

second , in general , it specifies that the adjustment allows for negative payment updates and as such , payment rates for a year may be less than for a preceding year .

at the time of passage , the aca was estimated to achieve net medicare savings of approximately $430 billion over the 10-year budget window ( fy2010-fy2019 ) , based on a crs analysis of the congressional budget office estimates for provisions affecting the medicare program .

though the aca payment changes to medicare providers and plans is expected to slow the growth in medicare spending and extend the solvency of the hospital insurance ( part a ) trust fund , some have suggested that such a policy may not be sustainable in the long run , "without unprecedented improvements in health care provider productivity. .

once the impact of the provider payment changes from the aca is known , congress may wish to revisit the issue of the productivity adjustments to determine whether rates are much higher or much lower than originally estimated .

as in the case of physician payment updates , it is unclear whether congress will allow providers to be paid less than in a previous year under this new provision .

in addition , the aca created an independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) , and charged it with developing proposals to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare" if spending goes above targets specified in the statute .

ipab is prohibited from recommending changes that would reduce payments to certain providers before 2020 and is also prohibited from recommending changes in premiums , benefits , eligibility , and taxes or other changes that would result in rationing .

unlike other agencies that advise congress , ipab's recommendations are to be automatically implemented unless congress acts .

congress can alter the board's proposals , within limitations , or discontinue the automatic implementation of proposals .

the board is to be appointed by the president in consultation with congressional leadership and with the advice and consent of the senate .

it is to submit its first set of recommendations to the president and to congress , if required , by january 15 , 2014 .

however , the cbo has projected that the ipab trigger may not be activated in the near future .

provisions in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 , bca ) impact medicare payments in 2013 .

the bca established a joint select committee on deficit reduction and tasked it with providing to congress by november 23 , 2011 recommendations on ways to reduce the deficit over the subsequent 10 years .

when the committee did not provide the recommendations , this triggered a government - wide sequestration process to reduce federal spending beginning in 2013 .

payments for most medicare benefits will be subject to a maximum 2% reduction each year from march 2013 through 2021 .

starting april 1 , 2013 , for payments made to providers and suppliers under medicare parts a and b , the percentage reduction applies to individual payments for items and services provided .

in the case of medicare parts c and d , reductions are made to the monthly payments made to the private plans that administer these parts of the program .

certain parts of medicare , however , are exempt from sequestration .

these include ( 1 ) the part d low - income subsidies ; ( 2 ) the part d catastrophic subsidy ; and ( 3 ) qualified individual ( qi ) premiums .

outlays for certain medicare administrative expenditures ( non - benefit spending ) are not subject to the 2% limit .

provider - specific sequestration adjustments are not reflected in the tables that follow because they are temporary adjustments to payment systems .

in addition , the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( tptcca , p.l .

112-78 ) , the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( mctrjca , p.l .

112-96 ) , and the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) extended certain time - limited payment adjustments to specified medicare providers .

this report provides a guide to medicare payment rules by type of benefit .

the information is presented through a series of tables , each representing a provider type , such as physicians , or medicare advantage plans .

the first column in each table lists the type of payments that may be received by the provider ( eg , the separate operating and capital payments paid to short - term general hospitals under the prospective payment system as described in medicare payment policies ( table 1 ) , or lists subcategories of providers under the general provider category ( such as the different types of non - physician providers that are all listed in table 7 ) .

the second column of each table discusses the general policy for determining payments while column three describes how the general payment amounts are updated , or adjusted each year ( eg , amounts may be updated by a measure of inflation , economy - wide productivity , or statutorily specified reductions to updates ) .

the final column presents the most recent update amounts .

a complete list of acronyms used in this report is included the appendix .

this report is updated to reflect the most recent legislative changes to the program and payment updates available through january 2013 .

the following table includes health care acronyms used in this report .

it also includes acronyms for laws that have amended medicare since 1997 .

