the establishment of the united nations "oil - for - food" program ( offp ) reflected a longstanding u.n. security council effort to alleviate human suffering in iraq while pressing iraq to comply with all relevant u.n. security council resolutions .

the program was a temporary and limited exception to the international trade embargo imposed on iraq by u.n. security council resolution 661 , adopted on august 6 , 1990 , after iraq's invasion of kuwait on august 2 , 1990 .

u.n. security council resolution 687 ( april 3 , 1991 ) provided for the international embargo on iraq's exportation of oil to end once iraq had fully complied with u.n. efforts to end its weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) programs .

the wmd inspections began in april 1991 but proceeded more slowly than expected , and an end to sanctions did not appear to be in sight by the mid - 1990s .

without oil export revenues , iraq was unable to import sufficient quantities of food and medical supplies , and , according to virtually all accepted indicators ( infant and child mortality , caloric intake , and other indicators ) , living conditions deteriorated sharply during 1991-1995 .

the first version of an oil - for - food plan would have allowed iraq to export $1.6 billion in oil every six months .

it was adopted by the council in 1991 in resolutions 706 ( august 15 , 1991 ) and 712 ( an implementing plan adopted september 19 , 1991 ) , but iraq rejected it as too limited in scope and an infringement on iraq's sovereignty .

there was little movement on the issue during 1991-95 , despite dramatic declines in iraq's living standards .

during this period iraq continued to sell its oil under the terms of trade protocols with some of its neighbors in violation of the u.n. sanctions regime .

these sales were known to members of the u.n. sanctions committee , including the united states .

on april 15 , 1995 , the u.n. security council adopted resolution 986 , which took into account one of iraq's concerns by allowing the export of $2 billion in oil every six months .

pressured by fears of unrest caused by the drop in living standards , iraq accepted this proposal , and it and the united nations signed a memorandum of understanding on the program on may 20 , 1996 ( document number s / 1996 / 356 ) .

after several more months of negotiations on details , the first iraqi oil exports under the offp began on december 10 , 1996 .

after the first year of the program , the secretary general determined that the program was not meeting the food and medical needs of the iraqi people , and resolution 1153 ( february 20 , 1998 ) raised the oil export ceiling to $5.256 billion per six - month phase .

in an effort to provide iraq an incentive to cooperate with a new program of u.n. wmd inspections , the u.n. security council , in resolution 1284 ( december 17 , 1999 ) , abolished the export limit entirely .

according to investigations conducted by u.s. , u.n. , and iraqi officials , the regime of saddam hussein used two distinct illicit methods to generate funds following the imposition of sanctions on iraq by the united nations security council .

first , iraq illicitly sold oil to some neighboring countries from 1990 to 2003 in violation of u.n. sanctions that predated and remained outside of the auspices or control of the u.n. offp .

second , iraq allegedly exploited loopholes in u.n. offp regulations to impose surcharges on buyers purchasing offp - approved oil shipments and to solicit kickbacks from suppliers of humanitarian and other civilian goods purchased with funds from the u.n. offp escrow account .

some of those illicit funds were used to procure military supplies and commodities banned under the u.n. sanctions regime .

the primary concern of u.s. officials prior to the fall of the saddam hussein regime was that iraq reportedly was using illicit revenues to buy prohibited military and wmd technology .

following the regime's fall in april 2003 , allegations have emerged concerning the regime's purported use of its control over oil and humanitarian goods contracts to influence foreign officials , parties , and companies , and reward individuals and entities perceived to be supportive of iraq's positions .

the findings of subsequent investigations regarding these illicit fundraising and political activities are described in further detail below .

according to the iic report , saddam hussein's regime earned $11 billion from illicit oil sales that began before the offp started and remained outside of the scope or authority of the u.n. offp and in violation of u.n. sanctions on iraq .

the regime's illicit oil sales were conducted on the basis of "trade protocols" between iraq and individual governments or on the basis of "private sector export" agreements between iraqi authorities and private individuals and entities .

the importation of civilian goods under iraq's trade protocols with its neighbors was not necessarily prohibited by u.n. sanctions , and , under u.s. sanctions , iraq was allowed to import additional goods , separate from the offp , using its own non - u.n. escrow account revenues .

all iraqi oil sales outside of the auspices of the u.n. offp were prohibited by u.n. sanctions .

governments , individuals , and commercial entities engaged in buying and selling iraqi oil outside the auspices of the offp did so in violation of the u.n. sanctions regime .

the united states and other members of the u.n. sanctions committee took note of iraq's illicit oil sales to some of its neighbors but , for a number of reasons , chose not to take direct action to halt the sales or punish states or entities engaged in them prior to the onset of operation iraqi freedom in march 2003 .

the iic's final report on the management of the offp links this inaction to what it describes as the "primacy of political preference over even handed enforcement of sanctions against iraq and its neighboring countries. .

the iic report describes many examples of this phenomenon and singles out two cases as particularly noteworthy: "the united states tolerance for trade with jordan and turkey ( but not syria ) " and "russia's and france's reluctance to redress smuggling activity between iraq and syria. .

current allegations regarding the mismanagement and abuse of the u.n. offp fit into two broad categories: ( 1 ) allegations of mismanagement of the contracts and administration of the offp by contractors and u.n. staff , and ( 2 ) abuse of the u.n. program through vouchers , surcharges , and kickbacks by the regime of saddam hussein .

linking the two categories are allegations that contractors and u.n. staff , including oip executive director benon sevan , personally solicited and received , on behalf of themselves or associates , oil vouchers or bribes from iraqi authorities while administering their official program duties .

with regard to the allegations of u.n. and contractor mismanagement , investigations of the offp's operations have revealed flaws and shortcomings in the awarding , management , and auditing of program contracts .

with regard to the allegations of abuse of the u.n. program by the regime of saddam hussein , investigations have revealed evidence that iraq raised illicit funds through surcharges on offp oil shipments and kickbacks on u.n. approved commercial and humanitarian good contracts .

the iic's final report estimates that iraq earned $1.8 billion in illicit funds using these methods .

investigations also have uncovered evidence that the former iraqi government created a secret oil voucher system to allocate oil that was approved for sale under the offp to politically sympathetic individuals and entities .

according to former regime officials , iraq used the oil voucher system to encourage foreign individuals and entities to support iraq politically in international fora .

following the passage of the iraq sanctions act of 1990 [ p.l .

101-513 ] , u.s. law stipulated that any country violating u.n. sanctions against iraq should be denied u.s. foreign assistance unless the president certified to the congress that u.s. assistance was "in the national interest. .

in spite of public evidence that jordan and turkey were purchasing iraqi oil in violation of the u.n. sanctions regime , subsequent administrations issued presidential waivers to congress justifying the continued provision of u.s. foreign assistance to each country from fy1994 through fy2003 .

according to the iic's final report , iraq's illicit oil sales to turkey and jordan provided saddam hussein's regime with $6.74 billion in revenue .

memoranda of justification issued by the state department to the senate committee on foreign relations contain detailed explanations of the importance of u.s. foreign assistance to jordan and turkey , its utility as a means of supporting bilateral relationships with those countries , and the importance of those bilateral relationships to other u.s. foreign policy priorities .

the memoranda did not contain estimates of the value of the illicit oil sales to iraq or estimates of the possible uses of illicit revenue from the sales by saddam hussein's regime .

given contemporaneous u.s. concerns about iraq's efforts to reconstitute its wmd programs and its alleged support for international terrorism , inclusion of estimates of the proceeds of iraq's oil sales in the memoranda of justification may have provided members with a more complete understanding of the possible costs of continuing to provide bilateral u.s. assistance to countries that were openly violating the u.n. sanctions regime .

in considering steps to reform congressional oversight of u.s. sanctions policy , members may consider including more specific reporting requirements to accompany presidential waiver authority provisions so that the possible costs of choosing to waive sanction provisions are described as completely as the possible benefits of continued u.s. foreign assistance to various recipients .

bills addressing allegations of oil - for - food program abuse and the iic investigation were introduced in the 109 th congress: s. 291 , the united nations oil - for - food accountability act of 2005 , would have mandated percentage reductions ( 10% in fy2006 and 20% in fy2007 ) in u.s. contributions to the united nations unless the president certified u.n. cooperation ( providing requested documents , waiving immunity from u.s. prosecution for u.n. officials ) with u.s. inquiries into the oil - for - food allegations .

companion legislation was introduced in the house ( h.r .

1092 ) .

h.r .

4369 would have withheld $100 million in u.s. contributions to the united nations for each fiscal year fy2007-fy2009 until the secretary of state certified that the unedited and uncensored archives and files of the iic were transferred to a non - un entity and made accessible to the public ( including u.s. authorities ) for at least five years .

the united nations reform act of 2005 ( h.r .

2745 ) would have linked future u.s. financial contributions to the united nations to the creation of an independent oversight board ( iob ) at the united nations .

the bill subsequently would have directed the iob to review the iic's findings , determine the completeness of the iic investigation , and , if necessary , identify areas for further investigation .

the house passed h.r .

2745 on june 17 , 2006 ( roll no .

282 ) .

companion legislation was introduced in the senate ( s. 1394 ) .

