the government accountability office ( gao ) — with more than 3,100 staff positions and an annual budget exceeding $507 million in fy2008 — is the largest of several support agencies that provide research , review , and analysis for congress ; and it is the only one with a nationwide field structure .

gao , which had been titled the general accounting office until 2004 , operates under the control and direction of the comptroller general of the united states ( cg ) .

the head is appointed by the president — after receiving recommendations from a special bicameral congressional commission — by and with the advice and consent of the senate , for a 15-year nonrenewable term .

the position , which had been vacant for two years , was filled in late 1998 , when david m. walker was sworn in and became only the seventh comptroller general in gao's history , which began more than eight decades ago .

the post is now vacant with mr. walker's resignation on march 12 , 2008 .

gao was established as an independent auditor of government agencies and activities by the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( 42 stat .

23 ) .

that enactment also created the bureau of the budget , the forerunner to the office of management and budget , and established presidential authority over the budget formulation process .

the basic authority for the office and its head is codified at 31 u.s.c .

701 et seq .

and 3511 et seq .

numerous other statutory provisions affect the powers and duties of both gao and the cg .

the office was designed to be "independent of the executive departments," which were placed under its audit and review powers ( 31 u.s.c .

702 ( a ) ) .

sometimes characterized as "congress's watchdog" and the "investigative arm of congress," the gao provides a variety of services to congress , largely connected to the oversight , investigation , and evaluation of executive operations , activities , and programs .

the evolution of the office's authority , functions , and mandates over time , along with new pay and personnel powers for the comptroller general , prompted him to request a change in its name: from the general accounting office to the government accountability office ( p.l .

108-271 ) .

gao's current activities and services include: auditing and evaluating federal programs and operations ; conducting special investigations ( through a small office ) of alleged violations of federal criminal law , particularly conflict of interest or procurement and contract fraud ; providing various legal services to congress , including advice on legal issues involving government programs and activities ; resolving bid protests that challenge government contract awards ; prescribing accounting principles and standards for the executive branch , advising federal agencies on fiscal and other policies and procedures , and setting standards for auditing government programs ; assisting the professional audit / evaluation community in improving and keeping abreast of ongoing developments in such matters as audit methodology and approaches ; and detailing gao staff to work directly for congressional committees ( in these temporary transfers , the assigned staffs represent the committees and not gao itself ) .

since 1994 , gao has been the subject of congressional hearings , studies , and proposals for change connected with its mission , roles , capabilities , and personnel system .

after a lengthy period of growth — in its powers , duties , and resources — the office experienced reductions in these areas in the mid - 1990s .

in 1996 , for instance , certain of the "executive powers" of the comptroller general were abolished or transferred to executive branch agencies .

in addition , gao's budget was cut by 25% over a two - year period ( fy1996 and fy1997 ) , representing the largest reduction in a seven - year downsizing ( 1992-1999 ) .

since then , however , its budget authority has increased , from a low of $358 million in fy1998 to a high of $507.2 million for fy2008 .

since 1995 , however , full - time - equivalent employees are fewer than in each previous year , with 3,100 currently compared to 4,324 in fy1995 .

in fact , in the midst of the cutbacks during the 1990s , gao experienced an overall staff reduction of 39% from fy1992 to fy1998 .

a number of proposals in the 110 th congress would affect gao's organization , structure , and authority .

gao's budget and staffing levels have varied since the mid - 1990s , experiencing both downs and ups , with a current leveling off as continuing resolutions have tended to stabilize both figures .

the government accountability office , like the other congressional support agencies , operates under a permanent authorization and an annual appropriation .

a proposal in 1994 , based on the recommendations of the joint committee on the organization of congress , would have mandated an eight - year authorization period for all congressional support agencies to replace their permanent authorizations .

no action , however , was taken on the recommendation .

table 1 provides statistics on total new budget authority ( gross ) and on full - time equivalent employees ( ftes ) for gao from fy1995 through fy2009 ( requested ) .

since its inception in 1921 as the general accounting office , the government accountability office has been headed by only seven comptrollers general .

table 2 lists them in chronological order .

when the comptroller general post is vacant , gao has been headed by an acting comptroller general , as it is now .

the longest absence of a confirmed comptroller general was three years , 1936-1939 .

the second longest was the two - year vacancy from september 30 , 1996 , when charles bowsher ended his term , until november 9 , 1998 , when david walker began his .

the comptroller general is limited to a single 15-year term , a statutory provision designed to protect the officer's independence , professional integrity , and objectivity .

of the seven comptrollers general , three served the full term .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the four with shorter tenures include david walker , who will have served for nine years and four months when his resignation takes effect ( november 9 , 1998 , to march 12 , 2008 ) .

the remaining three who left early , coincidentally in succession , were brown , one year , resignation ; warren , 14 years , retirement ; and campbell , 10½ years , retirement .

all three cited ill health as the reason for leaving .

created in 1921 , the general accounting office , now the government accountability office , is congress's largest support agency , with a budget of more than $507 million and an authorized staff of 3,100 for fy2008 .

the office has been headed by only seven comptrollers general over its eight - decade history ; with a vacancy currently , it operates under an acting cg .

gao has been granted broad jurisdiction over the executive and substantial independence from it as well as extensive authority to gain access to its records and to investigate , audit , and evaluate its operations .

these attributes support a wide variety of services and activities , most connected with legislative oversight of the executive , that gao can initiative on its own or , more usually , at the request of congress , its members , and panels .

over the past decade , questions have arisen over several matters affecting gao's structure , organization , and powers: the process ( and resulting delay ) for selecting the comptroller general ; the absence of a confirmed deputy for more than twenty - five years ; the unsuccessful attempt to gain access to information from a presidentially established panel , headed by the vice president ; problems in securing independent access to the records of certain agencies ; and limitations on gao auditing of all components of the intelligence community .

as a result , bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress which would enhance gao access to executive branch information , clarify the office's jurisdiction over the intelligence community , provide reimbursement for certain audit costs , and establish a statutory inspector general in gao .

in the mid - 1990s , gao underwent a substantial downsizing — in funding and staffing — in part because of congressional criticism of its perceived orientation towards the previous two administrations and concerns about its missions and roles .

in the meantime , the office has experienced a paradox between its budget and personnel levels .

its annual budget has increased regularly over the past 10 years — reaching its highest level in fy2008 — while its staff has been downsized , falling to its smallest level at the same time .

in 2004 , the comptroller general garnered new authority over pay and personnel in the newly - designated government accountability office .

a followup study a year later , under the auspices of the ibm center for the business of government , found benefits in gao's use of human capital management to drive its organizational transformation .

the authors recommended that executive agencies — notwithstanding their differences with a legislative branch support agency — "heed the lessons of the government's chief accountability office as they go about the critical work of reinventing their own personnel systems. .

despite this endorsement , the changes in gao ( as well as parallel ones in executive agencies ) prompted concerns over the implementation and impact of the new personnel flexibilities authority and pay .

these developments contributed , in 2007 , to the establishment of an employee union with collective bargaining rights ; in 2008 , to a new contract for eligible employees ; and in the same year , to legislative proposals to modify the cg's powers over such personnel matters and provide reimbursements for certain staff who did not receive pay increases in 2006 and 2007 .

in sum , the government accountability office appears to be going through a transition period .

changes — in progress or proposed — have been prompted by a vacancy in the office of the comptroller general ; the nearly 30-year absence of an official deputy cg ; conflicts over a new personnel system and its implementation ; the perceived need for certain new arrangements and organizations within gao , such as a statutory inspector general ; and restrictions on its independent access to executive branch information and its auditing of the intelligence community .

