the traditional practice of the house is to elect a speaker by roll call vote upon first convening after a general election of representatives .

customarily , the conference of each major party in the house selects a candidate whose name is formally placed in nomination before the roll call .

a member may vote for one of these nominated candidates or for another individual .

in the great majority of cases , members vote for the candidate nominated by their own party conferences , since the outcome of this vote in effect establishes which party has the majority and therefore will organize the house .

table 1 presents data on the votes cast for candidates for speaker of the house of representatives in each congress from 1913 ( 63 rd congress ) through 2019 ( 116 th congress ) .

it shows the votes cast for the nominees of the two major parties , other candidates nominated from the floor , and individuals not formally nominated .

included in the table are not only the elections held regularly at the outset of each congress but also those held during the course of a congress as a result of the death or resignation of a sitting speaker .

such elections have occurred five times during the period examined: in 1936 ( 74 th congress ) upon the death of speaker joseph byrns ; in 1940 ( 76 th congress ) upon the death of speaker william bankhead ; in 1962 ( 87 th congress ) upon the death of speaker sam rayburn ; in 1989 ( 101 st congress ) upon the resignation of speaker jim wright ; and in 2015 ( 114 th congress ) upon the resignation of speaker john boehner .

on the two earlier occasions among these five , the election was by resolution rather than by roll call vote .

on the more recent three , the same procedure was followed as at the start of a congress .

the data presented here cover the period during which the permanent size of the house has been set at 435 members .

this period corresponds to that since the admission of arizona and new mexico as the 47 th and 48 th states in 1912 .

the actual size of the house was 436 , and then 437 , for a brief period between the admission of alaska and hawaii ( in 1958 and 1959 ) and the reapportionment of representatives following the 1960 census .

by practice of the house going back to its earliest days , an absolute majority of the members present and voting is required in order to elect a speaker .

a majority of the full membership of the house ( 218 , in a house of 435 ) is not required .

precedents emphasize that the requirement is for a majority of "the total number of votes cast for a person by name. .

a candidate for speaker may receive a majority of the votes cast , and be elected , while failing to obtain a majority of the full membership because some members either are not present to vote or instead answer "present" rather than voting for a candidate .

during the period examined , this kind of result has occurred five times: in 1917 ( 65 th congress ) , "champ" clark was elected with 217 votes ; in 1923 ( 68 th congress ) , frederick gillett was elected with 215 votes ; in 1943 ( 78 th congress ) , sam rayburn was elected with 217 votes ; in 1997 ( 105 th congress ) , newt gingrich was elected with 216 votes ; and in 2015 ( 114 th congress ) , john boehner was elected with 216 votes .

in addition , in 1931 ( 72 nd congress ) , the candidate of the new democratic majority , john nance garner ( later vice president ) , received 218 votes , a bare majority of the membership .

the table does not take into account the number of vacancies existing in the house at the time of the election ; it therefore cannot show whether any speaker may have been elected lacking a majority of the then qualified membership of the house .

if no candidate obtains the requisite majority , the roll call is repeated .

on these subsequent ballots , members may still vote for any individual ; no restrictions have ever been imposed , such as that the lowest candidate on each ballot must drop out , or that no new candidate may enter .

because of the predominance of the two established national parties during the period examined , only once in the period did the house fail to elect on the first roll call .

in 1923 ( 68 th congress ) , in a closely divided house , both major party nominees initially failed to gain a majority because of votes cast for other candidates by members from the progressive party or from the "progressive" wing of the republican party .

many of these members agreed to vote for the republican candidate only on the ninth ballot , after the republican leadership had agreed to accept a number of procedural reforms these members favored .

thus the republican was ultimately elected , although ( as noted earlier ) still with less than a majority of the full membership .

in the first portion of the period covered by table 1 , it was common for candidates other than those of the two major parties to receive votes .

such action occurred in 11 of the 16 congresses ( 63 rd - 78 th ) that convened from 1913 through 1943 .

on 7 of those 11 occasions , candidates other than those of the two major parties were formally nominated .

these events reflect chiefly the influence in congress , during those three decades , of the progressive movement .

the additional nominations were offered in the name of that movement , and the votes cast for members other than the major party nominees also generally represent an expression of progressive sentiments .

during this period , the occurrence of additional nominations ( displayed in the table ) reflects changing views of members identifying themselves as "progressives" about whether to constitute themselves in the house as a separate progressive party caucus or as a wing of the republican party .

so does the pattern of shifts in the party labels by which these nominees and others receiving votes chose to designate themselves .

the last formal progressive party nominee appeared in 1937 ( 75 th congress ) .

after defeats in the following election , the only two remaining members representing the progressive party were reduced to voting for each other for speaker , and beginning in 1947 ( 80 th congress ) , the last standard - bearer of the tendency accepted the republican label .

the demise of this movement in the house represented the final stage in the establishment of a two - party system at the national level .

from 1945 through 1995 ( 79 th - 104 th congresses ) , only the official nominees of the two major parties received votes for speaker .

this pattern , in other words , persisted from the end of world war ii and the advent of the "modern congress" until after the republicans had regained the majority in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) after four decades as the minority party .

during this period , the presumption became firmly established that a member's vote for speaker will reliably reflect his or her party membership .

the opening of the 105 th congress in 1997 , accordingly , marked the first time since 1943 that anyone other than the two major party candidates received votes for speaker .

in 10 of the 13 speakership elections since then ( 1997-2019 ) , at least one member has voted for a candidate other than ones formally nominated by the major party conferences .

early in this period , votes cast for other candidates seem to have usually reflected specific circumstances and events , but in the most recent instances , some of them may be regarded as reflecting action by identifiable political factions or groupings .

during this period , only in the initial election of 2015 have the names of any candidates other than those of the party conferences been formally placed in nomination .

the ballots in 1997 , 2013 , 2015 ( both instances ) , and 2019 were also notable because votes were cast for candidates who were not members of the house at the time .

in the initial election in 2015 , two of the votes cast were for sitting members of the senate ; in 2019 , one such ballot was cast .

although the constitution does not require the speaker ( or any other officer of either chamber ) to be a member , the speaker has always been so ; it is not known that any votes for individuals other than members to be speaker had ever previously been cast in the history of the house .

notably , in 2001 , a member who bore the designation of one major party voted for the nominee of the other .

although the table below does not indicate the party affiliation of the members voting for each candidate , examination of other available records confirms that no such action had occurred at least for the previous half century .

