the bilateral economic relationship between the united states and the european union ( eu ) is the largest such relationship in the world — and it is growing .

it is a relationship forged over several centuries , since the european colonization of north america .

the modern u.s. - european economic relationship has evolved since world war ii .

it has broadened as the 6-member european community expanded into the present 28-member european union .

the ties have also become more complex , covering a growing number and type of trade and financial activities that intertwine the economies on both sides of the atlantic into an increasingly interdependent relationship .

for members of congress and other policy makers , the eu remains a significant participant in the u.s. economy and a major factor in policy considerations .

for example , the eu and its members are influential members of the world trade organization ( wto ) , the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the international monetary fund ( imf ) , and the world bank .

these countries , together with the united states , play decisive roles in developing and implementing the missions of those institutions .

despite the tightness of the bilateral relationship , policy tensions arise , generating tensions within the relationship , sometimes leading to bilateral trade disputes .

the issues that arise are becoming more complex , reflecting the growing integration of the u.s. and eu economies .

yet , in spite of these disputes , the u.s. - eu economic relationship remains dynamic and one within which trillions of dollars of economic activity transpire .

the united states and the eu have embarked on an effort to bind their economic relationship even more tightly with negotiations to form a free trade agreement — the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) .

this report provides background information and analysis of the u.s. - eu economic relationship for members of the 113 th congress as they contemplate the costs and benefits of closer u.s. economic ties with the eu .

it examines the economic and political framework of the relationship and the scope and magnitude of the ties based on data from various sources .

in addition , the report analyzes the implications these factors have for u.s. economic policy toward the eu .

the report will be revised as events warrant .

the united states has been a strong advocate for the construction of close economic ties among the west european countries since the end of world war ii .

during the cold war , the european community served u.s. foreign policy and national security interests as a force of stability that drew former enemies — ( west ) germany and france — closer together and that helped to build western europe into an economic bulwark against the soviet bloc .

the formation of an economically unified europe has served u.s. economic interests as well by accelerating european economic growth and development , which has opened trade and investment opportunities for the united states .

many studies have concluded that the formation of the eu has had a net positive economic impact on the world as a whole because it has led on balance to more trade creation than diversion of trade from other countries .

the eu became a more closely knit entity with the formation of the european monetary union comprising 17 of the 28 members of the eu and their adoption of a common currency , the euro .

that union is under challenge as the members of the eurozone confront the current debt crisis .

u.s. - eu economic relations exist within a framework of economic , political , and security factors .

some of these factors have promoted closer economic relationships , while others have created tensions that have , at times , threatened to undermine the relationship .

the u.s. - eu economic relationship dominates the world economy by the sheer size of the combined economies .

the combined population of the united states and the eu members approaches 800 million people who generate a combined gross domestic product ( gdp ) that is roughly equivalent to over 40% of world gdp in 2012 .

combined eu and u.s. world merchandise trade accounts for about 47% of all world trade .

in other words , the u.s. - eu economic relationship has clout .

the united states and the eu member countries are of roughly equivalent levels of economic development and are among the most advanced in the world .

as a group they include the world's wealthiest and most educated populations .

the united states and the members of the eu , with a few exceptions , are major producers of advanced technologies and services .

as a result , u.s. - eu trade tends to be intra - industry trade ; that is , trade in similar products , such as cars and computers , dominates two - way trade flows .

furthermore , the united states and the eu have advanced and integrated financial sectors which facilitate large volumes of capital flows across the atlantic .

these capital flows account for a significant portion of the bilateral economic activity .

the dominance of security and defense matters is another factor influencing u.s. - eu ties .

twenty - two of the eu - 28 are members of nato , and represent an overwhelming majority of nato's 28 members .

nato members must deal with a number of issues that pertain to foreign trade , such as defense - related government procurement , product standardization , controls of exports of dual - use technologies and related products , and economic sanctions .

national security and foreign policy concerns strongly dominated the u.s. - european relationship during the cold war .

the 159-member wto ( and its predecessor , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) ) is a critical part of the eu - u.s. bilateral economic framework .

the wto provides the principles and rules under which the united states and the eu conduct much of their trade .

the basic principles of most - favored - nation ( mfn ) , or nondiscriminatory , treatment and of national treatment of imports of goods and services and of foreign investments , along with wto rules on trade - related intellectual property rights , investment , and trade remedy practices ( antidumping and countervailing duties and safeguards ) , are the foundation of u.s. and european trade and investment policies .

the wto also provides the mechanism by which the united states and the eu resolve many of their bilateral trade disputes .

to a lesser extent , the oecd is an important element in the u.s. - eu framework .

largely consisting of fully industrialized countries , the 34-member oecd coordinates economic policies and reviews economic conditions and polices of its members and those of some non - members .

the oecd also has some rules and guidelines for trade and investment practices of its members .

for example , the oecd arrangement on official export credits curbs the subsidization of exports .

eu and u.s. policies and practices form another element of the bilateral economic framework .

the united states and the eu share a commitment to open trade and investment .

the united states and european countries were largely instrumental in establishing the post - world war ii foundation for an open international economic system .

this commitment has played a large role in the strong economic ties between them .

yet , the two sides differ in some significant policy areas , for example , the eu's common agricultural policy , conflicting competition policies , and the u.s. extraterritorial application of economic sanctions against cuba and other countries .

these policy differences have been a source of significant bitterness and controversy .

the eu as a unit is the largest merchandise trading partner of the united states .

in 2012 , the eu accounted for $265.1 billion of total u.s. exports ( or 17.1% ) and for $380.8 billion of total u.s. imports ( or 16.7% ) for a u.s. trade deficit of $115.7 billion .

at the same time , the united states is the largest non - eu trading partner of the eu as a whole .

in 2012 , eu exports to the united states accounted for 17.1% of total exports to non - eu countries , while eu imports from the united states accounted for 11.4% of total imports from non - eu countries .

for a number of years , the united states realized trade surpluses with the eu .

however , since 1993 , the united states has been incurring growing trade deficits with the eu ( $125.1 billion in 2013 ) .

among the top u.s. exports to the eu have been aircraft and machinery of various kinds , including computers , integrated circuits , and office machine parts .

a large share of u.s. imports from the eu has consisted of passenger cars ; machinery of various types , including gas turbines ; computers and components ; office machinery ; and parts and organic chemicals .

within the eu , germany , the united kingdom , and france are the leading u.s. trading partners , followed by the netherlands and italy .

the eu is the largest u.s. trade partner when trade in services is added to trade in merchandise .

in 2012 ( latest data available ) , the eu accounted for $193.8 billion ( or 30.7% of the total in u.s. services exports ) .

of this amount , $31.4 billion derived from receipts for various travel services , $10.3 billion from payments for passenger fares , and $14.9 billion for other transportation fees ( freight and port services ) .

another $47.2 billion were in receipts for royalties and licensing fees , and $88.9 billion derived from other private sector services , including business , professional , and technical services ( including legal services ) , and insurance .

also included under services are revenues from transfers under u.s. military contracts , which equaled $0.7 billion in 2012 .

in 2012 , the eu accounted for $149.7 billion ( or 34.4% of total u.s. services imports ) — including travel services ( $21.7 billion ) , passenger fares ( $13.2 billion ) , and freight and port fees ( $18.6 billion ) .

royalties and licensing fees accounted for another $18.4 billion .

in addition , other private sector services accounted for $66.0 billion of imports .

also included were payments of $10.4 billion in defense - related expenditures .

table 2 indicates that the united states has consistently run surpluses in services trade with the eu .

these surpluses helped , albeit modestly , to offset the u.s. merchandise trade deficits .

a substantial amount of funds flows between the united states and the eu as receipts of income derived from assets , including direct and portfolio investments and government securities .

in 2012 ( latest data available ) , an estimated $278.6 billion flowed to the united states from income earned on eu assets held by u.s. residents .

in 2012 , $221.9 billion flowed to the eu as income earned on assets held in the united states by eu residents .

in addition , a net $2.5 billion flowed out of the united states as unilateral transfers .

trade in goods and services , plus income receipts and payments , plus unilateral transfers , make up the u.s. current account , the most comprehensive measure of u.s. trade flows .

in 2012 , the united states incurred a current account deficit with the eu of an estimated $7.1 billion .

in sum , the flows of merchandise or goods trade , services trade , and income between the united states and the eu manifest a very active , strong , and large economic relationship .

in 2012 alone , a total of more than $1,500.5 billion flowed between the united states and the eu .

transactions on the current account represented only a part of the volume of international financial flows between the united states and eu in 2012 .

the remaining transactions are on the capital account , which derive from payments by the u.s. government and residents to obtain assets in the eu and by eu residents to obtain assets in the united states .

these assets include government purchases of gold and foreign currencies for their official reserves and government purchases of other foreign assets .

the capital account also includes payments by u.s. residents for portfolio investments ( including bank deposits , government securities , corporate stocks and bonds , and other private sector securities ) and payments to obtain direct investments ( including real estate , plants , factories , and commercial establishments ) .

foreign direct investments ( fdi ) represent long - term commitments on the part of the investor .

in 2012 , an estimated net $150.0 billion flowed from u.s. residents to eu countries into direct investments , while an estimated net $105.9 billion flowed from eu residents to direct investments in the united states .

by the end of 2012 ( latest data available ) , the position of u.s. direct investment in eu countries stood at $2,239.6 billion , or 50.3% of all foreign direct investment by u.s. residents .

of that total , $275.2 billion , or 12.3% , was in the manufacturing sector .

another 18.2% was in banking and other financial establishments , and insurance firms .

at the end of 2012 , eu residents had foreign direct investments in the united states valued at $1,647.6 billion , or 62.2% of total foreign direct investments in the united states .

of that total , $605.0 billion ( 36.7% ) was in manufacturing , $356.8 billion ( 21.7% ) was in banking and other financial services , and $685.8 billion ( 41.6% ) was in other industries .

foreign trade and investment data depict a strong , interdependent , and significant u.s. - eu bilateral economic relationship .

it is a relationship that is likely to grow in importance as advancements in technology and other forces of globalization , plus the future enlargement of the eu , force more trade and investment barriers to fall .

the relationship may grow even tighter if and when the united states and the eu complete and implement the ttip .

the expanded relationship is widely seen as bringing economic benefits to both sides in the form of wider choices of goods and services and greater investment opportunities .

but increasing economic interdependence brings challenges as well as benefits .

u.s. - eu trade ties have been plagued by disputes that at times have reached the highest levels of policymaking .

while these disputes have covered a range of sectors and issues , the most contentious and public have been related to trade in agricultural and agricultural - related products .

the united states has taken the eu to task for its ban on hormone - enhanced beef imports and for its policy regarding banana imports .

yet , the agriculture sector accounts for a very small portion of not only u.s. - eu bilateral trade but also for the total world trade of the two entities .

in 2013 , agriculture accounted for 4.5% of total u.s. exports to the eu and for 3.8% of total imports from the eu .

it is beyond the scope of this report to analyze this contrast between u.s. and eu trade policies and trade volume .

but the contrast suggests that the attention received by these disputes at the official level , as well as from the press , reflects the domestic political salience of these issues to a much further extent than their overall commercial or economic significance .

greater economic integration also challenges long - held notions of "sovereignty," as national or regional policies have extraterritorial impact .

for example , the u.s. use of foreign policy trade sanctions against such "rogue states" as cuba and iran affected eu firms and investors and caused sharp u.s. - eu friction .

similarly , accepted understandings of "competition," "markets," and other economic concepts are tested as national borders dissolve with closer integration of economies .

u.s. and eu policy makers , therefore , continually face the task of how to manage the increasingly complex bilateral economic relationship in ways that maximize benefits and keep frictions to a minimum .

for members of congress it means weighing the benefits and costs to constituents of greater economic integration and placing this calculation in the context of overall u.s. national interests .

the debate over u.s. - eu economic relations will likely become more acute as the united states pursues the transatlantic trade and investment partnership fta with the eu .

crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) negotiations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22163 , the united states and europe: current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42377 , the eurozone crisis: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

