is there any practical replacement for gasoline and diesel fuel in automobiles ? .

since the oilcrises of the 1970s and the rise in the awareness of environmental and security issues , policy makershave often considered this question .

for many reasons , the united states has searched foralternatives to petroleum fuels .

these reasons include limiting dependence on imported petroleum,controlling the emissions of pollutants into the air , and limiting the emissions of greenhouse gases .

several fuels are considered alternative transportation fuels by the federal government .

these fuels are electricity , natural gas , propane ( liquefied petroleum gas , or lpg ) , ethanol , methanol,biodiesel , and hydrogen .

some of these fuels are similar to conventional fuels , and can be used inconventional vehicles with little or no modification to the vehicle .

however , some of these fuels aresignificantly different , and require the use of completely different engine , fuel , and drive systems .

consequently , cost as well as performance of the associated alternative fuel vehicles ( afvs ) mustbe part of the discussion .

key factors in the ultimate success or failure of any alternative fuel includethe relative cost of the fuel , the ability to develop and expand fueling stations , and the performanceand safety of the fuel .

for various reasons - - notably cost , performance , and availability - - alternative fuels have yet to play a major transportation role in the united states .

many argue that the government must stepin .

congress , recent administrations , and state governments have instituted some key programs topromote the use of alternative fuels .

these programs include tax incentives for the purchase ofalternative fuels and alternative fuel vehicles ( afvs ) , purchase requirements for government andprivate fleets , and research grants for the study of alternative fuels .

despite these efforts , only about480 million gallons ( 1 ) of alternative fuels wereconsumed in 2004 , just 0.3% of motor fuel demand ( 136 billion gallons of gasoline and 36 billion gallons of diesel ) .

 ( 2 ) .

the three most important statutes concerning alternative fuels are the alternative motor fuelsact of 1988 ( amfa , p.l .

100-494 ) , the clean air act amendments of 1990 ( caaa , p.l .

101-549 ) ,and the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact , p.l .

102-486 ) .

amfa promoted federal governmentuse of alcohol - and natural gas - fueled vehicles .

epact requires that federal and state agencies , aswell as private firms that distribute alternative fuels , must purchase for their fleets a certainproportion of vehicles that are capable of being fueled by specific non - petroleum fuels .

furthermore,epact grants the department of energy ( doe ) the authority to make similar requirements of localgovernments and private fleets .

in addition , epact provides tax incentives for private purchases ( both individual and commercial ) of afvs .

caaa requires government and private fleets in citieswith significant air quality problems to use low - emission , "clean - fuel" vehicles .

in addition to these laws , recent executive orders have also shaped alternative fuels policy in the united states .

these include e.o .

12844 , which urged federal agencies to exceed epactpurchase requirements ; e.o .

13031 , which required that federal agencies meet epact requirementsregardless of budget ; and e.o .

13149 , which aims to drastically reduce federal governmentpetroleum consumption through the use of afvs and hybrid vehicles .

the major alternative fuelslegislation and relevant executive orders are summarized in table 1 and discussed further below .

table 1 .

history of u.s .

alternative fuel vehicle policie .

as noted above , several fuels are considered alternative fuels .

this section will addressalternative fuels recognized by epact .

many technical and market factors affect the usability andultimate success of these fuels as alternatives to petroleum - based fuels .

since many of these fuelsrequire entirely new engines , or extensive modifications to conventional vehicles , the characteristicsof both alternative fuels and alternative fuel vehicles must be discussed together .

fuel cost andfueling infrastructure , vehicle cost , fuel and vehicle performance , and other factors for each fuel willbe addressed in turn in the discussion below .

table 3 presents a summary of the various alternativefuels .

table 3 .

summary of alternative fuels source: department of energy and california energycommission .

notes: all estimates are for 2004. a geg: gasoline equivalent gallon .

to compare variousfuels , an equivalency factor is used .

in this case , it is theamount of energy in one gallon of gasoline .

b as of december 3 , 2004. c this does not include additional infrastructure / fuelingequipment costs or additional life - cycle vehicle costs ( egmaintenance , resale ) .

d since biodiesel can be blended with conventional diesel,separate refueling sites are not necessary .

e biodiesel is used in conventional diesel engines .

f 1,813 million geg including ethanol in blended gasoline .

g this does not include flexible fuel ethanol / gasoline vehiclesthat operate primarily or exclusively on gasoline .

in 2002,there were approximately 4.1 million of these vehicles in the united states ( energy information administrationestimate ) .

recent policy debate has focused on american energy security .

because of this , discussion hasturned to alternative fuels .

proponents argue that expanding alternative fuel tax credits and otherincentives would promote improved air quality and energy security .

opponents argue that alternativefuel programs could lead to "corporate welfare" and that there are less expensive ways to reducepollution and cut fuel consumption , such as efficiency improvements and conservation .

forexample , an increase in fuel economy of one mile per gallon across all passenger vehicles in theunited states could cut petroleum consumption more than all alternative fuels and replacementfuels ( 118 ) combined .

 ( 119 ) the bush administration's national energy policy ( 120 ) supports an increased role for alternativefuels , as did several bills in the 108th congress .

provisions in various bills would have provided taxcredits for the purchase of alternative fuel and hybrid vehicles , and would have expanded the existingelectric vehicle tax credit .

further , some bills would have expanded the existing tax credits anddeductions for the installation of alternative fuel refueling infrastructure .

some bills also would haveprovided per - gallon tax credits for the retail sale of alternative fuels , and some bills would haveallowed states to exempt alternative fuel and / or hybrid vehicles from high occupancy vehicle ( hov ) restrictions .

finally , some bills would have provided grants to schools , municipalities , and / or transitsystems for the purchase of alternative fuel vehicles , refueling infrastructure and / or fuel .

most notably , the energy policy act of 2003 ( h.r .

6 ) contained several provisions on alternative fuels .

the conference report ( h.rept .

108-375 ) would have required the use of 5.0billion gallons of renewable fuel in gasoline by 2012 ( renewable fuels standard ) .

further , the billwould have authorized the $2.15 billion over five years for hydrogen and fuel cell research anddevelopment .

the bill also would have provided a tax credit for the purchase of fuel cell vehicles .

finally , the bill would have modified the way vehicle purchase credits are generated under epact .

the house approved the conference report on november 18 , 2003 .

on november 21 , 2003 , acloture motion on the bill was rejected in the senate .

it is likely that a similar bill will be introducedin the 109th congress .

another key piece alternative fuel legislation in the 108th congress was the clear act ( h.r .

1054 and s. 505 ) .

these bills would have expanded the existing evtax credit and infrastructure deduction , and created new credits for alternative fuel vehicles andhybrids .

further , the bills would have established a tax credit for the retail sale of alternative fuel .

 ( 121 ) most notably , on october 22 , 2004 , the american jobs creation act was signed into law ( p.l .

108-357 , h.r .

4520 ) .

among other provisions , this act replaced the existing taxexemption for ethanol - blended fuel with a tax credit .

in addition , it established a tax credit for theproduction and sale of biodiesel fuel .

