untreated hiv infection leads to a gradual deterioration of the immune system and leavesaffected individuals susceptible to the opportunistic infections and cancers that typify aids .

since1981 , a cumulative total of 1,014,797 aids cases in the united states and dependent areas havebeen reported to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

 ( 1 ) of this total , 448,871 personswere reported to be living with aids as of the end of december 2006 .

in addition to the totalnumber of people living with aids , another 233,079 persons were known to be infected with hiv ( does not include data from five states and the district of columbia ; these areas have not beenreporting name - based hiv infection case numbers to cdc since at least 2003 ) .

figure 1 .

estimated total federal spending on hiv / aids,by function , fy2008 source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

federal government aids spending is estimated at $23.3 billion in fy2008 ( see table 5 ) .

the bush administration request for fy2009 is $24.1 billion .

of the total amount spent by thefederal government on hiv / aids in fy2008 , the majority ( 63% ) of funding is for treatmentprograms ; funding for research receives 13% of the total ( see figure 1 and table 4 ) .

the remainingamounts are for prevention programs ( 14% ) and income support for persons with aids ( 10% ) .

aids programs within hhs ( health and human services ) account for 66% of the totalamount spent on aids by the federal government ( see figure 2 ) .

hhs entitlement funding supportsthe treatment of hiv / aids patients through medicaid and medicare , which are administered by thecenters for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) .

hhs discretionary funding supports aidsresearch and prevention programs , as well as treatment programs .

table 2 provides a history ofhhs discretionary funding for hiv / aids from the beginning of the epidemic in fy1981 to thepresent .

funding for hiv / aids programs within hhs has increased markedly over the past 15 yearsas measured in constant 2000 dollars , shown in figure 4 near the end of this report .

even thoughhhs has revised its estimates of spending by medicaid for fy2007 through fy2009 , figure 4 stillshows that most of the overall rise can be attributed to increased spending on medicaid , medicare,and treatment programs in the discretionary budget , largely through the ryan white programadministered by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) .

the increase inhiv / aids research and prevention programs has been much less pronounced , and their portion ofthe total amount spent by hhs on hiv / aids has declined over the past 15 years ( see figure 5 ) .

for example , in fy1992 hiv / aids research and prevention programs at hhs accounted for 51%of the total amount spent by hhs on hiv / aids ; by fy2008 , such programs were about 27% of thetotal amount spent by hhs on hiv / aids , reflecting the growing amounts spent on treatmentservices under medicaid and medicare .

figure 2 .

estimated total federal spending on hiv / aids , byagency , fy2008 source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

note: usaid , u.s. agency for international development .

see table 4 .

about 90% of fy2008 hhs discretionary funding for hiv / aids is allocated to three hhsagencies: the national institutes of health ( nih ) , which supports hiv / aids research ; cdc , whichsupports hiv / aids prevention programs ; and , hrsa , which administers the ryan white program,an hiv / aids treatment program ( see table 3 and table 4 ) .

the budgets and activities of thesethree agencies are briefly described below , followed by a discussion of entitlement program spendingon hiv / aids .

in 1998 the white house announced a series of initiatives targeting appropriated funds forhiv / aids prevention and treatment programs in minority communities .

the congressional blackcaucus worked with the clinton administration to formulate the approach .

for fy2008 , a total of $403 million is provided to continue these activities .

for fy2009 , the administration has requested$387 million .

see table 1 below for further details .

table 1 .

hiv / aids minority initiative ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research ( crs ) based on analysis from the hhsbudget office , february 15 , 2008 .

notes: totals may not add due to rounding .

fy2009 is based on the administration's budgetrequest .

in january 2003 , president bush announced in the state of the union speech a five - year $15 billionprogram , the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) .

 ( 13 ) the five - year programtargets countries with a very high prevalence of hiv infection ; its goals are to prevent 7 million newinfections , provide treatment to 2 million hiv - infected people , and provide care for 10 millionhiv - infected individuals and aids orphans .

the global fund to fight aids , tuberculous and malaria , was first proposed at the july2000 g - 8 summit in okinawa .

 ( 14 ) its purpose is to attract , manage and disburse funding througha public - private partnership dedicated to the reduction of infections , illness and death caused bythese three diseases in countries in need .

it was established in january 2002 as a charitablefoundation in geneva , switzerland ; the first round of grants was approved in april 2002 .

u.s.support of the fund occurs through usaid and hhs .

as indicated in table 6 , federal government spending on international hiv / aids programsin fy2008 is $5.8 billion ; the administration's request for fy2009 is $5.9 billion .

 ( 15 ) table 2 .

hhs discretionary funding forhiv / aids ( $ in thousands ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhsbudget office , march 20 , 2008 .

note: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request .

table 3 .

hhs discretionary funding for hiv / aids , by agency ( $in thousands ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

notes: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request .

fda: food and drug administration ; hrsa: health resources and servicesadministration ; ihs: indian health service ; cdc: centers for disease control and prevention ; nih: national institutes of health ; samhsa: substance abuse and mental health services administration ; ahrq: agency for healthcare research and quality ; os: office of the secretary ( includes the office of hiv / aids policy , office for civil rights , office of minority health , office of women's health and the public health and socialservices emergency fund / minority communities fund ) ; global aids trust fund: while budgeted in nih , hhs contributions to the global fund tofight hiv / aids , malaria , and tuberculosis are not reflected in the nih hiv / aids spending figures , but are accounted for separately .

a. cdc reported funding for hiv / aids expenditures have been comparably adjusted downward to reflect the new budget structure at cdc that excludesadministrative and management costs .

the fy2004 adjustment was about $68 million , and the fy2005 adjustment was about $74 million .

table 4 .

total federal government spending on hiv / aids , by function ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

notes: hhs : department of health and human services ; cms : centers for medicare and medicaid services ; di : disability insurance ; hud :department of housing and urban development ; ssi : supplemental security income ; opm - fehb : office of personnel management - federal employeeshealth benefits .

table 5 .

federal government spending on hiv / aids: fy1982-fy2009 ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

notes: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request .

may not add due to rounding .

hhs: department of health and human services ; discretionary aids budget ; cms: centers for medicare and medicaid services ; ss: social security ; di: disability insurance ; ssi: supplementalsecurity income ; va: veterans affairs ; aid: u.s. agency for international development ; doj - prisons: department of justice , bureau of prisons ; hud: department of housing and urban development ; opm - fehb: office of personnel management - federal employees health benefits .

a. fy2000 total includes $75 million for the hrsa ricky ray hemophilia program , and fy2001 total includes $580 million for the hrsa ricky rayhemophilia program .

b. medicaid and medicare amounts have been revised due to the impact medicare part d prescription drug coverage and lowered per capita health carecosts .

figure 4 .

hhs spending on hiv / aids programs source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

note: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request .

figure 5 .

hhs hiv / aids spending , by program / function , as apercentage of total source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

note: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request .

table 6 .

federal government spending on international hiv / aids programs , by function ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 .

notes: may not add due to rounding .

hhs: department of health and human services .

