 table 5 shows the administration's fy2019 request for air force and navy research and development and procurement funding for the f - 35 program , along with fy2017 and fy2018 funding levels .

table 6 shows the procurement request in greater detail .

the f - 35's cutting - edge capabilities are accompanied by significant costs .

some analysts have suggested that upgrading existing aircraft might offer sufficient capability at a lower cost , and that such an approach makes more sense in a budget - constrained environment .

others have produced or endorsed studies proposing a mix of f - 35s and upgraded older platforms ; yet others have called for terminating the f - 35 program entirely .

congress has considered the requirement for f - 35s on many occasions and has held hearings , revised funding , and added oversight language to defense bills .

as the arguments for and against the f - 35 change , the program matures , and / or the budgetary situation changes , congress may wish to consider the value of possible alternatives , keeping in mind the program progress thus far , funds expended , evolving world air environment , and the value of potential capabilities unique to the f - 35 .

a potential issue for congress concerns the total number of f - 35s to be procured .

as mentioned above , planned production totals for the various versions of the f - 35 were left unchanged by a number of reviews .

since then , considerable new information has appeared regarding cost growth and budget constraints that may challenge the ability to maintain the expected procurement quantities .

"'i think we are to the point in our budgetary situation where , if there is unanticipated cost growth , we will have to accommodate it by reducing the buy,' said undersecretary of defense robert hale , then pentagon comptroller. .

some observers , noting potential limits on future u.s. defense budgets , potential changes in adversary capabilities , and competing defense - spending priorities , have suggested reducing planned total procurement quantities for the f - 35 .

a september 2009 report on future air force strategy , force structure , and procurement by the center for strategic and budgetary assessments , for example , states that [a]t some point over the next two decades , short - range , non - stealthy strike aircraft will likely have lost any meaningful deterrent and operational value as anti - access / area denial systems proliferate .

they will also face major limitations in both irregular warfare and operations against nuclear - armed regional adversaries due to the increasing threat to forward air bases and the proliferation of modern air defenses .

at the same time , such systems will remain over - designed – and far too expensive to operate – for low - end threats.... reducing the air force plan to buy 1,763 f - 35as through 2034 by just over half , to 858 f - 35as , and increasing the [annual f - 35a] procurement rate to end [f - 35a procurement] in 2020 would be a prudent alternative .

this would provide 540 combat - coded f - 35as on the ramp , or thirty squadrons of f - 35s[,] by 2021[ , which would be] in time to allow the air force budget to absorb other program ramp ups[,] like ngb [the next - generation bomber] .

development of the f - 35 block 4 software , part of an effort now called continuous capability development and delivery ( c2d2 ) , is expected to cost as much as $10.8 billion over the next six years .

"the f - 35 joint program office ( jpo ) plans to transition into the next phase of development – continuous capability development and delivery ( c2d2 ) – beginning in cy18 , to address deficiencies identified in block 3f development and to incrementally provide planned block 4 capabilities. .

"the jpo's latest plan for f - 35 follow - on modernization ... c2d2 , relies heavily on agile software development — smaller , incremental updates to the f - 35's software and hardware instead of one big drop , with the goal of speeding follow - on upgrades while still fixing remaining deficiencies in the block 3f software load. .

some in congress argue that a program of that size should part with traditional procurement practice for an upgrade and be run as a separate major defense acquisition program ( mdap ) , with its own budget line and the concomitant reporting requirements .

at a march 23 , 2016 , hearing of a house armed services subcommittee , government accountability office ( gao ) director of acquisition and sourcing management michael sullivan argued that the block 4 estimated cost justifies its management as a separate program , but f - 35 program executive officer ( peo ) air force lt. gen. christopher bogdan countered that breaking it off would create an administrative burden and add to the program's price tag and schedule .

section 1087 of the senate's version of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( s. 2943 ) required the department of defense to treat the f – 35 follow - on modernization program ( block 4 development ) as a separate mdap .

an amendment to the house version of the fy2017 ndaa ( h.r .

4909 ) to do likewise failed in markup by a vote of 28-41 .

section 223 of the conference report on the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.rept .

115-404 , accompanying h.r .

2810 ) included language limiting funds to be expended on f - 35 follow - on modernization ( i.e. , the block 4 software ) pending receipt of a previously required report that contains the basic elements of an acquisition program baseline for that modernization .

lieutenant general bogdan's comments regarding the difficulty of cost control in a sole - source environment ( see " engine costs ," above ) reflect a broader issue affecting defense programs as industry consolidates and fewer sources of supply are available for advanced systems .

congress may wish to consider the merits of maintaining competition when overseeing system procurements ( for example , the use of competition to maintain cost pressure was a principal argument in favor of the f - 35 alternate engine program ) .

on the f - 35 program , that competition could include contracting for lifecycle support .

in the specific case of the f - 35 , pratt & whitney and the joint program office have declined to reveal the cost per engine in each lrip contract , replacing dollar costs with percentage savings and aggregate contract values that include items other than the engines themselves .

congress may wish to consider whether this approach is sufficient to provide useful oversight , and weigh that value against a contractor's right to protect competition - sensitive data .

a possible analogue can be found in the debate over whether public disclosure of the contract value for the b - 21 bomber might reveal more data than prudent , or whether that is a reasonable cost to allow proper program oversight .

an additional potential issue for congress for the f - 35 program concerns the affordability of the f - 35 , particularly in the context of projected shortfalls in both air force fighters and navy and marine corps strike fighters .

although the f - 35 was conceived as a relatively affordable strike fighter , some observers are concerned that in a situation of constrained dod resources , f - 35s might not be affordable in the annual quantities planned by dod , at least not without reducing funding for other dod programs .

as the annual production rate of the f - 35 increases , the program will require more than $10 billion per year in acquisition funding at the same time that dod will face other budgetary challenges .

the issue of f - 35 affordability is part of a larger and long - standing issue concerning the overall affordability of dod's tactical aircraft modernization effort , which also includes procurement of f / a - 18e / fs .

some observers concerned about the affordability of dod's desired numbers of f - 35s have suggested procuring upgraded f - 16s as complements or substitutes for f - 35as for the air force , and f / a - 18e / fs as complements or substitutes for f - 35cs for the navy .

f - 35 supporters argue that f - 16s and f / a - 18e / fs are less capable than the f - 35 , and that the f - 35 is designed to have reduced life - cycle costs .

the issue of f - 35 affordability occurs in the context of a projected shortfall of up to 800 air force fighters that was mentioned by air force officials in 2008 , and a projected shortfall of more than 100 ( and perhaps more than 200 ) navy and marine corps strike fighters .

in the interim , "in light of delays with the f - 35 lightning ii joint strike fighter , the u.s. air force is set to begin looking at which of its newer f - 16s will receive structural refurbishments , avionics updates , sensor upgrades or all three. .

another potential issue for congress regarding the f - 35 program concerns its potential impact on the u.s. tactical aircraft industrial base .

the award of the f - 35 sdd contract to a single company ( lockheed martin ) raised concerns in congress and elsewhere that excluding boeing from this program would reduce that company's ability to continue designing and manufacturing fighter aircraft .

similar concerns regarding engine - making firms have been raised since 2006 , when dod first proposed ( as part of the fy2007 budget submission ) terminating the f136 alternate engine program .

some observers are concerned that if the f136 were cancelled , general electric would not have enough business designing and manufacturing fighter jet engines to continue competing in the future with pratt & whitney ( the manufacturer of the f135 engine ) .

others argued that general electric's considerable business in both commercial and military engines was sufficient to sustain general electric's ability to produce this class of engine in the future .

exports of the f - 35 could also have a strong impact on the u.s. tactical aircraft industrial base through export .

most observers believe that the f - 35 could potentially dominate the combat aircraft export market , much as the f - 16 has .

like the f - 16 , the f - 35 appears to be attractive because of its relatively low cost , flexible design , and promise of high performance .

competing fighters and strike fighters , including france's rafale , sweden's jas gripen , and the eurofighter typhoon , are positioned to challenge the f - 35 in the fighter export market .

some observers are concerned that by allowing foreign companies to participate in the f - 35 program , dod may be inadvertently opening up u.s. markets to foreign competitors who enjoy direct government subsidies .

a may 2004 gao report found that the f - 35 program could "significantly impact" the u.s. and global industrial base .

gao found that two laws designed to protect segments of the u.s. defense industry — the buy american act and the preference for domestic specialty metals clause — would have no impact on decisions regarding which foreign companies would participate in the f - 35 program , because dod has decided that foreign companies that participate in the f - 35 program , and which have signed reciprocal procurement agreements with dod to promote defense cooperation , are eligible for a waiver .

congress consolidated the jast and astovl programs after finding "no apparent willingness or commitment by the department to examine future needs from a joint , affordable , and integrated warfighting perspective. .

dod states that the f - 35 program "was structured from the beginning to be a model of acquisition reform , with an emphasis on jointness , technology maturation and concept demonstrations , and early cost and performance trades integral to the weapon system requirements definition process. .

a subsequent rand corporation study found that the fundamental concept behind the f - 35 program — that of making one basic airframe serve multiple services' requirements — may have been flawed .

congress may wish to consider how the advantages and / or disadvantages of joint programs may have changed as a consequence of evolutions in warfighting technology , doctrine , and tactics .

 table a - 1 summarizes key performance parameters for the three versions of the f - 35 .

