the air force , persuaded that global hawk will meet many , if not all , its airborne surveillancerequirements , is inclined to accelerate the acquisition effort beyond the twelve global hawksplanned for fy03-fy09 .

to supply the $960 million required in additional funding , secretary of theair force whitten peters has said that he is considering reductions in the u - 2 program beginningin fy2006 and retirement of all u - 2s by fy2011 .

 ( 36 ) this will inevitably be a controversial decision .

the u - 2 is one of the most heavily deployed aircraft in the air force's inventory , widely acclaimedby the cincs , and the beneficiary of a series of expensive upgrades in recent years that haveelongated its service life .

a "congressional interest item," the u - 2 is the "bird in the hand" whereasthe global hawk has yet to be fielded .

a formal decision to retire the u - 2 early to free up funds foradditional uavs will likely be given close scrutiny by congress and the public .

advocates of the proposal note that global hawks have performed well in tests .

they argue that the global hawk's long endurance gives it the ability to perform the u - 2's imagery collectionmissions with fewer platforms .

furthermore , future upgrades and reconfigurations will give globalhawk the u - 2's sigint collection capability .

to lay the groundwork for future airborne surveillancecapabilities , it is reasonable , according to this view , to retire the u - 2s beginning in 2006 rather thangradually phasing them out by attrition and make instead the investment in the next generation ofairborne reconnaissance platforms .

air force options on global hawks and u - 2s appear to be based on the assumption that funding must be adjusted within overall limits on spending for isr programs .

apparently an earlytermination of the u - 2 effort is the most acceptable way for the air force to identify funding for atrade - off to fund accelerated acquisition of the global hawk within its budgetary constraints .

someobservers suggest that air force officials may anticipate that , at some point , funding might beidentified elsewhere within the defense budget or that congress might provide funding specificallyfor additional global hawks .

one report noted , "some service sources say it is unlikely the airforce will be able to come up with the money without significant help from osd [office of thesecretary of defense] or congress. .

 ( 37 ) opponents of the proposal believe that the two systems should operate simultaneously .

they argue that , considering the very high demand for today's innumerous airborne isr assets , it isessential that the air force increase today's isr capabilities , not just replace them on a one - to - onebasis .

opponents of secretary peters's proposal also argue that the u - 2 should not be phased outuntil the global hawk is produced and employed in large numbers , and its operational capabilitiesand limitations are well understood .

this , they say , would ensure a smooth transition from today'sisr fleet to tomorrow's , and would ensure that the replacement of u - 2s does not result in a loss ofan essential capability .

opponents also argue that decommissioning all u - 2s which , as a result of extensive investment in upgrades have an expected service life of up to 50 more years , would be wasteful of an importantcapability .

they note that whereas fewer uavs than u - 2s might be needed for the same missionif they were identically equipped , the actual number of global hawks required might vary since theycannot ( at least at present ) carry the same set of collection systems as the u - 2 .

furthermore , theycontend , it is unclear when air force scientists will be able to overcome the technologicalimpediments that currently limit the global hawk's payload .

there may be other options that could be pursued to maintain or improve dod's aerial isr capability until the global hawk is optimally configured , and produced in sufficient quantities , toreplace the u - 2 .

these options include ( 1 ) increasing the number of operational u - 2s ; ( 2 ) moreeffectively managing the existing u - 2 inventory ; ( 3 ) attracting and retaining more u - 2 pilots ; or ( 4 ) returning the sr - 71 aircraft to active service .

there are currently 31 operational u - 2s with another four used as trainers .

at any one time , three of the 31 operational u - 2s are in depot for maintenance .

since it takes five u - 2s to maintaina 24 hour orbit ( 38 ) , these 28 u - 2s can theoreticallyoperate in five to six different spots on the globeat the same time .

given the limited inventory of u - 2s , a key concern is the foreseeable loss ofaircraft through accidents and attrition .

in recent years , one u - 2 has been lost through attrition everytwo years .

if this rate persists , by 2008 the air force would only have enough u - 2s to provide 24hour coverage of four to five different spots at any one time .

some urge the procurement of additional u - 2s by reopening the production line .

this idea has received some congressional attention .

 ( 39 ) someobservers believe that this may be a cost - effectiveway to make additional platforms available in a relatively short period of time .

the technology iswell - proven under operational conditions and acquiring new platforms would not require longlead - times for research and development and costs would be relatively manageable .

others argue that such a step would be counterproductive in that the air force would have a fleet of u - 2s of varying ages which would present maintenance problems at some point.furthermore , they suggest that the u - 2 is representative of decades - old technology and is difficultto fly .

also , the u - 2 production line has lain fallow for approximately 20 years .

is re - opening thisline feasible ? .

if so , at what cost ? .

another key consideration is manning ; the u - 2 requires speciallytrained pilots whose employability in other air force positions becomes limited .

most importantly,it places pilots at risk of death or capture .

proponents of re - opening the u - 2 line counter , however,that it should be possible to manufacture future u - 2s that don't require a pilot .

the additional costsof re - designing the u - 2 to fly without a pilot are unclear , but advances and technologies developedunder the global hawk and other uav programs could probably be exploited .

another important action that could be taken to relieve the high operational tempo felt by the u - 2 force would be to attract more pilots to the program and better retain the ones already qualifiedto fly the dragon lady .

u - 2 proponents suggest that congress may wish to enquire about steps theair force has or has not undertaken to attract more pilots into the u - 2 program .

what , for example,would be the impact on overall recruitment and retention if the air force were to dictate that agreater percentage of its pilots enter the u - 2 program ? .

options may also exist to more effectively manage dod's current u - 2 inventory .

for instance , only four u - 2 training aircraft exist .

this lack of trainers could slow the pace of preparing new u - 2pilots for their missions .

it is feasible that two - seat training aircraft could be used to fly operationalmissions if required , though with diminished capabilities .

however , the 31 single - seat aircraft usedto fly operations can't be used to train new pilots .

therefore , the reduction in isr capability causedby converting a handful of single - seat u - 2s to two - seat trainers may be outweighed by theimprovement in training capabilities .

another inventory management issue that might be examined is the u - 2's foreign basing arrangements .

in addition to bases in the united states , u - 2s currently operate from five air baseslocated in france , cyprus , spain , south korea , and saudi arabia .

the air force is currentlywithdrawing the u - 2 from the french and cypriot locations .

fewer forward bases may mean thatu - 2s could spend a greater percentage of their 10 hour missions transiting to and from the theaterto be observed , and less time collecting intelligence .

additional u - 2s would be required to overflythe theater to maintain the same amount of coverage .

base consolidation has been justified by thedissolution of the soviet union .

yet there has also been a proliferation of smaller scalecontingencies in which the united states has an interest .

this raises questions about the efficacy ofreducing the u - 2's operational basing by two fifths at a time of high operational tempo .

someobservers have suggested that examining the utility of opening additional u - 2 bases in differenttheaters may be in order .

another inventory management issue pertains to the expeditionary air force concept .

to increase deployment predictability and more evenly distribute the deployment burden , the air forceis dividing its people and forces into 10 air expeditionary forces ( aefs ) .

these aefs are looseamalgams of resources that will rotate through set training and deployment cycles .

currently , the airforce does not have a similar strategy for its "high demand , low density" ( hd / ld ) assets such asthe u - 2 .

instead , u - 2s are sent to a given theater as demand rises .

some within dod have suggestedthat the u - 2 and other isr assets could be included in the current aef concept and thus increase u - 2deployment predictability .

this idea may help distribute the deployment burden throughout the u - 2force , but may not reduce the deployment tempo , due to low numbers of operational platforms .

another suggested option is to devise an aef - like inventory management scheme specifically forthe u - 2 .

different variants of the global hawk may have to be developed and other uavs or manned aircraft may be acquired .

the global hawk is not the only uav potentially available , but it hasbeen designed to meet certain dod requirements for range and endurance .

configuring smalleruavs , such as the predator , to accomplish at least some of global hawk's mission capabilitiesmight be feasible , but would entail considerable delays and could come at the cost of otheroperational capabilities .

yet , this idea may merit further investigation .

a final option that may bear investigation is to "un - retire" a handful of sr - 71 black bird aircraft .

proponents of this approach point out that the sr - 71 was a very capable isr asset .

its veryhigh speed contributed to the sr - 71's survivability , and increased the potential volume of territorythat could be surveilled .

also , several sr - 71 airframes still exist .

they have been preserved at theair force facility in palmdale , california .

also , sr - 71 aircraft have been "un - retired" in the past.opponents of this idea point out that the sr - 71 was a very expensive aircraft to fly and maintain,and that flying just a handful would not be cost effective .

also , the airframes may exist , but whatabout pilots ? .

are there any pilots qualified to fly the aircraft ? .

are there any pilots qualified to teachand train pilots ? .

opponents of this idea argue that un - retiring the sr - 71 would be too expensive ameasure to simply bridge the gap between the u - 2 and global hawk .

it is likely that congress will play a key role in dealing with the futures of the global hawk andthe u - 2 .

direct congressional interest in uavs is longstanding and funding and policy direction forthe global hawk has been reflected in a series of appropriations and authorization acts .

similarly,congress has also monitored the u - 2 program closely in recent years , identifying funding forupgrades to the aircraft and for additional surveillance and communications equipment .

plans forthe early retirement of the u - 2 force will undoubtedly be viewed with care and there will be interestin the progress of global hawk acquisition and its integration into the operating forces .

actd advanced concept technology demonstration aef air expeditionary force asars advanced synthetic aperture radar system bda battle damage assessment cinc commander in chief ( of a u.s. unified or specified command ) comint communications intelligence darp defense airborne reconnaissance program dod department of defense elint electronic intelligence emd engineering , manufacturing and development eo electro optical faa federal aviation administration gao general accounting office hd / ld high demand , low density ioc initial operational capability ir infra red isr intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance lre launch , recovery unit jsaf joint signals intelligence avionics family mce mission control element pgm precision guided munition rdt&e research , development , test and evaluation sar synthetic aperture radar sigint signals intelligence slar side looking airborne radar syers senior year electro optical reconnaissance system tad temporary additional duty uav unmanned aerial vehicl .

