following general elections , one of the first orders of business for leaders of both parties in the senate is the setting of standing committee ratios and sizes .

committee ratios and sizes usually are set simultaneously because of their interrelationship .

these determinations usually are made before assigning senators to standing committees because the party organizations that make committee assignments need to know the numbers of seats available to each party on each committee .

the determination of ratios and sizes sometimes is made with an awareness of senators' specific desires for seats on particular panels .

the ratio of republicans to democrats on each standing committee usually is determined at early organization meetings held in the interval between the general election and the beginning of a congress .

since the rules of the chamber do not contain provisions regarding committee ratios generally , the majority party possesses the potential to set them unilaterally .

in practice , however , ratios generally are set after negotiation between leaders of the two parties .

committee ratios usually parallel the overall party ratio in the senate , with each party occupying a percentage of seats on all committees consistent with the percentage of seats it has in the senate .

senate rule xxv sets out the number of senators allowed on each committee .

however , these committee sizes typically are amended at the beginning of a congress through senate approval of one or more resolutions .

under senate rules , the majority and minority leaders may agree to adjust temporarily the size of one or more standing committees , by up to two members , to accord the majority party a majority of the membership of every standing committee ( a "working majority" ) .

in many cases , however , amendments to committee sizes are made to accommodate the interests and needs of senators in serving on committees .

these amendments , and therefore committee sizes , are usually the product of consultation between the party leaders .

the sizes of standing committees normally differ .

in the 109 th congress , the senate standing committees ranged from 13 to 28 members .

committees with broader jurisdictions generally are larger than those whose jurisdiction is more narrowly defined .

committees considered more prestigious or otherwise sought - after also tend to be larger .

the senate select committee on ethics has an equal party ratio pursuant to the resolution which created the panel .

the rules of the senate divide its standing and other committees into categories for purposes of assigning all senators to committees .

in particular , rule xxv , paragraphs 2 and 3 establish the categories of committees , popularly called the "a," "b," and "c" committees .

the "a" and "b" categories , are as follows: " a " committees agriculture , nutrition , and forestry appropriations armed services banking , housing , and urban affairs commerce , science , and transportation energy and natural resources environment and public works finance foreign relations health , education , labor , and pensions homeland security and governmental affairs judiciary select committee on intelligence " b " committees budget rules and administration small business and entrepreneurship veterans' affairs special committee on aging joint economic committee the "c" category comprises three non - standing committees: the select committee on ethics , the committee on indian affairs , and the joint committee on taxation .

the joint committee on the library and the joint committee on printing are not listed in any category , but are treated as "c" committees for assignment purposes .

rule xxv , paragraph 4 places restrictions on senators' committee membership based on these categories .

the restrictions are intended to treat senators equitably in the assignment process .

essentially , each senator is limited to service on two of the "a" committees , and one of the "b" committees .

service on "c" committees is unrestricted .

exceptions to the restrictions are recommended by the pertinent party conference and then officially authorized through senate approval of a resolution affecting one or more senators .

sometimes these exceptions are authorized to accord the majority party a working majority on a committee , whereas at other times exceptions are made to accommodate the preferences and needs of individual senators .

non - standing committees are divided between the so - called category "b" committees and category "c" committees .

the special committee on aging and the joint economic committee , along with four standing committees , are included in the "b" category of committees .

under senate rules , no senator may serve on more than one "b" committee , whether standing or non - standing .

the select committee on ethics , the committee on indian affairs , and the joint committees on taxation , the library , and printing essentially are treated as "c" committees , although joint library and joint printing are not explicitly listed as such in senate rules .

the "c" committees are exempt from the assignment limitations in senate rules , so a senator may serve on any number of them without regard to his or her other assignments .

specific rules regarding senate membership on and appointments to non - standing committees often are contained in the legislation creating these panels .

thus , the procedures vary from committee to committee .

a review of the legislation establishing the non - standing committees , and the appointment practices that have evolved , reveal that party leaders are usually included in the process .

the members of the select committee on ethics and the special committee on aging are elected by the senate by resolution , essentially in the same manner as the standing committees .

the ethics committee is the only senate committee with an equal party ratio , consisting of three senators from each party .

republican members of both committees are chosen by the republican leader and confirmed by the republican conference before election by the full senate .

democratic members of the ethics committee are selected initially by the democratic leader .

in contrast , democrats on the aging committee are nominated by the steering and outreach committee and confirmed by the democratic conference before election by the full senate .

majority - party senators are appointed to the select committee on intelligence on the recommendation of the majority leader , and minority - party senators on the recommendation of the minority leader .

senators are appointed to this committee from the appropriations , armed services , foreign relations , and judiciary committees , as well as from the senate "at large. .

the majority and minority leaders , as well as the chair and ranking member of the armed services committee serve on the committee as ex - officio , non - voting members .

the resolution creating the intelligence committee provided for a rotation of membership ; no senator could serve on the committee for more than eight years of continuous service .

to the extent practicable , one - third of the senators appointed to the committee at the outset of each congress should be senators who did not serve on it in the preceding congress .

s.res .

445 , adopted october 9 , 2004 , ended the eight - year limitation on the intelligence committee .

the majority and minority leaders recommend senators for appointment to the committee on indian affairs , but the members are officially appointed by the president of the senate ( the vice president of the united states ) .

appointments to the committee on indian affairs are announced to the senate from the chair .

ten senators , six from the majority party and four from the minority party , are appointed to the joint economic committee by the president of the senate .

the senate membership of the joint committee on taxation consists of five senators from the committee on finance , three from the majority and two from the minority , chosen by the finance committee .

appointments to both joint committees are announced to the senate from the chair .

the senate participants on the joint committee on the library and the joint committee on printing are selected by the committee on rules and administration from among the committee's members .

the chair and four other members of the rules committee are to serve on each joint committee .

however , in some congresses , the house and senate have agreed to a concurrent resolution allowing another member of the senate rules committee to serve on the joint committee on the library in place of the rules committee's chair .

the membership of the joint committee on printing typically includes not only the chair but also the ranking minority member of the senate rules committee .

members of both joint committees are elected by the senate by resolution .

