this report provides information on the current status of u.s. military base closures andrealignments .

it includes data on domestic bases , including u.s. territories .

the report also provides information on the costs and savings associated with implementation of domestic base closings andrealignments .

 ( 1 ) from 1976 to 1988 , virtually no u.s. domestic bases were closed as a result of congressionally imposed restrictions .

 ( 2 ) this situation changedradically in 1988 , when the u.s. congress passedlegislation establishing the first of four independent base realignment and closure commissions ( brac ) .

the four commissions ( activated in 1988 , 1991 , 1993 , and 1995 ) generated 499recommendations for closing and realigning bases .

only 451 of these ultimately required action,primarily because 48 were changed in some manner by recommendations of a later commission .

 ( 3 ) .

two important aspects of analyzing costs and savings are associated with brac closings .

thefirst has to do with the element of chronological timing .

in the early years , base closure costs greatlyexceeded savings .

at a later point in time ( 1998 ) , costs and savings became about equal ( see wherethe two lines in figure 2 cross ) .

presently , with the implementation of four brac rounds nearingcompletion ( the deadline is end of fy2001 ) , savings are projected to be significantly greater thancosts .

the second , and more fundamentally problematic , aspect has to do with determining theaccuracy of data - - especially data involving savings .

the inability of dod to locate some of itsdata , including the original cost and savings estimates it gave to the brac commissions , hascomplicated matters .

these difficulties have been addressed at some length by dod as well as bythe congressional budget office and the general accounting office ( see below ) .

source: gao's analysis of dod data .

 ( 12 ) .

the pentagon insists that the high cost of maintaining a base structure far in excess of itscurrent , and most likely future , requirements imposes a very significant financial burden on thedepartment .

the removal of this burden remains a major department of defense objective .

it is anespecially important item on dod's agenda this year , as it presents and defends its annual budgetin hearings before the committees of the new 107th congress .

with the conclusion of the year 2000 presidential election , members of congress may be more inclined now than before to undertake the necessary steps to authorize new base realignment andclosure ( brac ) rounds .

the long - standing argument of many members of congress against anynew rounds as long as the clinton administration remained in place ( because of perceived abuse inthe handling of mcclellan and kelly air force bases ) has now become largely moot .

a majorimpediment to further closures and realignments , thus , appears to have been removed .

it is generally agreed , however , that congress has only a brief "window of opportunity" to muster the support needed to establish a new , independent base closure commission - - the previousone having expired more than 5 years ago .

any extended delay by congress that moves a bracdecision closer to the next election in 2004 , it is widely acknowledged , will likely result in dwindlingsupport and possible rejection .

