special order speeches ( commonly called "special orders" ) usually take place at the end of the day after the house of representatives has completed all legislative business .

during the special order period , individual representatives can deliver speeches on topics of their choice for up to 60 minutes .

special order speeches give members a chance to speak outside the time restrictions that govern legislative debate in the house and the committee of the whole .

these speeches also provide one of the few opportunities for non - legislative debate in the house , where debate is almost always confined to pending legislative business .

this report examines current house practices for reserving special order speeches and securing recognition for these speeches .

it discusses the differences between inserted and delivered special orders , various uses of special orders , and current reform proposals .

the rules of the house do not provide for special order speeches .

instead , special orders have evolved as a unanimous consent practice of the house .

although any member can object to the practice of holding daily special order speeches , this happens infrequently .

during the special order period , members must abide by the rules of the house , the chamber's precedents , and the "speaker's announced policies," in that order .

relevant house rules include those governing debate , decorum , and the speaker's power of recognition .

for example , a representative cannot deliver a special order longer than 60 minutes because this would violate house rule xvii , clause 2 , which limits individual members to "one hour in debate on any question. .

when a member's 60-minute special order expires , he or she cannot even ask unanimous consent to address the house for an additional minute .

the member can speak again , however , if time is yielded under another representative's special order .

individual representatives with reserved special order speeches will commonly yield time to colleagues during the speech .

house precedents discuss how the chamber has interpreted and applied its rules .

these precedents are published in several parliamentary reference publications .

under house precedents , for example , individual members cannot deliver more than one special order each legislative day .

the term speaker's announced policies refers to the speaker's policies on certain aspects of house procedure ( eg , decorum in debate , conduct of electronic votes , recognition for special orders ) .

these policies are usually announced on the opening day of a new congress .

in practice , the speaker's current policies on special orders ( announced on january 6 , 2015 ) govern recognition for special order speeches and the reservation and television broadcast of these speeches .

recognition for special orders is the prerogative of the speaker .

although special orders routinely begin once legislative business is completed , the speaker is not required to recognize members for special orders as soon as legislative business ends .

under his power of recognition ( house rule xvii , clause 2 ) , the speaker can first recognize other members for "unanimous - consent requests and permissible motions. .

the speaker may also interrupt or reschedule the special order period to proceed to legislative or other business .

moreover , the speaker can recognize representatives for special orders earlier in the day ( eg , when the house plans to consider major legislation through the evening hours ) .

a majority party representative appointed as speaker pro tempore usually presides in the chair during special orders .

in recognizing members , the chair observes the following announced policies of the speaker: representatives are first recognized for five - minute special order speeches , and then for longer speeches that do not exceed 60 minutes .

recognition alternates between the majority and minority for both the initial special order and subsequent special orders in each time category ( i.e. , five - minute special orders ; longer special orders ) .

in recognizing individual members , the chair follows the order specified in the list of special order requests submitted by each party's leadership ( see " reservation of special orders " section ) .

no special orders are allowed after midnight on any day .

on tuesdays , after all legislative business is completed , the chair can recognize members for five - minute special orders and unlimited longer special orders until midnight .

on every day but tuesday , after the five - minute special orders , the chair can recognize members for no more than four hours of longer special orders .

the four hours are divided equally between the majority and minority .

each party can reserve the first hour of longer special orders for its leadership or a designee ( a so - called leadership special order — see below for more information ) .

when less than four hours remains until midnight , each party's two - hour period is prorated .

each party's leadership usually chooses a designee to deliver a leadership special order during the party's first hour of longer special orders .

this designee will sometimes lead a thematic special order and yield time to other party members .

for example , on may 7 , 1997 , the minority leader's designee delivered a 60-minute special order on h.r .

3 ( juvenile crime control legislation ) , with participation from other democratic members .

the majority leader's designee then led a 60-minute special order on the 1997 balanced budget agreement , during which he yielded time to other republican members .

to summarize , under the speaker's current announced policies , there are generally three stages to each day's special order period: 1. five - minute special orders by individual members ; 2. special orders longer than five minutes ( normally 60 minutes in length ) by the party's leadership or designee ; and 3. special orders longer than five minutes ( length varies from 6 minutes to 60 minutes ) by individual member s .

members reserve five - minute and longer special orders through their party leadership: democratic members reserve time through the office of the majority leader , and republican members reserve time through the republican cloakroom or the party leadership desk on the house floor .

under the speaker's announced policies , members cannot reserve special orders more than one week in advance .

moreover , the date of the reservation does not affect the order in which the chair recognizes members for special orders .

the speaker's announced policies require that the majority and minority leadership give the chair a list each day showing how the party's two hours of longer special orders will be allocated among party members .

the chair follows this list in recognizing members for longer special orders .

for five - minute special orders , the majority and minority leadership compile a list of five - minute special order reservations each day .

this list is given to a party member who asks unanimous consent that each member on the list be allowed to address the house for five minutes on a specific date .

permission is routinely granted by the house .

a notice of granted five - minute special orders appears in the house section of the daily congressional record ( under the heading "special orders granted" ) and on the inside page of the daily "house calendar" ( formally called "calendars of the united states house of representatives and history of legislation" ) .

individual members may also ask unanimous consent to give a special order speech at the last minute , to use another representative's reserved special order time , or to deliver a reserved special order out of the established sequence for that day .

these unanimous consent requests are made infrequently and permission is usually granted .

house rule v places the broadcasting of house proceedings under the speaker's exclusive direction .

the speaker's announced policies prohibit house - controlled television cameras from panning the chamber during special orders .

instead , a caption ( also known as a "crawl" ) appears at the bottom of the television screen indicating that legislative business has been completed and the house is proceeding with special orders .

instead of delivering a special order speech on the house floor , members may insert their speech in either the house pages of the congressional record or the section known as the "extensions of remarks. .

special orders inserted in the house section are published in a distinctive typeface alongside the special orders delivered that day on the house floor .

members must decide in advance to insert special orders in the house section .

they make this decision when reserving the special order through their party's leadership .

a representative who wants to participate in another member's reserved special order can also decide in advance to insert his remarks in the house section .

this decision is coordinated with the member holding the special order reservation .

the representative's inserted remarks appear in a distinctive typeface during the other member's reserved special order .

members who are not present when recognized for their special order speech routinely have the option of inserting this speech in the extensions of remarks section .

permission of the house is required to insert any material in this section .

when the house grants unanimous consent to special order requests , it typically gives representatives permission to "revise and extend" their remarks and to "include extraneous material. .

this permission is usually reported in the house pages of the congressional record under the special orders granted heading ( see above ) .

special order speeches inserted in the extensions of remarks section appear alongside other inserted material ( eg , legislative statements not delivered on the floor , newspaper articles , letters from constituents ) and are not identified as special orders .

all materials in the extensions of remarks section appear in a distinctive typeface .

the practical difference between inserting and delivering a special order speech is twofold .

first , inserted special orders are available only to readers of the hard copy and online versions of the congressional record .

by contrast , special orders delivered on the house floor reach a larger audience through c - span's televised coverage of house floor proceedings .

second , inserted special order speeches incur less cost than those delivered on the house floor .

although both inserted and delivered special orders involve congressional record printing costs , only delivered speeches entail the expenses of keeping the house in formal session ( eg , electricity , salaries of house officers and staff ) .

members often use special orders to address subjects unrelated to legislation before the house .

they deliver speeches on broad policy issues , a bill they have introduced , and local , national , or international events .

they also present eulogies and tributes .

special orders are also used to debate specific legislation and policy issues outside the time restrictions that govern legislative debate in the house and the committee of the whole .

as mentioned earlier , each party's leadership sometimes reserves a 60-minute special order to present party views on a particular bill or policy issue .

in addition , members of both parties may coordinate their special orders to debate legislation .

for example , in the 104 th congress , the two parties reserved consecutive , 60-minute special orders to conduct a "real give - and - take kind of debate" of h.j.res .

159 ( a proposed constitutional amendment to require two - thirds majorities for bills increasing taxes ) .

majority and minority members participated in each party's 60-minute special order .

in a departure from regular practice , these special orders took place in the middle of the day before the house considered the joint resolution .

the special order period also provides a forum where members can practice and hone their debate skills .

veteran representatives have advised new members , in particular , to reserve special orders for this purpose: ... before you participate in general debate on a bill ... get some practice .

get a special order and have a few of your friends participate with you .

get the feel of being in the well of the house , how the lectern can move up and down , how the microphones work .

practice in the somewhat stilted language of yielding to other colleagues and so forth , so that when you do get into the real legislative fight it isn't all new ; you have a little bit of the feel of debating in the house .

during special orders , freshmen majority members also have an opportunity to gain experience presiding as speaker pro tempore .

the speaker's current announced policies on special orders build upon earlier policies , mainly those implemented on february 23 , 1994 .

these 1994 policies significantly changed special order procedures by imposing new restrictions ( eg , four - hour limitation on longer special orders , no special order reservations more than one week in advance ) .

before early 1994 , special orders could be reserved months in advance and it was not unusual to have more than 10 hours of special orders reserved for a single day .

special order speeches also could be delivered after midnight and all - night special orders took place on occasion .

the speaker's announced policies before 1994 required that members be recognized for five - minute special order speeches first and then for longer speeches , and that recognition alternate between majority and minority members .

when studying special order speeches before february 23 , 1994 , it is useful to remember these speeches were reserved and delivered under the speaker's earlier , less restrictive policies .

the house rules committee's subcommittee on rules and organization of the house held hearings on april 17 , 1997 , and may 1 , 1997 , to discuss issues raised in civility in the house of representatives ( hereinafter referred to as civility ) , a report prepared for the march 1997 bipartisan retreat of house members .

civility examined the public's perception of rising incivility in the house and recommended actions to reduce this perception and actual breaches in decorum .

the report pointed out that incivility was more likely to take place during special orders and one - minute speeches than during other periods of house floor proceedings .

according to civility , unparliamentary language "that would be taken down in regular debate was more likely to be tolerated or 'cautioned'" during special orders .

the report attributed this situation to the low number of members present during special orders — it was unlikely a member would make a timely demand that unparliamentary words be taken down and , even if this demand was made , "it would be all but impossible to locate the members needed to vote" on an appeal of the chair's ruling .

on this last point , the report recommended that the house change its rules to require that appealed rulings of the chair after regular business be voted on the next legislative day .

this rules change , the report argued , would encourage the chair to intervene more frequently against unparliamentary language in special orders .

the 1999 report provided data on the 105 th congress generally , and the december 1998 impeachment debate specifically .

no recommendations were included .

the house rules committee held hearings on the 1999 report in april 1999 .

as discussed earlier , daily special orders entail congressional record printing expenses for delivered and inserted special orders and the costs of keeping the house in formal session for delivered special orders ( eg , electricity , salaries of house staff and officers ) .

on february 9 , 1999 , representative lynn rivers introduced h.res .

47 , a resolution to amend house rules to require that "the expenses of special - order speeches be paid from the members' representational allowances of members making such speeches. .

each representative has a members' representational allowance ( mra ) for expenses related to official and representational duties ( eg , employment of staff , travel , franked mail , supplies ) .

h.res .

47 was referred to the house committee on rules upon introduction but did not receive committee action in the 106 th congress .

representative rivers introduced identical resolutions ( h.res .

97 ) in the 105 th congress and ( h.res .

263 ) in the 104 th congress , but no action was taken on either measure .

