the release of the 2000 census data for the apportionment of the house of representatives among the states and the release of the state redistricting data to the states as required by p.l .

94-171 has renewed the decennial debate over several census - related issues .

first , the perennial statistical adjustment issue , although decided by the united states supreme court with regard to the apportionment of the house of representatives among the states , remains active with regard to intrastate redistricting census data .

the decision of the secretary of commerce to release unadjusted 2000 census data for intrastate redistricting purposes was seen as an unequivocal victory by opponents of statistical adjustment , but does not seem to have quelled the determination of proponents of statistical adjustment to obtain release of adjusted data .

second , utah has brought a lawsuit challenging the apportionment , alleging that expatriate missionaries for the church of jesus christ of the latter - day saints should have been included in the population count for utah .

on january 10 , 2001 , the state of utah filed suit against the secretary and department of commerce alleging that the defendants had unlawfully excluded overseas missionaries of the church of jesus christ of the latter - day saints in violation of the census clause ( art .

i , § 2 , cl .

3 ) , the free exercise clause of the first amendment , the equal protection clause of the fifth amendment , and the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment ( amend .

xiv , § 2 ) of the federal constitution ; of the administrative procedure act ( 5 u.s.c .

§§ 701 et seq .

 ) ; of the religious freedom restoration act ( 42 u.s.c .

§§ 2000bb et seq .

 ) ; of 2 u.s.c .

§ 2a ; and of the census act ( 13 u.s.c .

§§ 1 et seq .

 ) .

on march 5 , 2001 , district court judge dee benson issued an order denying the plaintiffs' request for a three - judge panel pursuant to 28 u.s.c .

§ 2284 , finding that the suit did not involve a challenge to a redistricting statute .

thus , it may take longer for the suit to reach a final resolution , since a decision by a three - judge panel could have been appealed directly to the u.s. supreme court , whereas now a decision would have to be appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the 10 th circuit before any potential hearing before the u.s. supreme court .

the house has delayed certification of the disputed seat until after a district court decision on march 20 ; north carolina has joined the federal government in opposing the suit by utah .

with regard to census methodology , the leading relevant decision is that of franklin v. massachusetts , in which the united states supreme court upheld the decision of the secretary of commerce to include and allocate overseas federal employees in the census data for the apportionment of the house of representatives , which resulted in a loss of one congressional seat for massachusetts .

the court held that there was no final agency action reviewable under the administrative procedure act and that the allocation of overseas federal employees to their home states was consistent with the "usual residence standard" of other censuses and furthered the constitutional goal of equal representation .

however , the issue of distinguishing between overseas federal employees and other expatriate u.s. citizens by including the former in the census and excluding the latter was not before the court and was not decided by it .

congress could have a role by legislatively mandating the inclusion of all expatriate u.s. citizens in the decennial census .

one bill has been introduced by representative maloney , h.r .

680 , to provide funds for a special census of expatriates and to urge the census bureau to plan for the inclusion of expatriates in the 2010 census .

according to franklin v. massachusetts , the decision to include overseas federal employees in the 1990 census appears to have been in response to legislative activity in the late 1980s .

crs info pack , ip537c , census 2000: background and issues , updated as needed , by george walser .

includes copies of the crs reports census 2000: new legislative proposals ( rs20123 ) , census 2000: the sampling debate ( rl30284 ) , and house apportionment following the 2000 census ( 98-135 ) .

crs report rl30182 , census 2000: sampling as an appropriations issue in the 105 th and 106 th congresses , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30284 , census 2000: the sampling debate , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 93-1060 gov , congressional redistricting: federal law controls a state process , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 94-89 gov , decennial census coverage: the adjustment issue , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-871 , sampling for census 2000: a legal overview , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl30047 , sampling for census 2000: department of commerce v. united states house of representatives and its ramifications , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 91-736 a , the voting rights act of 1965: a legal overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

