to ensure that members of congress uphold high standards , the u.s. constitution provides sole authority to establish rules and punish and expel members to the house of representatives and the senate , respectively .

article i , section 5 , clause 2 provides that "each house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member. .

in the 18 th and 19 th centuries , the senate used its authority to establish ethics rules and to punish individual members sparingly .

former senate historian richard baker observed that "[f]or nearly two centuries , a simple and informal code of behavior existed .

prevailing norms of general decency served as the chief determinants of proper legislative conduct. .

during that time , congress often dealt with ethics issues "on a case - by - case basis , [and then] only with the most obvious acts of wrongdoing , those clearly 'inconsistent with the trust and duty of a member. ' .

events in the early 1960s , including charges of corruption and influence peddling against secretary to the majority robert g. "bobby" baker , prompted the senate committee on rules and administration , which had jurisdiction over "[m]atters relating to the payment of money out of the contingent fund of the senate or creating a charge upon the same," to hold hearings on financial and business activities of current and former members , officers , and employees of the senate .

this report examines the history and evolution of the senate select committee on ethics , including the committee's jurisdiction and investigative procedure .

it does not deal with changes to criminal law ( as defined in title 18 , u .s .

code ) , with criminal prosecutions of members of congress , or with the specifics of disciplinary cases in the senate .

prior to the 88 th congress ( 1963-1964 ) , no standard mechanism existed for discipline of senators .

during the 88 th congress , the senate created the first ethics committee , the select committee on standards and conduct .

in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) , the senate changed the committee's name to the committee on ethics .

in the 1940s , public criticism regarding potential conflicts of interest by members of congress supplementing their income from speeches and outside activities led to concern over the lack of disclosure of members' finances .

in 1946 , senator wayne morse introduced the first public financial disclosure legislation to require annual , public financial disclosure reports by senators ( s.res .

306 ) .

in remarks on the introduction of the resolution , senator morse defended members' right to earn outside income , but believed that the american people were entitled to know about alternate income sources .

commenting on the resolution's purpose , senator morse stated , i may say that my resolution is bottomed upon the very sound philosophical principle enunciated by plutarch that caesar's wife must be above suspicion .

likewise , i feel that , so far as the public's evaluation of members of the senate is concerned , they must be above suspicion .

hence , i think my resolution which calls for the filing with the secretary of the senate of all sources and amounts of senatorial income is in keeping with the public's right to know what influences may possibly be brought to bear upon members of the senate in the performance of their legislative duties .

no action was taken on senator morse's proposal .

in 1958 , congress established the first code of ethics for government service ( code of ethics ) .

initially proposed in 1951 by representative charles bennett , the code of ethics was adopted following a house investigation of presidential chief of staff sherman adams , who was alleged to have received gifts from an industrialist being investigated by the federal trade commission .

the code of ethics for government service standards continue to be recognized as ethical guidance in the house and senate .

the code of ethics is not legally binding , however , because it was adopted by congressional resolution , not by law .

in october 1965 , as one of its first actions , the select committee on standards and conduct recommended rules of conduct for members , officers , and employees of the senate .

in march 1968 , the select committee on standards and conduct reported a resolution ( s.res .

266 ) making four additions to the standing rules of the senate .

after several days of debate , the senate adopted a new code of conduct .

the four areas covered by the new code of conduct were ( 1 ) outside employment of officers and employees , ( 2 ) raising and permissible uses of campaign funds , ( 3 ) political fund - raising activities of senate staff , and ( 4 ) annual financial disclosures by senatorial candidates as well as members , officers , and designated employees of the senate .

pursuant to s.res .

338 ( 88 th congress ) , the select committee on standards and conduct was given the authority to ( 1 ) investigate allegations of improper conduct which may reflect upon the senate ; ( 2 ) investigate violations of laws , rules , and regulations of the senate relating to the conduct of members , officers , and employees in their official duties ; ( 3 ) recommend disciplinary action , when appropriate ; and ( 4 ) recommend additional senate rules to insure proper conduct .

following the creation of the select committee on ethics , the senate adopted s.res .

110 ( 95 th congress ) and transferred the jurisdiction of the former select committee on standards and conduct and made the new committee responsible for enforcing and interpreting the senate code of official conduct .

procedures for the select committee on ethics are established pursuant to s.res .

338 ( 88 th congress ) , as amended ; p.l .

93-191 ; s.res .

400 ( 94 th congress ) ; and 5 u.s.c .

section 7342 .

the ethics committee may initiate an inquiry or investigate allegations brought by senators , senate officers , senate staff , or outside individuals and groups .

while the committee does not have formal procedural requirements for filing a complaint , the committee can issue public statements regarding a specific inquiry .

if the committee chooses not to issue a public statement , all allegations are treated confidentially and the committee has a practice of neither confirming nor denying that a matter is before the committee .

"upon completion of its investigative process , the committee may recommend to the senate or party conference an appropriate sanction for a violation or improper conduct , including , for senators , censure , expulsion , or party discipline and , for staff members , termination of employment. .

in 1977 , the senate agreed to s.res .

110 , which created the code of official conduct .

title ii of s.res .

110 amended s.res .

338 , the 1964 resolution that created the procedures of the select committee on standards and conduct , which became the select committee on ethics .

the amendments required the select committee to receive complaints and investigate alleged violations of the senate code of official conduct and to publish necessary regulations to implement the code .

title ii also required the publishing of advisory opinions in the congressional record , if requested by specified individuals .

appendix a .

membership on the senate select committee on standards and conduct , 1965-1976 created in the 89 th congress ( 1965-1966 ) , a total of 14 senators served on the senate select committee on standards and conduct prior to its being disbanded with the creation of the senate select committee on ethics in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) .

table a - 1 provides a list of all members who served on the senate select committee on standards and conduct , their party affiliation , and their state .

majority party members are listed first .

appendix b .

membership on the senate select committee on ethics , 1977-2019 created in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) , the senate select committee on ethics has had a total of 57 different members .

table b - 1 provides a list of all members who have served on the senate select committee on ethics , their party affiliation , and their state .

majority party members are listed first .

