house and senate rules of procedure are largely a function of the number of members comprising each chamber .

in the house , a structured legislative process and strict adherence to the body's rules and precedents have resulted from the need to manage how 435 representatives make decisions .

by contrast , the senate's smaller membership has brought about a less formal policy - making process and a more flexible approach to the chamber's standing rules .

while individual representatives must typically yield to the majority will of the house , the senate usually accommodates the interests of individual senators .

this report compares selected house and senate rules of procedure for various stages of the legislative process: referral of legislation to committees ; scheduling and calling up measures ; and floor consideration .

no attempt is made to present a comprehensive discussion of how both chambers operate .

in both the house and senate , the presiding officer ( see " presiding officer and recognition practices " section ) refers newly - introduced legislation and measures passed by the other chamber to the appropriate standing committee .

upon advice from the parliamentarian , the presiding officer bases referral decisions on the chamber's rules and precedents for subject matter jurisdiction .

legislation passed by the other body usually receives floor consideration without reference to a committee if there already is a companion bill on a calendar ( see discussion of " calendars " in next section ) .

the house changed its referral rule ( rule xii , clause 2 ) at the beginning of the 104 th congress .

this change was aimed at reducing the number of measures referred to more than one committee , commonly called "multiple referrals. .

the rules change eliminated joint referrals , a type of multiple referral where a measure is simultaneously referred to two or more committees .

under the new rule , the speaker designates "a committee of primary jurisdiction" ( based on the committee jurisdictions itemized in rule x ) when referring measures to more than one committee .

in practice , two types of multiple referrals can take place if the speaker first selects a primary committee: a sequential referral ( the measure is referred to one committee , then to another , and so on ; the speaker can establish time limits for each committee's consideration ) ; and a split referral ( specifically designated portions of a measure are referred to one or more committees ) .

in the 108 th congress , house rules were changed to allow the speaker to not designate a primary committee "under exceptional circumstances. .

house committees often develop "memorandums of understanding" ( sometimes referred to as "letters of agreement" ) which explain an agreement between committees about how to divide jurisdiction over specific policy issues .

these memorandums are sent to the speaker in the form of letters from the involved committee chairmen , and are sometimes printed in the congressional record .

the memorandums seek to advise the speaker on referral decisions where committee jurisdictions are unclear or overlapping .

under the senate's referral rule ( rule xvii , paragraph 1 ) , legislation is referred to "the committee which has jurisdiction over subject matter which predominates" in the measure ( sometimes referred to as "predominant jurisdiction" ) .

senate rule xxv lists the subjects for which the standing committees are responsible .

senate rule xiv requires that measures be read twice on different legislative days ( see " adjournment and legislative days " section ) before being referred to a committee .

most bills and joint resolutions , however , are considered as having been read twice and are referred to committee upon introduction .

under rule xiv , when a senator demands two readings and there is objection to the measure's second reading , the measure is placed directly on the calendar of business ( see next section ) without reference to committee .

three types of multiple referrals — joint , sequential and split — are allowed in the senate .

in practice , measures are referred to multiple committees by unanimous consent .

under the senate's standing rules ( rule xvii , paragraph 3 ) , the senate majority and minority leaders can make a joint leadership motion to jointly or sequentially refer legislation to multiple committees .

however , this rule has never been used since its adoption by the senate in 1977 .

in general multiple referrals are more common in the house than in the senate .

the speaker of the house is both the leader of the majority party and the chamber's presiding officer .

in this dual position , the speaker uses his parliamentary and political powers to govern house floor proceedings .

he has the discretionary power to recognize , or not recognize , members to speak .

when a representative seeks recognition , the speaker will frequently ask: "for what purpose does the gentleman ( gentlewoman ) rise ? .

the speaker does so in order to determine what business the member wants to conduct .

if the business does not have precedence ( eg , a special order speech ) , the speaker can usually deny recognition .

the speaker does adhere to some established house practices of recognition , such as giving members of the committee reporting a bill priority recognition for offering floor amendments .

a speaker has the right to vote and to debate from the floor , if he wishes .

the extent to which this right is exercised varies from speaker to speaker .

the speaker presides over house floor proceedings , but not over meetings of the committee of the whole ( formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ) .

he appoints a majority party representative to preside as chairman of the committee of the whole .

the house resolves into the committee of the whole , a committee to which all members belong , to consider measures that will be amended ( see " amending measures " section ) .

a non - partisan parliamentarian , an officer of the house , is always present to advise the presiding officer on rulings and precedents .

the vice president of the united states is the senate's official presiding officer ( formally , "president of the senate" ) , as provided in article i of the constitution .

the constitution also requires that a "president pro tempore" preside over the senate in the vice president's absence .

the president pro tempore , in modern times the most senior senator of the majority party , is elected by a majority vote of the senate .

in practice , the vice president and the president pro tempore seldom preside over senate proceedings .

the vice president typically presides when he might be required to break a tie vote on an important administration priority .

most of the time , the president pro tempore exercises his right under the senate's standing rules ( rule 1 ) to appoint a senator as "acting president pro tempore. .

this senator , in turn , can appoint another senator to serve as acting president pro tempore .

as a result , the duties of presiding officer are routinely filled by a rotation of junior and first - term senators of the majority party who preside for approximately one hour at a time .

since the senate's official presiding officer is not a member of the body , the presiding officer position does not have the same powers to control floor proceedings as those held by the speaker of the house .

the senate's presiding officer may speak only if granted permission to do so by the unanimous consent of the membership , and he may vote ( as noted above ) only to break a tie .

he also must recognize the first senator standing and seeking recognition .

when several senators seek recognition at the same time , the senate's precedents give preferential recognition to the majority and minority leaders , and the majority and minority floor managers , in that order .

the senate's presiding officer never interrogates senators about their purpose for seeking recognition .

a non - partisan senate parliamentarian is always present to advise on rulings and precedents .

by house tradition , the presiding officer's rulings on points of order raised by members are seldom appealed .

as a result , the house has a relatively large and consistent body of precedents based on rulings of the chair .

if the chair's ruling is appealed , the full house decides by majority vote whether to sustain or overrule this ruling .

because this vote is viewed as a serious test of the chair's authority , it is typically settled along party lines , with the majority sustaining the chair .

in contrast to the senate , there are only a few situations when the house's presiding officer does not rule on points of order .

in the senate , the presiding officer's rulings on points of order raised by senators are frequently appealed .

the full senate votes on whether to sustain or overrule the ruling .

under rule xx , the presiding officer has the option of submitting any question of order to the full senate for a majority vote decision .

he is required to submit questions of order that raise constitutional issues , and those concerning the germaneness or relevancy of amendments to appropriations bills , to the full senate .

senate votes on appealed rulings of the chair , and on points of order submitted to the full body , often turn on the political concerns of the moment rather than on established senate practices and procedures .

as a result , the senate has a smaller and less consistent body of precedents than does the house .

yet , because the senate usually operates informally , it is a more precedent - than rule - regulated institution .

house debate nearly always takes place under some form of time restriction .

there is the "one - hour" rule for debate in the house ( rule xvii , clause 2 ) , and the "five - minute" rule during the amendment process in the committee of the whole ( rule xviii , clause 5 ( a ) ) .

debate is limited to forty minutes for bills considered under the suspension of the rules procedure .

special rules can impose time restrictions on debate , and rule - making provisions in statutes often limit debate on certain types of measures such as budget resolutions .

time restrictions make it difficult for individual representatives to get debate time on the floor .

when members are accorded debate time , they rarely receive more than two to five minutes .

representatives can be recognized to speak for up to five minutes during the "morning hour" debates before legislative business commences on mondays and tuesdays , for "one - minute" speeches ( at the speaker's discretion and usually at the beginning of the legislative session ) , and for "special order" speeches of a specified length ( ordinarily at the end of the day ) .

in the senate , individual senators have the right to unlimited debate .

senators also can seek unanimous consent to speak out of turn on another subject , or to interrupt proceedings with an unrelated matter .

unanimous consent is usually granted .

senators may use their right to extended debate and employ other parliamentary maneuvers to delay floor action , a tactic known as a "filibuster. .

the threat of a filibuster , particularly at the end of a session or near a scheduled recess , can be used to try to extract concessions from the senate leadership .

to be sure , it would be impossible for the senate to act on legislation in a timely fashion if senators always exercised their right to extended debate .

for this reason , the senate often agrees to debate restrictions as set forth in complex unanimous consent agreements .

floor debate on certain types of measures , such as budget resolutions , is often limited by rule - making provisions in statutes , as is the case in the house .

representatives can offer a motion for the previous question to end debate in the house ( rule xix , clause 1 ( a ) ) .

adoption of this motion by a majority vote ends debate on the pending question , prevents the offering of any further motions and amendments , and brings about an immediate vote on approving the pending question .

this motion cannot be offered when the house meets in the committee of the whole .

in the committee of the whole , representatives may offer a motion to close or limit debate on the pending question ( rule xviii , clause 8 ) .

the motion may propose to end debate immediately or when a specified time expires .

adoption of this motion by a majority vote only closes or limits debate on the pending question ; it does not preclude members from offering additional motions or amendments ( although they may be precluded from debating them ) and does not produce an immediate vote on the pending question .

members also may ask unanimous consent to end debate on pending amendments in committee of the whole .

when a special rule establishes time limitations on general debate or on the debate of specific amendments , debate ends when these time limitations expire .

senate debate usually ends when a senator yields the floor and no other senator seeks recognition , or when a previously - established time limitation ( eg , in a complex unanimous consent agreement or a rule - making statute ) expires .

the senate's adoption of a motion to table by majority vote will end debate on a pending measure , motion , or amendment .

the practical effect of adopting this motion , however , is to reject the pending question .

the senate can only resume consideration of the tabled matter by unanimous consent .

usage of the motion to table is generally reserved for cases when the senate is prepared to reject the pending question .

a cloture motion signed by 16 senators can be filed to end extended debate on a measure , motion , or amendment .

this motion is filed when informal negotiations cannot end a filibuster ( discussed in previous section ) .

once the cloture motion is adopted by three - fifths of the senate , debate can only continue for a maximum of 30 more hours ( called the "post - cloture" period ) .

at the end of the post - cloture period , debate time expires or has been yielded back , and the senate votes on the underlying matter .

the house typically meets in the committee of the whole to consider legislation that will be amended .

the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole by a motion of the majority floor manager , or pursuant to the provisions of a special rule .

the rules of the committee of the whole expedite floor consideration of measures .

consideration begins with a designated period of time for general debate , followed by the offering of amendments .

legislation is amended in an orderly fashion ( i.e. , by section or paragraph , or under the terms specified in a special rule ) .

members can only offer amendments to the part of the bill that has been read , or designated , for amendments .

any deviation from this orderly sequence requires unanimous consent or a provision in a special rule .

amendments must always be germane , unless a special rule permits the offering of specified , non - germane amendments .

the principles governing the order of voting on amendments in the committee of the whole are graphically displayed in one "basic amendment tree. .

when the committee of the whole approves amendments , it does not actually amend the bill's text .

the committee of the whole , similar to a house standing committee , reports the measure back to the house with the amendment[s] it adopted .

such amendment[s] must then be approved by the full house .

the senate ( the chamber does not have a committee of the whole ) considers and amends legislation in a less structured manner than the house .

as a result , the sequence and duration of floor consideration is less predictable in the senate .

when recognized , senators can decide whether they wish to debate the bill in general or offer an amendment .

amendments to the bill may be proposed in any order .

at times , the senate agrees to a complex unanimous consent agreement that allows only specific amendments to be offered and limits the time for debate on each amendment .

however , even under unanimous consent arrangements , it is rare for the senate to impose a specific sequence for debate and amendment .

four amendment trees depict the principles of precedence for offering and voting upon amendments in the senate .

germaneness of amendments is not required in the senate , except in four specific instances: 1 ) if a unanimous consent agreement so requires ; 2 ) in the post - cloture period ( see previous section ) ; 3 ) if a rule - making provision in a statute so requires ( eg , provisions of the congressional budget and impoundment act of 1974 governing consideration of budget resolutions and reconciliation bills ) ; and 4 ) if the underlying measure is a general appropriations bill .

the constitution requires that a quorum — a simple majority of the membership — be present for the house ( 218 ) and the senate ( 51 ) to conduct business .

when the house meets in the committee of the whole , a quorum of 100 members is required .

both chambers typically assume that a quorum is present unless it can be demonstrated otherwise .

the rules of the house restrict when members can make a point of order that a quorum is not present in the house or in the committee of the whole .

this point of order is generally permitted only in connection with record votes .

in recent years , house quorum calls have typically lasted 15-17 minutes .

senate quorum calls are in order at almost any time .

quorum calls made for the purpose of obtaining the presence of a majority of senators are called "live quorums. .

more commonly , however , a senator will "suggest the absence of a quorum" for purposes of constructive delay .

this type of quorum suspends action on the senate floor without requiring the senate to recess or adjourn .

this pause in floor action provides time for informal negotiations to take place , and for absent senators to reach the floor .

the clerk slowly calls the roll until a senator asks unanimous consent to "rescind," or dispense with , the quorum call .

there is no time limit on this type of quorum call .

the house and senate each have three main types of votes: voice , division , and record .

record votes include all those in which the names of members voting on each side are individually recorded , and the cumulative totals of yeas and nays are compiled .

the senate refers to record votes as "yea and nay votes" or "rollcall votes ; " in the house , record votes include both "yea and nay votes" and recorded votes. .

in each house , most questions are first put to a voice vote .

for voice votes , the chair first asks those in favor to respond "aye," and then those in opposition to respond "no" ( house rule i , clause 6 ) .

the chair then announces which side has prevailed .

before he or she does so , a member may ask for a division or record vote .

for division votes ( also called "standing votes" ) , those in favor stand up and are counted by the chair , followed by those in opposition .

the chair then announces the result ( house rule xx , clause 1 ( a ) ) .

division votes in the senate are rare , they are sometimes taken by senators raising their hands instead of rising , and the chair does not announce the number voting on each side .

the two chambers differ in their conduct of record votes .

after a voice or division vote has taken place in the house , but before the final result had been announced , representatives can demand either a "yea and nay vote" or a "recorded vote," except that a yea and nay vote may not be demanded in committee of the whole .

the demand for a yea and nay vote must be supported by one - fifth of those present , or the vote may be ordered automatically if a member objects to a pending vote on the ground that a quorum is not present .

the demand for a recorded vote must be supported by one - fifth of a quorum in the house ( a minimum of 44 members ) , or by 25 members in committee of the whole ( house rule xx , clauses 1 ( b ) , 6 ( a ) ; constitution , article i , section 5 ) .

record votes in the house normally take place by electronic device .

members vote with electronic voting cards and their votes are displayed on an electronic board in the chamber .

while a vote is taking place , members preparing to vote often look at the electronic board to see how other members voted .

the majority and minority party floor whips also use their board to carry out their vote - counting responsibilities .

house rules ( rule xx , clauses 2 ( a ) , 9 ) require a minimum 15-minute voting period for record votes , except that in specified situations ( eg , when a record vote immediately follows a quorum call in the committee of the whole ) the presiding officer may reduce the time to not less than five minutes .

the voting period may also be extended at the discretion of the chair .

the chair also has the authority to postpone and cluster certain votes , such as those ordered on motions to suspend the rules ( rule xx , clause 10 ) .

the senate does not use an electronic voting system to conduct rollcall votes .

under rule xii , the clerk calls the names of all senators in alphabetical order ( formally , "calls the roll" ) .

senators come to "the well" of the senate to vote , and the clerk announces how each senator voted .

senators can track how colleagues have voted by checking the tallies kept by majority and minority floor staff .

a senator's demand for a rollcall vote must be supported by a minimum of 11 senators , which is one - fifth of the minimal quorum for doing business ( 51 ) .

in general , this requirement is casually enforced .

a 15-minute period for rollcall votes is usually established in a unanimous consent agreement adopted on the opening day of a new session of congress .

the party floor leaders can extend this voting time period at their discretion .

senators can , and usually do , ask for a rollcall vote at any time a question is pending before the senate .

they do not have to wait for a voice or division vote to first take place .

for example , a senator offering an amendment can ask for a rollcall vote even before debate on the amendment begins .

when this happens , the yeas and nays are ordered after the clerk confirms that a sufficient second supports the request .

the ordering of the yeas and nays does not bring about an immediate vote .

in fact , most rollcall votes in the senate do not take place immediately upon being ordered .

the house routinely adjourns at the end of a day's proceedings .

as a result , the house's calendar days and legislative days are almost always the same .

the exceptions are when the house is in session past midnight and in a rare procedural situations .

the motion to adjourn in the senate ends the day's proceedings and creates a new legislative day when the chamber next convenes .

a motion to recess , however , keeps the senate in the same legislative day .

this means that a legislative day in the senate can continue for many calendar days .

at times , there are procedural advantages for the majority leader to keep the senate operating in the same legislative day .

in doing so , he avoids having to conduct some routine business required on new legislative days .

senators might otherwise use this routine business for purposes of delay .

at other times , there may be procedural advantages for the majority leader to create a new legislative day by adjourning .

at the beginning of a new legislative day the motion to proceed to consider a measure is non - debatable .

this motion is fully debatable at any other time , thus creating an opportunity for a filibuster .

