human history is believed to have begun in africa , probably in the eastern and southern part of the continent,as human ancestors evolved into the species homosapiens , perhaps 200,000 years ago , and began peopling the sub - saharan region .

 ( 1 ) about 50,000 to 100,000 years ago , according to most current scientificthinking , small bands of these fully modern humans crossed out of africa into the middle east , and became theancestors of all human populations elsewhere .

 ( 2 ) an internal african migration of great significance was launched perhaps 2,500-5,000 years ago , as the bantu people of west africa began to expand their area ofsettlement from a base that was probably in the northeast of present - day nigeria or possibly cameroon .

the bantueventually became the predominant peopleover most of sub - saharan africa , although people speaking so - called nilo - saharan languages are widely found inthe sahel grasslands on the southern border ofthe sahara and parts of eastern africa .

the nilo - saharan languages may have had their origins in the nile valley,but the term "nilotic" to describe peoplesexisting today has fallen out of favor with scholars because of the extensive intermingling of bantu andnilo - saharan speakers over the centuries .

bantu tropicalagriculture was not suited to the mediterranean climate of extreme southern africa , and this region continued to beinhabited by people known as "khoisan" or"san. .

experts are uncertain about the origins of iron use in africa , ( 3 ) but by about 500 bc , it appears that the bantu had become skilled in smelting iron and making theiron tools that created a highly successful agriculture and accelerated their expansion .

when europeans began toexplore the african coast after 1450 ad , theyfound that farmers were growing a wide variety of crops , including grains as well foods unfamiliar to europeans,such as bananas .

some of these had come intoafrica through contacts with the indian ocean region and southeast asia .

 ( 4 ) many african farmers also had cattle , although the tsetse fly kept cattle outof thewetter , central part of the continent .

after the discovery of america , farmers quickly adopted new world crops,such as maize and peanuts .

by 1500 , an estimated 47 million africans were living in thousands of farming communities spread across the continent , ( 5 ) although in particularly dry regions,such as kenya's rift valley , some lived a purely pastoral life , herding cattle , sheep , and goats .

these wereexchanged with farmers for grains and otheressentials .

 ( 6 ) large towns and cities had notdeveloped , probably because large settlements were likely to be struck down by the parasites and otherdisease - causing organisms that had evolved with homo sapiens in africa .

 ( 7 ) human populations outside africa , by contrast , had largely escaped thesediseasesand hence could more easily build cities .

in the first years of the 1960s , the future for western and eastern africa seemed quite bright .

heavy - handedcolonial governments had departed , and a new africanelite including many individuals with excellent educations and global experience had come to power .

gnp percapita was rising at about 1% per year , onaverage , ( 43 ) and africans as well as foreigndevelopment experts expected that the construction of roads , universities , hospitals , hydro - electric dams , and otherprojects would soon result in faster growth .

in may 1963 , the heads of 30 african states signed the charter of theorganization of african unity ( oau ) topromote african solidarity and intensify efforts to improve living standards .

member states pledged to respect theprinciples of non - interference and respect forterritorial integrity in their relations with one another .

even in these early years , however , serious problems were beginning to emerge .

the former belgian congo fell into civil war from 1960-1964 , and itsmineral - rich katanga province attempted to secede .

in january 1963 , the president of togo , sylvanus olympio , wasassassinated in the first of dozens of militarycoups and attempted coups that would plague the region .

nkrumah , who had made ghana a socialist , one - party statewas overthrown in 1966 , and the first ofnigeria's many coups occurred that same year .

ethnic tensions mounted in nigeria as a result of the coup , and whenthe ibo people of eastern nigeria attempted tosecede , a civil war broke out that lasted until 1970 .

sub - saharan africa's annual rate of per capita economic growth fell to .8% in the 1970s , and plunged to a negative 2.2% per year in the 1980s , more than wiping out all previous gains .

 ( 44 ) in these decades , mostafrican countries were governed by authoritarian regimes , and a few , such as idi amin's government in uganda ( 1971-1979 ) , were quite violent .

civil wars broke out not only uganda , but also in ethiopia , sudan , somalia , andchad , as well as in angola and mozambique,where long civil wars followed the wars for independence .

when drought struck wide areas of the continent in1982-1984 , the highest death tolls occurred in thewar - torn countries , particularly ethiopia and sudan , where international relief agencies could not reach the hungry .

the underlying causes of africa's problems in the post - independence era have been the subject of much discussion and analysis .

the impact of the colonial era,which is blamed for inciting ethnic divisions and creating traditions of authoritarian rule as well as bureaucraticinterference in the economy , has already beenmentioned .

colleges and universities began to appear in african colonies only at the end of the colonial period,leaving very small indigenous elites to deal withthe challenges of independence .

independent africa confronted a major population challenge as well .

in 1950 , therewere an estimated 200 million people in thesub - saharan region , but by 1990 , the number had grown to 600 million .

 ( 45 ) .

the clinton administration's policy toward africa had a decidedly afro - optimist tone .

president clinton madean extensive trip to africa in march - april 1998,visiting six countries in 11 days .

 ( 69 ) he told thesouth african parliament that he was seeing "what deputy president mbeki has called an african renaissance," ( 70 ) and in a speech in ghana , the president said that "democracy and peace and prosperity are not slogans , but theessence of a new africa. .

 ( 71 ) the presidentacknowledged during his visit that africa faced continuing economic problems and disruptive conflicts in a numberof countries , but insisted that "from ghana tomozambique , from cote d'ivoire to uganda , growing economies are fueling a transformation in africa. .

 ( 72 ) in august 2000 , president clinton again traveled to africa , visiting nigeria to underscore u.s. support for what national security advisor sandy berger called"the most important democratic transition in africa since the collapse of apartheid. .

 ( 73 ) president clinton warmly praised nigeria not only for its progress indemocratization , but also for its cooperation with the united states in combating international crime and itsleadership in regional peacekeeping .

in addition , heemphasized the importance of combating the african hiv / aids epidemic , which had not been a subject during his1998 trip .

the clinton administration stressed africa's potential as a u.s. trading partner , citing possibilities for increased trade and investment and emphasizing thegrowing importance of oil imports from the region .

officials repeatedly argued that africa was already supplying16% of u.s. oil imports and that it wasprojected to surpass the persian gulf as a u.s. supplier within the decade .

 ( 74 ) the administration gave strong endorsement to a congressional trade andinvestmentinitiative , the african growth and opportunity act , noted above , which first passed the house in 1998 and becamelaw ( p.l .

106-200 ) in may 2000 .

administration spokesmen argued that the united states has a number of other interests in africa as well , such aspreventing weapons proliferation , preservingenvironmental resources of global importance , and combating the drug trade and international terrorism .

to further its objectives in africa , the administration launched a number of africa assistance initiatives , such as the leland initiative , aimed at enhancing africa'saccess to the internet , and the greater horn of africa initiative ( ghai ) intended to reduce perennial food insecurityover much of eastern africa .

in july 1999 , theadministration launched a major new effort against the hiv / aids epidemic in africa and worldwide , known asthe life ( leadership and investment in fightingan epidemic ) initiative .

these and other administration initiatives involved a range of u.s. agencies apart fromthe department of state and the u.s. agency forinternational development , including the departments of transportation , labor , and commerce , as well as thecenters for disease control of the nationalinstitutes of health - all of which , as a result , boosted their africa - related capabilities .

administration policy encountered some difficulties , however , and a defining moment came early , when in october 1993 , 18 u.s. soldiers were killed whileparticipating in a united nations humanitarian relief operation in somalia .

 ( 75 ) in reaction to this incident , the united states and the united nationshesitated insending peacekeepers when the rwanda genocide broke out in 1994 , and president clinton later acknowledged torwandans that "we did not act quickly enoughafter the killing began. .

 ( 76 ) in the wake of the somalia and rwanda experiences , the administration sought to strengthen africa's own peacekeeping capabilities through the africa crisisresponse initiative ( acri ) , which trains units of african armed forces for peacekeeping duties .

moreover , theadministration launched a "train and equip"program to help at least five nigerian battalions prepare for peacekeeping duties in sierra leone .

 ( 77 ) u.s. officials often assumed roles as mediatorsin africanconflicts and claimed the peace agreement between ethiopia and eritrea , signed in algiers on december 12 , 2000,as a particular success .

secretary of statealbright attended the signing ceremony .

nonetheless , africa's many other conflicts were a source of frustrationto administration policymakers , since theyundermined efforts to promote economic growth and political reform .

trade results during the clinton years were mixed .

u.s. imports from africa grew by an annual rate of 2.7% from 1995 to 1999 , but this pace was considerablyslower than the overall 8.4% annual increase in u.s. imports over the same period .

 ( 78 ) similarly , exports to africa grew at an average annual rate of .9% , ascompared to a 4.4% annual growth rate for all u.s. exports .

 ( 79 ) most trade took place with only a few countries , notably oil producers and south africa , and morethan half of imports were accounted for by petroleum .

african imports and exports accounted for about 1% of theu.s .

totals in 1999 , while according to 1998data , u.s. investment in the sub - saharan region , also heavily focused on the petroleum sector , was about 1.2% oftotal u.s. foreign direct investment .

 ( 80 ) nonetheless , administration officials pointed out that u.s. firms had made major investments in africa , includingsouthwestern bell's acquisition of a share inthe south african telecommunications industry and the establishment of caterpillar inc. dealerships in 15countries .

 ( 81 ) .

as noted at the beginning of this report , congress has dealt with a wide range of issues related to africa .

thissection lists principal actions in recent decades .

2000 .

the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa , p.l .

106-200 ) , aimed at boosting u.s. trade with africa as well as u.s.investment , became law .

 - - - under the global aids and tuberculosis relief act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-264 ) congress authorized $300 million in fy2001 and also infy2002 for a comprehensive hiv / aids effort worldwide .

the fy2001 foreign operations appropriations ( p.l.106-429 ) provided $300 million indevelopment assistance for hiv / aids and slightly more than half of the amount was expected to go towardafrican programs .

1998 .

congress enacted the africa: seeds of hope act ( p.l .

105-385 ) to promoteafrican food security through u.s. assistance programsand other measures .

1994 .

the african conflict resolution act ( p.l .

103-381 ) , authorizing u.s. assistance to promote the peaceful resolution of africanconflicts , was enacted .

1993 .

the south african democratic transition support act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-149 ) committed the united states to supporting theconsolidation of democracy in south africa .

1990 .

congress created the development fund for africa ( dfa ) , which became chapter 10 of part i of the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

the dfa , which was first mentioned in fy1988 report language , was intended to protect africa aid levels in thewake of the cold war .

1992 .

the horn of africa recovery and food security act ( p.l .

103-274 ) was passed .

the act set policy objectives for u.s. assistance inthe horn and included provisions to promote democracy .

1986 .

congress enacted the comprehensive anti - apartheid act ( p.l .

99-440 ) over president reagan's veto .

the act set policy objectivesfor the united states in south africa , imposed a number of sanctions , and provided for "positive measures" toimprove the lives of black southafricans .

1985 .

congress passed a large emergency supplemental appropriation for african famine relief ( p.l .

99-10 ) .

the move followed extensivemedia coverage of famine in ethiopia and sudan , and some criticism of the adequacy of the executive branchresponse .

 - - - the international security and development cooperation act of 1985 repealed the clark amendment ( see below,1976 ) .

1980 .

congress created the african development foundation to promote grassroots development through small grants to african self - helporganizations ( p.l .

96-533 ) .

1977 .

congress , in effect , repealed the byrd amendment ( see below , 1971 ) by ending its application to rhodesia .

1976 .

the "clark amendment," sec .

404 of the international security assistance act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-239 , later sec .

118 of p.l .

96-533 ) ,prohibited aid that would help any group in angola conduct military or paramilitary operations .

the prohibitioncould be waived by a joint resolution .

theamendment was sponsored by senator dick clark of iowa .

 ( the clark amendment followed an earlier , temporaryban known as the "tunneyamendment." ) .

1971 .

the "byrd amendment," named for its sponsor , senator harry f. byrd , jr. of virginia , was passed .

this amendment to the armedforces appropriation ( p.l .

92-156 ) partially exempted the united states from participating in u.n. sanctionsagainst white - ruled rhodesia by prohibiting thepresident from enforcing the u.n. trade embargo with respect to imports of critical and strategic materials , such aschromium and nickel .

bohannan , paul and philip curtin .

africa and africans , 4th ed .

prospect heights,illinois: waveland press , 1995 .

davidson , basil .

the black man's burden: africa and the curse of the nation state .

new york , times books , 1992 .

gordon , david f. , david c. miller , jr. , and howard wolpe .

the united states and africa: a post - cold war perspective .

new york: w.w. norton , 1998 hochschild , adam .

king leopold's ghost .

boston: houghton mifflin , 1998 .

herbst , jeffrey .

states and power in africa: comparative lessons in authority and control .

princeton , princeton university press , 2000 .

joseph , richard , ed .

state , conflict , and democracy in africa .

boulder , colorado: lynne reinner publishers , 1999 .

pakenham , thomas .

the scramble for africa , 1876-1912 .

new york: random house , 1991 .

reader , john .

africa: a biography of the continent .

new york: alfred a. knopf , 1998 .

schraeder , peter j .

united states foreign policy toward africa: incrementalism , crisis , and change .

cambridge: cambridge university press , 1994 .

crs issue brief ib95052 .

africa: u.s. foreign assistance issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

continuously updated .

crs issue brief ib10050 .

aids in africa , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib96037 .

congo ( formerly zaire ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

continuously updated .

crs issue brief ib98046 .

nigeria in political transition , by theodros dagne with the assistance of amanda smith .

continuously updated .

crs issue brief ib98043 .

sudan: humanitarian crisis , peace talks , terrorism , and u.s. policy , by theodros dagne .

continuously updated .

