members of congress have demonstrated an ongoing interest in annual u.s. contributions to the united nations ( u.n. ) regular budget , which funds core activities for u.n. organs such as the general assembly and security council , staffing and administration at u.n. headquarters , international conferences , human rights promotion , and u.n. special political missions , among other things .

over the years , congress has focused on the overall cost of the u.s. assessment to the regular budget per year , as well as any outstanding contributions ; how the united states assessment compares to the assessments of other u.n. member states ; and how the united states' payment of its assessed contributions over time compares with other u.n. member states .

in 2010 — the last calendar year for which data are publicly available — the united states was the single largest contributor to the regular budget , paying $532,435,102 , or 22% , in assessed contributions .

the next largest contributors were japan ( 12.530% ) , germany ( 8.018% ) , the united kingdom ( 6.604% ) , and france ( 6.123% ) .

seventeen countries , including the united states , were assessed at over 1% , representing about 83% of the total regular budget .

ten countries were assessed between 0.5% and 1% , accounting for about 7% of the budget .

the rest of the u.n. membership ( 167 countries ) accounted for about 8% of the regular budget .

this report highlights , for each of the past 20 years , payments and the total outstanding contributions of the top contributors to the u.n. regular budget — including the united states .

for additional information on u.s. funding of the u.n. system , see crs report rl33611 , united nations system funding: congressional issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

the enclosed tables list the assessment level , actual payment , and contributions outstanding of key contributors to the u.n. regular budget from calendar years 1990 through 2010 .

most countries pay their assessment in full during the calendar year .

other countries , however , ( including argentina , brazil , ukraine , ussr / russian federation , and the united states ) have on occasion failed to pay the entire assessment and maintained unpaid or outstanding contribution balances .

consequently , the annual payments listed may not always match the assessment for any given year .

each table is divided into four columns , described below .

countries — contributing countries are grouped into key categories: ( 1 ) the "united states" ; ( 2 ) "other major contributors," which are countries assessed at more than 1% ; ( 3 ) "middle contributors," a new category created in 2004 that provides data on nations that are assessed at 0.5% and over but less than 1% ; and ( 4 ) "rest of membership," which lists overall contributions from the remaining member states .

assessment — the percentage of the u.n. regular budget at which a country is assessed .

payment — country payments to the u.n. regular budget that have been received and duly recorded as of december 31 of each calendar year ( assessed contributions received after that date are reported in the next statement on the status of contributions ) .

contributions outstanding — total outstanding contributions represent money owed by a country as of december 31 of that year .

it includes both current year and prior year contributions outstanding .

four of the five permanent u.n. security council members are identified in each table , and information on the fifth permanent council member , china , is provided in a footnote .

china is included among the major contributors starting in 2001 , when its assessment level first exceeded 1% .

