the consumer price index ( cpi ) is probably the most widely used measure of inflation .

a number of federal government programs , such as social security benefits and civil service retirement , are tied to increases in the cpi .

in addition , the personal income tax rate schedule is indexed to the cpi .

economists use the cpi to calculate constant - dollar estimates of other economic indicators , such as retail sales and hourly earnings , which allow analysis of changes in these variables excluding the effect of changes in the price level .

each year , the cpi is used to update the income levels that determine the poverty rate .

periodic increases in many union wage and other contracts are also tied to increases in the cpi .

thus , the behavior of the cpi has major consequences for a significant portion of the population ; but many may be unfamiliar with the details of its calculation .

the cpi is published by the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

there is no specific legislation authorizing or requiring bls to calculate and publish the cpi .

neither has legislation ever been enacted to require bls to adopt any particular methodology in calculating the cpi .

when the bureau of labor was first created in 1888 , its task was , among other duties , to "acquire and diffuse among the people of the united states useful information on subjects connected with labor , in the most general and comprehensive sense of the word.... " in 1913 , the bureau of labor was transferred to the newly created department of labor and renamed the bureau of labor statistics .

bls was given slightly more specific instructions: the bureau of labor statistics , under the direction of the secretary of labor , shall collect , collate , and report at least once each year , or oftener if necessary , full and complete statistics of the conditions of labor and the products and distribution of the products of the same ... and said secretary of labor may collate , arrange , and publish such statistical information so obtained in such manner as to him may seem wise .

two cpis are published by the bls , the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) , and the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

the cpi - w is based on the purchasing patterns of only those in the population who earn more than half of their income from clerical or wage occupations , and were employed at least 37 weeks in the previous year .

the cpi - w population makes up about 32% of the total population .

prior to 1978 , the cpi - w was the only cpi published .

beginning in 1978 , the cpi - u was introduced so that a broader share of the population would be represented in estimates of changes in the price level .

the cpi - u is based on the expenditure patterns of all urban consumers and covers about 87% of the population .

the cpi - u is usually the more publicized of the two price indexes .

although the cpi - u and cpi - w are slightly different indexes , the numerical difference between the two measures is typically small .

between 1989 and 2009 , the cpi - u increased , overall , by 73.0% compared with an increase of 71.0% for the cpi - w. over the same period , that translates into an average annual rate of change of 2.8% for the cpi - u and 2.7% for the cpi - w .

both the cpi - w and the cpi - u are used for inflation indexing by the federal government .

one advantage to using the cpi in indexing is that the cpi is rarely revised .

definitions , the index base year , the goods and services accounted for , and the methodology used to calculate the cpi may change from time to time , but , once published , the actual index number is final .

using other measures of the price level , such as one of the price indexes associated with gross domestic product , for indexing purposes poses the problem of which number to use , the preliminary estimate or one of many subsequent revisions .

since the release of january 2007 data , the cpi and all of its component indexes have been published rounded to three decimal places rather than one .

the change was not meant to imply any increase in the accuracy of the cpi .

instead it is being done to maintain precision in published estimates of percentage changes .

prior to 2007 , when bls published the cpi rounded to only one decimal place , it based published figures of percentage change in the cpi on those rounded numbers so that they could be replicated by users of published cpi data .

but doing that meant that some precision in the published percent change data was lost .

the effect of the change was expected to be small .

both cpis are based on retail market prices .

these prices , for more than 80,000 separate items , are collected in 87 urban areas across the country from thousands of outlets , such as grocery and department stores , gasoline service stations , and hospitals , among others .

bls selects these retail establishments based on a survey showing where people do their shopping .

actual prices ( except those for food ) are not published because they are collected on a confidential basis .

price indexes are available in considerable detail .

examples of items for which cpi data are available include white bread , men's shirts , automobile tires , haircuts , funerals , automobile repair , and bedroom furniture .

the "all - items" cpi is the index most often referred to and it is a composite index , a weighted average , based on the indexes for all of the goods and services whose prices are collected .

the all - items cpi measures the price change of a fixed market basket of goods and services over time .

the mix of goods and services making up the market basket is based on spending patterns established by the consumer expenditure survey ( ces ) .

based on the ces , weights are assigned to each of the goods and services that make up the market basket .

these weights determine how much the price change for a given good will affect the all - items measure .

for any given interval , the total price change , as measured by the all - items cpi , is the weighted average of the price changes of all of the components .

with the release of data for january 2010 , the cpi market basket is based on purchasing patterns described by the ces in 2007 and 2008 .

bls updates the expenditure weights every two years .

table 1 shows the major expenditure categories included in the cpi and their relative importance in the cpi - u as of december 2009 .

relative importance reflects both the expenditure weights and changes in relative prices .

either a larger expenditure weight , or an increase in the price of a good relative to prices for other goods may cause the relative importance to increase , and vice versa .

in december 1996 , a special commission chaired by economist michael boskin reported to the senate finance committee that the cpi tended to overstate the actual rate of inflation by about 1.1% per year .

although a number of specific recommendations were made in the report , congress took no legislative steps to require any changes in the way bls calculates the cpi .

but the methodology of calculating the cpi has changed much since it was first published and is likely to continue to do so .

bls continues to look at methods that might lead to a more accurate measure of the cost of living .

as part of that process , with the release of data for july 2002 , bls introduced an alternative cpi that makes use of "chain - weights. .

this index is referred to as the c - cpi - u .

the expenditure weights for the c - cpi - u are updated more frequently than either the cpi - u or the cpi - w , and the index itself is subject to revision .

the c - cpi - u has not replaced either the cpi - u or the cpi - w , and they will continue to be used for indexing .

the cpi is currently published for 26 metropolitan areas .

for most of these cities , however , indexes are not published on a monthly basis .

these metropolitan area indexes are only intended to compare inflation rates between cities .

the metropolitan area cpis may not be used to compare the actual cost of living between cities .

table 2 shows the metropolitan areas for which the cpi is published as well as the publication frequency .

bls has set up an internet home page for the cpi where visitors can get a copy of the most recent cpi press release , as well as up - to - date information regarding the cpi program .

the internet address for this page is http: / / www.bls.gov / cpi / .

detailed cpi data are also readily available .

bls has set up a number of ways on their website , http: / / www.bls.gov / cpi / #data , to obtain cpi data .

by making selections from each of a succession of menus , users of bls's website may specify the particular data they want .

there is also a link to an "inflation calculator," allowing users to make their own inflation adjustments to dollar amounts .

bls has published estimates of the cpi going back as far as 1800 , which makes it the longest , continuous price index series available .

these data are shown in table 3 .

data for 1800 through 1912 were derived by splicing price indexes collected in three separate , nongovernmental , studies .

prior to 1978 , there was only one cpi available .

for 1978 and after , the data in table 3 correspond to the cpi - u .

given that the accuracy of the cpi remains a topic of discussion , the data for the early years of this series should be considered to be fairly crude estimates .

the long series allows a noteworthy observation .

between 1800 and 1945 , there was no long - term trend in the price level .

during that period prices tended to fall as often as they rose .

since 1945 , however , there has been a decided upward trend in the level of prices with the price level having fallen in only a few years .

the decline in 2009 was the first since 1955 .

the figures in table 3 show year - over - year changes in the cpi , and the index numbers for each year are the average of the monthly data for that year .

changes in the cpi are sometimes published on a december - over - december basis .

that number can vary significantly from the year - over - year number depending on how the monthly changes are distributed over the period .

in 2009 , for example , the year - over - year change was - 0.4% whereas the change from december 2008 to december 2009 was 2.7% .

the cpi is an indicator of changes in the price level .

at present , those changes are expressed relative to the average level of prices in the years 1982 , 1983 , and 1984 .

thus , the average of all of the monthly cpi numbers for those three years is equal to 100 .

determining the change in consumer prices between any two years is a simple percent change calculation using the formula: percentage change in the cpi = ( ( cpi 2 ÷ cpi 1 ) - 1 ) x 100 .

for example , in 2009 , the cpi - u was 214.537 , and in 1989 the cpi - u was 124.0 .

the total percentage change in the cpi - u between 1989 and 2009 was: ( ( 214.537 ÷ 124.0 ) - 1 ) x 100 = 73.0 percent .

calculating the percentage change between any two years at an annual rate is slightly more complicated , and requires the formula: annual rate of change in the cpi = ( ( cpi 2 ÷ cpi 1 ) 1 / n - 1 ) x 100 , where n is the number of years covered in the interval .

to calculate the average annual rate of change in the cpi - u between 1989 and 2009 , we use an n of 20 and the same cpi - u values as in the previous example .

the average annual rate of change in the cpi - u between 1989 and 2009 was: ( ( 214.537 ÷ 124.0 ) 1 / 20 - 1 ) x 100 = 2.8 percent .

another common use of the cpi is to adjust dollar amounts for inflation , so that amounts from different years can be compared in terms of dollars of the same purchasing power .

suppose the question is how much money would have been required in 2009 to buy the same quantity of goods and services as $100 bought in 1989 .

to get such an estimate , the 1989 dollar value needs to be adjusted to account for the increase in consumer prices between 1989 and 2009 .

that requires the formula: equivalent purchasing power in period 2 = ( cpi 2 ÷ cpi 1 ) x dollar amount in period 1 .

for example , using the same cpi values as in the above examples , the equivalent purchasing power in 2009 of $100 in 1989 is: ( 214.537 ÷ 124.0 ) x $100 = $173.01 .

this same calculation can be reversed to find the purchasing power in an earlier period of a dollar amount of a more recent vintage .

to do this use the formula: equivalent purchasing power in period 1 = ( cpi 1 ÷ cpi 2 ) x dollar amount in period 2 .

for example , using the same cpi values as in the above examples , the equivalent purchasing power in 1989 of $100 in 2009 is: ( 124.0 ÷ 214.537 ) x $100 = $57.80 .

using these formulae , dollar values of constant purchasing power can be compared for any two periods for which cpi data are available .

constant dollar values are always compared in terms of the dollar's purchasing power in a particular year , known as the base year .

when comparing dollars of constant purchasing power , it is important to specify the base year .

