certain socioeconomic activities are vital to the day - to - day functioning and security of the country ; for example , transportation of goods and people , communications , banking and finance , and the supply and distribution of electricity and water .

domestic security and our ability to monitor , deter , and respond to hostile acts also depend on some of these activities as well as other more specialized activities like intelligence gathering and command and control of police and military forces .

a serious disruption in these activities and capabilities could have a major impact on the country's well - being .

these activities and capabilities are supported by an array of physical assets , functions , information , people , and systems , forming what has been called the nation's critical infrastructures .

these infrastructures have grown complex and interconnected , meaning that a disruption in one may lead to disruptions in others .

any number of factors can cause disruptions: poor design , operator error , physical destruction due to natural causes , ( earthquakes , lightning strikes , etc. ) .

or physical destruction due to intentional human actions ( theft , arson , terrorist attack , etc. ) .

over the years , operators of these infrastructures have taken measures to guard against , and to quickly respond to , many of these threats , primarily to improve reliability and safety .

however , the terrorist attacks of september 11 in 2001 , and the subsequent anthrax attacks , demonstrated the need to reexamine protections in light of the terrorist threat , as part of an overall critical infrastructure protection policy .

this report provides an historical background and tracks the evolution of such an overall policy and its implementation .

however , specific protections associated with individual infrastructures is beyond the scope of this report .

for crs products related to specific infrastructure protection efforts , the reader is encouraged to visit the crs issues before congress webpage , click on homeland security and terrorism , then homeland security , then critical infrastructure and transportation security .

as discussed further below , a number of federal executive documents and federal legislation lay out a basic policy and strategy for protecting the nation's critical infrastructure .

according to presidential policy directive / ppd - 21 , "it is the policy of the united states to strengthen the security and resilience of its critical infrastructure against both physical and cyber threats. .

critical infrastructure is defined in the usa patriot act as systems and assets , physical or virtual , so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health and safety , or any combination of those matters .

the federal government works with states , localities , and the owners and operators of critical infrastructure ( in both the private and public sector ) to identify those specific assets and systems that constitute the nation's critical infrastructure .

together , these entities assess those assets' vulnerabilities to the threats facing the nation ( natural or manmade , i.e. , all hazards ) , determine the level of risk associated with possible attacks or the impacts of natural events on those assets , and identify and prioritize a set of measures that can be taken to reduce those risks .

primary responsibility for protection , response , and recovery lies with the owners and operators .

however , the federal government holds open the possibility of intervening in those areas where owners and operators are unable ( or unwilling ) to provide what it , the federal government , may assess to be adequate protection or response .

the reader who is not interested in the evolution of this policy and the organizational structures that have evolved to implement it can proceed to the " policy implementation " and / or " issues and discussion " sections of this report .

this report takes as its starting point the establishment of the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection ( pccip ) in july 1996 .

its tasks were to: report to the president the scope and nature of the vulnerabilities and threats to the nation's critical infrastructures ( focusing primarily on cyber threats ) ; recommend a comprehensive national policy and implementation plan for protecting critical infrastructures ; determine legal and policy issues raised by proposals to increase protections ; and propose statutory and regulatory changes necessary to effect recommendations .

the pccip released its report to president clinton in october 1997 .

examining both the physical and cyber vulnerabilities , the commission found no immediate crisis threatening the nation's infrastructures .

however , it did find reason to take action , especially in the area of cybersecurity .

the rapid growth of a computer - literate population ( implying a greater pool of potential hackers ) , the inherent vulnerabilities of common protocols in computer networks , the easy availability of hacker "tools" ( available on many websites ) , and the fact that the basic tools of the hacker ( computer , modem , telephone line ) are the same essential technologies used by the general population indicated to the commission that both threat and vulnerability exist .

the commission generally recommended that greater cooperation and communication between the private sector and government was needed .

the private sector owns and operates much of the nation's critical infrastructure .

as seen by the commission , the government's primary role ( aside from protecting its own infrastructures ) is to collect and disseminate the latest information on intrusion techniques , threat analysis , and ways to defend against hackers .

the commission also proposed a strategy for action: facilitate greater cooperation and communication between the private sector and appropriate government agencies by: setting a top level policy - making office in the white house ; establishing a council that includes corporate executives , state and local government officials , and cabinet secretaries ; and setting up information clearinghouses ; develop a real - time capability of attack warning ; establish and promote a comprehensive awareness and education program ; streamline and clarify elements of the legal structure to support assurance measures ( including clearing jurisdictional barriers to pursuing hackers electronically ) ; and expand research and development in technologies and techniques , especially technologies that allow for greater detection of intrusions .

the commission's report underwent interagency review to determine how to respond .

that review led to a presidential decision directive released in may 1998 .

presidential decision directive no .

63 ( pdd - 63 ) set as a national goal the ability to protect the nation's critical infrastructure from intentional attacks ( both physical and cyber ) by the year 2003 .

according to the pdd , any interruptions in the ability of these infrastructures to provide their goods and services must be "brief , infrequent , manageable , geographically isolated , and minimally detrimental to the welfare of the united states. .

pdd - 63 identified the following activities whose critical infrastructures should be protected: information and communications ; banking and finance ; water supply ; aviation , highways , mass transit , pipelines , rail , and waterborne commerce ; emergency and law enforcement services ; emergency , fire , and continuity of government services ; public health services ; electric power , oil and gas production , and storage .

in addition , the pdd identified four activities where the federal government controls the critical infrastructure: internal security and federal law enforcement ; foreign intelligence ; foreign affairs ; and national defense .

a lead agency was assigned to each of these "sectors" ( see table 1 ) .

each lead agency was directed to appoint a sector liaison official to interact with appropriate private sector organizations .

the private sector was encouraged to select a sector coordinator to work with the agency's sector liaison official .

together , the liaison official , sector coordinator , and all affected parties were to contribute to a sectoral security plan which was to be integrated into a national infrastructure assurance plan .

each of the activities performed primarily by the federal government also were assigned a lead agency who was to appoint a functional coordinator to coordinate efforts similar to those made by the sector liaisons .

the pdd also assigned duties to the national coordinator for security , infrastructure protection , and counter - terrorism .

the national coordinator reported to the president through the assistant to the president for national security affairs .

among his many duties outlined in pdd - 63 , the national coordinator chaired the critical infrastructure coordination group .

this group was the primary interagency working group for developing and implementing policy and for coordinating the federal government's own internal security measures .

the group included high level representatives from the lead agencies ( including the sector liaisons ) , the national economic council , and all other relevant agencies .

each federal agency was made responsible for securing its own critical infrastructure and was to designate a critical infrastructure assurance officer ( ciao ) to assume that responsibility .

the agency's current chief information officer ( cio ) could double in that capacity .

in those cases where the cio and the ciao were different , the cio was responsible for assuring the agency's information assets ( databases , software , computers ) , while the ciao was responsible for any other assets that make up that agency's critical infrastructure .

agencies were given 180 days from the signing of the directive to develop their plans .

those plans were to be fully implemented within two years and updated every two years .

the pdd set up a national infrastructure assurance council .

the council was to be a panel that included private operators of infrastructure assets and officials from state and local government officials and relevant federal agencies .

the council was to meet periodically and provide reports to the president as appropriate .

the national coordinator was to act as the executive director of the council .

the pdd also called for a national infrastructure assurance plan .

the plan was to integrate the plans from each of the sectors mentioned above and should consider the following: a vulnerability assessment , including the minimum essential capability required of the sector's infrastructure to meet its purpose ; remedial plans to reduce the sector's vulnerability ; warning requirements and procedures ; response strategies ; reconstitution of services ; education and awareness programs ; research and development needs ; intelligence strategies ; needs and opportunities for international cooperation ; and legislative and budgetary requirements .

the pdd also set up a national plan coordination staff to support the plan's development .

subsequently , the critical infrastructure assurance office ( ciao , not to be confused with the agencies' critical infrastructure assurance officers ) was established to serve this function and was placed in the department of commerce's export administration .

ciao supported the national coordinator's efforts to integrate the sectoral plans into a national plan , supported individual agencies in developing their internal plans , helped coordinate national education and awareness programs , and provided legislative and public affairs support .

coordinating the development of and maintaining the national plan is now part of the department of homeland security infrastructure protection and information security ( ipis ) program .

most of the directive established policy - making and oversight bodies making use of existing agency authorities and expertise .

however , the pdd also addressed operational concerns .

these dealt primarily with cybersecurity .

the directive called for a national capability to detect and respond to cyberattacks while they are in progress .

although not specifically identified in the directive , the clinton administration proposed establishing a federal intrusion detection network ( fidnet ) that would , together with the federal computer intrusion response capability ( fedcirc ) , established just prior to pdd - 63 , meet this goal .

the directive explicitly gave the federal bureau of investigation the authority to expand its computer crime capabilities into a national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) .

the directive called for the nipc to be the focal point for federal threat assessment , vulnerability analysis , early warning capability , law enforcement investigations , and response coordination .

all agencies were required to forward to the nipc information about threats and actual attacks on their infrastructure as well as attacks made on private sector infrastructures of which they become aware .

presumably , fidnet and fedcirc would feed into the nipc .

according to the directive , the nipc would be linked electronically to the rest of the federal government and use warning and response expertise located throughout the federal government .

the directive also made the nipc the conduit for information sharing with the private sector through an equivalent information sharing and analysis center ( s ) operated by the private sector , which pdd - 63 encouraged the private sector to establish .

these functions have been transferred to and greatly expanded upon at the department of homeland security .

the u.s. computer emergency response team ( u.s. cert ) now handles the computer security incidents occurring on non - national security federal systems and the national operations center ( noc ) provides all hazard situation awareness .

quite independent of pdd - 63 in its origin , but clearly complimentary in its purpose , the fbi established a program called infragard to interact with private sector firms .

the program facilitates information exchange between fbi field offices and the surrounding business communities .

its initial focus was network security .

after september 11 , its focus included both cyber and physical security .

infragard is geographically oriented rather than sector - oriented .

each fbi field office has a special agent coordinator who gathers interested companies of various sizes from all industries to form a chapter .

any company can join infragard .

local executive boards govern and share information within the membership .

chapters hold regular meetings to discuss issues , threats , and other matters that impact their companies .

chapters may also engage in contingency planning for using alternative systems in the event of a successful large scale attack on the information infrastructure .

the program was transferred to the nipc , before it was absorbed by the department of homeland security .

the program is now managed by the fbi's cyber division .

it should also be noted that the fbi had , since the 1980s , a program called the key assets initiative ( kai ) .

the objective of the kai was to develop a database of information on "key assets" within the jurisdiction of each fbi field office , establish lines of communications with asset owners and operators to improve physical and cyber protection , and to coordinate with other federal , state , and local authorities to ensure their involvement in the protection of those assets .

the program was initially begun to allow for contingency planning against physical terrorist attacks .

according to testimony by a former director of the nipc , the program was "reinvigorated" by the nipc and expanded to include the cyber dimension .

the department of homeland security is now responsible for creating a data base of critical assets .

over the last few years , congressional interest in critical infrastructure protection has focused , principally , on reviewing the progress and effectiveness of dhs's efforts .

however , two policy issues remain in debate: how to improve information sharing to the mutual benefit of the federal government and the owner / operators while maintaining privacy protections ; and , the need for further regulations .

congress continues to debate these issues primarily in the context of cybersecurity .

for a more detailed discussion of these efforts , see crs report r42114 , federal laws relating to cybersecurity: overview of major issues , current laws , and proposed legislation , by [author name scrubbed] .

information sharing in the context of homeland security encompasses a very complex web of proposed connections .

there is information sharing between federal agencies , especially between intelligence agencies , and between intelligence , law enforcement , defense , and other civilian agencies .

there is information sharing between federal agencies and their state and local counterparts .

there is information sharing between federal , state , and local agencies and the private sector .

there is information sharing within and between the private sectors .

and there is information sharing between all of these entities and the public .

a multitude of mechanisms have been established to facilitate all of this information sharing .

while the multitude of mechanism may cause some concern about inefficiencies , a highly connected , in some cases redundant , network may not be a bad thing .

a primary concern is if these mechanisms are being used and are effective .

in the past , information flow between all of these stakeholders had been restrained , or non - existent , for at least three reasons: a natural bureaucratic reluctance to share information , difficulties associated with information and technical compatibility , and legal restraints designed to prevent the misuse of information for unintended purposes .

however , in the wake of september 11 , given the apparent lack of information sharing that was exposed in reviewing events leading up to that day , many of these restraints were reexamined and there appears to be a general consensus to change them .

some changes have resulted from the usa patriot act ( including easing the restrictions on sharing of information between national law enforcement agencies and those agencies tasked with gaining intelligence on foreign agents ) .

the legislation establishing the department of homeland security also authorizes efforts to improve the ability of agencies within the federal government to share information between themselves and other entities at the state and local level .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l .

108-458 ) reorganized the entire intelligence community , in part to improve the level of communication and coordination between the various intelligence organizations .

the legislation also required the president to establish an information sharing environment ( ise ) for the sharing of terrorism information among all appropriate federal , state , local , and tribal entities , and the private sector .

as mentioned above , recent executive orders and legislative efforts deal with sharing cybersecurity information and how to improve and incentivize sharing cybersecurity information between the federal government and the owner / operators in the private sector , while protecting the privacy of average citizens and providing some liability protection for the companies providing the information .

it should be noted that the exchange of cybersecurity information may tend to introduce issues of privacy more so than the exchange of information related to physical security .

this is because the exchange of cybersecurity information meant to assist in analyzing attack modes , software vulnerabilities , etc .

may involve the content of electronic messages in which malware is embedded and which are held by , or transit through , third parties .

for an analysis of legislative activity in the 114 th congress related to sharing cybersecurity information see crs report r43996 , cybersecurity and information sharing: comparison of h.r .

1560 and h.r .

1731 as passed by the house , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r43941 , cybersecurity and information sharing: legal challenges and solutions , by [author name scrubbed] .

while the federal government is trying to increase the amount of information shared among appropriate stakeholders , it is also trying to maintain a tight control ( short of classification ) on who gets to see what information .

a variety of designations have been given to information the federal government wishes to control ( critical infrastructure information [see below] , homeland security information , terrorism information , sensitive security information ) .

a catch - all term for these and other designations of controlled information is "sensitive but unclassified. .

since much of what is considered to be critical infrastructure is owned and operated by the private sector , critical infrastructure protection relies to a large extent on the ability of the private sector and the federal government to share information .

however , it is unclear how open the private sector and the government have been in sharing information .

the private sector primarily wants information from the government on specific threats whereas the government may want to protect that information in order not to compromise sources or investigations .

in fact , much of the threat assessment done by the federal government is considered classified .

for its part , the government wants specific information from industry on vulnerabilities and incidents whereas companies may want to protect that information to prevent adverse publicity or to keep company practices confidential .

the private sector , too , is concerned about whether providing this information might lead to future regulatory action or other liabilities .

successful information sharing will depend on the ability of each side to demonstrate it can hold in confidence the information exchanged .

sharing information between government and the private sector is made more complex by the question of how the information will be handled within the context of the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

in particular , the private sector is reluctant to share the kind of information the government wants without it being exempt from public disclosure under the existing foia statute .

the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 , sec .

214 ) exempts information defined as critical infrastructure information from foia ( as well as providing other protections ) .

similar foia exemptions are offered in other legislation .

for example , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness act ( p.l .

107-188 , sec .

401 , see below ) exempts certain security - related information from foia .

even with these protections in statute , it is uncertain how much information on assets , vulnerabilities , incidents , etc .

is being shared with dhs , or how useful it is .

the foia exemptions for critical infrastructure information ( cii ) and other types of sensitive but unclassified information is not without its critics .

the non - government - organizations that actively oppose government secrecy are reluctant to expand the government's ability to hold more information as classified or sensitive .

these critics , and others , feel that the protections offered to cii and other types of sensitive but unclassified information is too broad and believe that controls are stifling public debate and oversight , as well as impeding technological advances that could benefit both security and the economy .

as a general statement of policy , owners and operators of critical infrastructure are to work with the federal government on a voluntary basis .

sharing information with the federal government about vulnerability assessments , risk assessments , and the taking of additional protective actions is meant to be voluntary .

however , the degree to which some of the activities are mandated varies across sectors .

in some cases , sectors are quite regulated .

nuclear power plants must meet very specific standards for assessing their vulnerabilities to very specific types of attacks and to take the necessary actions to address those vulnerabilities .

the nuclear regulatory commission enforces these regulations .

the maritime transportation security act ( p.l .

107-295 ) requires facilities at ports , and certain vessels , to conduct vulnerability assessments and to develop and implement security plans ( including naming a security officer who is responsible for developing and implementing these plans ) .

the vulnerability assessments and security plans are reviewed by the coast guard .

the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness act ( p.l .

107-188 ) requires community drinking water systems to conduct vulnerability assessments and to incorporate the results of those assessments into their emergency response plans .

the vulnerability assessments must be submitted to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the epa must also receive certification that the emergency response plans have been appropriately modified to reflect the vulnerability assessments .

this same act also amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act to require all facilities engaged in manufacturing , processing , packing , or holding food for consumption to register with the department of health and human services .

in addition , the food and drug act was amended to require regulations specifying the types of information these facilities need to keep on record for a specified amount of time to assist the secretary in determining if a food product has been adulterated and represents a public health problem .

the fy2006 dhs appropriation bill ( p.l .

109-295 , sec .

550 ) , authorized the secretary of homeland security to issue interim final regulations requiring vulnerability assessments and security plans for certain chemical facilities , except those covered by the maritime transportation and security act , other relevant acts affecting drinking water authorities , or those operated by the department of energy , the department of defense , or the nuclear regulatory commission .

at the other end of the spectrum are sectors such as information and telecommunication , oil and gas , and commercial ( i.e. , malls and office buildings ) where similar activities ( i.e. , vulnerability assessments , etc. ) .

are encouraged but not mandated .

as mentioned above , the security community , the obama administration , industry , and congress have debated the need to regulate more comprehensively the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure assets .

however , it has proven difficult to pass additional regulations .

some in the security community suggest that strategic national needs are market externalities that require regulation to encourage more owner / operators ( in particular , those who may not be at the forefront in cybersecurity capabilities or practices ) to take the type of action that the security community considers necessary .

industry groups are concerned about the costs and benefits and the potential for duplicative reporting requirements associated with additional regulations .

federal funding for critical infrastructure protection it is difficult to determine how much funding the federal government devotes to the protection of critical infrastructure .

the homeland security act requires the president's budget to include a budget analysis of homeland security activities across the federal government .

this analysis appears in chapter 3 of the analytical perspectives volume of the president's budget .

however , beginning with the fy2010 budget request , the administration changed the way homeland security activities are accounted for , making the estimate of how much is spent on critical infrastructure less clear .

during the bush administration , omb defined six categories of homeland security activities that paralleled the mission areas defined in the national strategy for homeland security .

these were: intelligence and warning ; border and transportation security ; domestic counter - terrorism ; critical infrastructure and key asset protection ; defending against catastrophic events ; and emergency preparedness and response .

the "critical infrastructure and key resources protection" category included funding spent by agencies to protect their own critical infrastructure .

it also included funds that agencies may have spent working with states , local governments , and private owners / operators to reduce their respective vulnerabilities .

dhs activities included both of these , as well as activities associated with coordinating the national effort .

other mission areas included activities that could also be considered part of the effort to protect critical infrastructure .

for instance , the intelligence and warning mission area includes threat analysis , risk analysis , and the sharing of that information with other stakeholders , including states , localities , and the private sector , each of which factor into critical infrastructure protection .

border and transportation security includes activities associated with protecting airports , sea ports , and other transportation modes .

therefore , previous estimates for "critical infrastructure and key resources protection" probably represented a minimum estimate of the total amount of federal funding spent on critical infrastructure protection .

for fy2010 , omb reformulated the categories for tracking homeland security activity , rearranging them into three new categories: prevent and disrupt terrorist attacks ; protect the american people , our critical infrastructure , and key resources ; and respond to and recover from incidents .

as a result , it is not possible to compare the fy2010 figures with those from prior budgets .

the category "protect the american people , our critical infrastructure , and key resources" now includes more activities than were counted in the "critical infrastructure and key resources protection" category in fy2009 and before .

these additional activities include ones that were previously counted in the "defending against catastrophic events" category .

the latter represents a significant addition in funding , and includes activities meant to protect the general population from weapons of mass destruction and not necessarily focused on infrastructure protection .

since this report does not cover many of the activities associated with defending against or responding to catastrophic events , the omb accounting is no longer representative of the activities covered in this report .

fy2016 dhs budget request and prior year appropriations for infrastructure protection and information security program and other relevant dhs budget activities just as it is difficult to account for all the federal activities associated with critical infrastructure protection in the federal government , it is also difficult to track the critical infrastructure protection activities within the department of homeland security .

funding for activities related to critical infrastructure protection is found in numerous places within the department , including the national protection and programs directorate , the transportation security administration , the coast guard , secret service , the science and technology directorate , fema , and u.s. customs and border protection .

however , much of the funding for the organizations and activities discussed in the body of this report can be found in the infrastructure protection and information security ( ipis ) program .

see table a - 1 , below .

ipis the infrastructure protection and information security program ( ipis ) supports the activities of the office of infrastructure protection ( oip ) , the office of cybersecurity and communications ( ocs&c ) , and the office of cyber and infrastructure analysis ( ocia ) .

oip coordinates the national effort to reduce the risks associated with the loss or damage to the nation's critical infrastructure due to terrorist attack or natural events .

this effort is a cooperative one between the federal government ; state , local , and tribal governments ; and the private sector , to identify critical elements of the nation's infrastructure , their vulnerabilities , the potential consequences of their loss or damage , and ways to mitigate those losses .

the ocs&c performs a similar function , but specifically focuses on the nation's information and communications networks , including the communications systems and programs that ensure the president can communicate with selected federal agencies , state , local , and tribal governments , and certain private sector entities during times of national emergencies .

ocia provides analytic support to oip and ocs&c .

funding is aligned with this organizational structure and provided in a set of program / project activities ( ppas ) as noted in the table below .

the administration requested $1,312 million for the ipis program for fy2016 , a net increase of $123 million above the amount enacted for fy2015 .

for further discussion of the ipis budgets , see crs report r43796 , department of homeland security: fy2015 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

other infrastructure related programs in addition to the ipis program within the national protection and programs directorate , other areas in dhs support infrastructure protection .

for example , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) manages a number of grant programs , some of which allow for protecting or mitigating the risks to critical infrastructure assets .

these grants include the state homeland security grant program , the urban area security initiative , public transportation security assistance and railroad security assistance ( which includes the intercity passenger rail - amtrak program and the intercity bus security grant program ) , and the port security grant program .

the state homeland security grants and the urban areas security initiative grants primarily support first responder capabilities , but funding can also be spent on critical infrastructure protection expenses ( such as the purchase of cameras , sensors , etc. ) .

the port , transit , and intercity bus and rail security grants focus primarily on protecting infrastructure assets and passengers .

for the last three fiscal years , the administration has been requesting that these grants be aggregated into a single national preparedness grant program .

congress has chosen not to agree and continues to appropriate funding for them individually .

table a - 2 shows the amount of funding appropriated for these programs in fy2015 .

the administration requested $1,043 million for its proposed national preparedness grant program for fy2016 .

the transportation security administration ( tsa ) oversees the security of the nation's transportation sectors ( as directed by the aviation and transportation security act , p.l .

107-71 ) .

aviation security consumes a large fraction of the tsa budget , including support for: passenger and baggage screening ; the purchase , installation , and operation of explosive detection equipment ; and airport perimeter security ; air marshals ; crew vetting ; etc .

congress appropriated $5,639 million for tsa aviation security activities in fy2015 .

tsa also receives funds for surface transportation security and security - related support activities .

for fy2015 congress provided $917 million .

for fy2016 the administration requested $7,092 million in direct appropriations ( not counting offsetting receipts and capital fund accounts ) , which included $931 million for transportation security support .

for more information on issues associated with transportation security , see crs report rl33512 , transportation security: issues for the 114 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

the coast guard , too , receives funding for its role in protecting u.s. ports .

however , funding for these functions cannot be found in a single line item .

the science and technology directorate budget supports research and development in a number of areas relevant to critical infrastructure protection .

this includes research and development in cybersecurity , risk analysis , explosive detection , blast protection , modeling and simulation , safe cargo containers , and more .

the directorate also works with the office of infrastructure protection to develop and maintain a national critical infrastructure protection r&d plan .

it is difficult to determine how much funding is devoted overall to critical infrastructure protection - related research , given the budget structure of the programs .

for additional information regarding dhs's science and technology program , including legislation calling for a critical infrastructure research and development plan , see crs report r43064 , the dhs s&t directorate: selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

