throughout its history , congress has engaged in oversight — broadly defined as the review , monitoring , and supervision of the implementation of public policy — of the executive branch .

the first several congresses inaugurated such important oversight techniques as special investigations , reporting requirements , resolutions of inquiry , and use of the appropriations process to review executive activity .

contemporary developments , have only increased congress's capacity and capabilities to check on and check the executive .

public laws and congressional rules have measurably enhanced congress's implied power under the constitution to conduct oversight .

despite its lengthy heritage , oversight was not given explicit recognition in public law until enactment of the legislative reorganization act of 1946 .

that act required house and senate standing committees to exercise " continuous watchfulness " over programs and agencies within their jurisdiction .

since the late 1960s , according to such scholars as political scientist joel aberbach , congress has shown increasing interest in oversight for several major reasons .

these reasons include the expansion in number and complexity of federal programs and agencies ; increases in expenditures and personnel , including contract employees ; the rise of the budget deficit ; and the frequency of divided government , with congress and the white house controlled by different parties .

major partisan disagreements over priorities and processes also heighten conflict between the legislature and the executive branches .

oversight occurs in virtually any congressional activity and through a wide variety of channels , organizations , and structures .

these range from formal committee hearings to informal member contacts with executive officials , from staff studies to support agency reviews , and from casework conducted by member offices to studies prepared by non - congressional entities , such as statutory commissions and offices of inspector general .

a persistent problem for congress in conducting oversight is coordination among committees , both within each chamber as well as between the two houses .

as the final report of the house select committee on committees of the 93 rd congress noted , "review findings and recommendations developed by one committee are seldom shared on a timely basis with another committee , and , if they are made available , then often the findings are transmitted in a form that is difficult for members to use. .

despite the passage of time , this statement remains relevant today .

oversight coordination between house and senate committees is also uncommon ; and it occurs primarily in the aftermath of perceived major policy failures or prominent inter - branch conflicts , as with the iran - contra affair and the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks .

intercommittee cooperation on oversight can prove beneficial for a variety of reasons .

it should , for example , minimize unnecessary duplication and conflict and inhibit agencies from playing one committee against another .

there are formal and informal ways to achieve oversight coordination among committees .

congressional oversight and investigations , which are often adversarial and confrontational , can serve to sustain and vindicate congress's role in the united states' constitutional scheme of separated powers .

the rich history of congressional investigations , from the failed st. clair expedition in 1792 and including teapot dome , watergate , iran - contra , and whitewater , have established , both legally and as a matter of practice , the nature and contours of congressional prerogatives necessary to maintain the integrity of the legislative role .

this section provides an overview of some of the more common legal , procedural , and practical issues that committees may face in the course of conducting oversight and / or congressional investigations .

it begins with a general summary of congress's constitutional authority to perform oversight and investigations .

it then turns to a discussion of the legal tools commonly used by congressional committees in conducting oversight and investigations , including the legal basis for subpoenas , staff depositions , and committee hearings , as well as a discussion of the various forms of contempt of congress , the primary enforcement mechanism available .

the section will then discuss limitations on congressional authority to conduct successful oversight and investigations , including constitutional privileges , such as executive privilege .

finally , the section will address a series of frequently encountered legal issues , such as the applicability of the privacy act and the freedom of information act , access to grand jury materials and pending litigation files , and access to classified and confidential information .

many oversight techniques are self - explanatory .

there are several techniques , however , for which explanation or elaboration may prove helpful for a better understanding of their utility .

inspectors general ( igs ) , whose origins date back to the mid - 1970s , have been granted substantial independence and powers to combat waste , fraud , and abuse within designated federal departments and agencies .

to execute their missions , offices of inspector general ( oigs ) conduct and publish audits and investigations — among other duties .

established by public law as permanent , nonpartisan , and independent offices , oigs exist in more than 70 federal agencies , including all departments and larger agencies , along with numerous boards and commissions and other entities .

the overwhelming majority of igs are governed by the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended ( hereinafter referred to as the ig act ) .

the ig act provided the blueprint for ig appointments and removals , powers and authorities , and responsibilities and duties — and explicitly created oigs in 12 "federal establishments. .

since its enactment in 1978 , the ig act has been substantially amended twice: the inspector general act amendments of 1988 created a new set of igs in "designated federal entities" ( dfes ) , which are usually smaller federal agencies .

the ig act of 1988 also added to the reporting obligations of all igs and agency heads , among other things .

the inspector general reform act of 2008 established a new council of the inspectors general for integrity and efficiency ( cigie ) ; amended reporting obligations , salary , bonus , and award provisions ; amended ig removal requirements ; and added budget protections — including requiring that congress see igs' unaltered original budget submissions .

typically , the jurisdiction of an inspector general includes only the programs and operations of a single affiliated agency and its components .

some igs , however , have authority to conduct audits and investigations in more than a single agency , organization , program , or activity .

examples include the ig of the ic , the ig for the department of state and the broadcasting board of governors , and the ig for the federal reserve system and the bureau of consumer financial protection .

other pieces of legislation have established or amended igs in specified agencies or programs — either directly under the ig act or as separate units .

still other enactments have enhanced ig independence or have added new responsibilities and powers on a selective basis .

as a result , statutory igs are not all created equal .

in certain cases , differences among igs are significant .

nonetheless , in general , statutory igs follow the standards , guidelines , and directives in the ig act .

congress calls upon a variety of sources for information and analysis to support its oversight activities .

most of this assistance is provided by legislative support agencies: the congressional research service , the congressional budget office , and the government accountability office .

in addition , the offices of senate legal counsel and house general counsel are valuable oversight resources .

a range of outside interest groups and research organizations also provide rich sources of information .

"the congressional research service serves the congress throughout the legislative process by providing comprehensive and reliable legislative research and analysis that are timely , objective , authoritative , and confidential , thereby contributing to an informed national legislature. .

crs is organized into five interdisciplinary research divisions: american law ; domestic social policy ; foreign affairs , defense and trade ; government and finance ; and resources , science and industry .

the knowledge services group provides research support services to crs analysts and attorneys in their preparation of authoritative and reliable information research and policy analysis to congress .

crs has about 600 employees on its permanent staff .

the professional staff are diverse , including , among others , attorneys , economists , engineers , social science analysts , information scientists , librarians , defense and foreign affairs analysts , political scientists , public administrators , and physical and biological scientists .

policy analysis and research .

crs staff anticipates and responds to congressional needs for policy analysis , research and information in an interdisciplinary , integrated manner .

crs provides timely and objective responses to congressional inquiries for policy analysis , research and information at every stage of the legislative process .

legislative attorneys and paralegal staff respond to congressional needs for legal information and analysis to support the legislative , oversight , and representational functions of congress .

information research .

information research specialists and resource specialists are available to provide information research and reference assistance .

the staff also provides copies of articles in newspapers , journals , legal and legislative documents and offers assistance with a wide variety of electronic files .

crs conducts briefings , seminars , and workshops for members of congress and their staffs .

on these occasions crs analysts and other experts discuss public policy issues , international concerns , and the legislative process .

briefings .

crs analysts and specialists are available to give one - on - one briefings to members and staff on public policy issues , the legislative process , congressional office operations , committee matters , or a general orientation to crs .

issue seminars and workshops .

in anticipation of congressional interest or at the request of a member or committee , crs organizes and conducts seminars and workshops on issues of current interest to members and staff of congress .

crs and outside experts participate in these events with members and staff .

federal law update .

this series , offered twice yearly by the american law division , focuses on developments on important issues of law directly related to the legislative business of congress .

the series can meet continuing legal education ( cle ) requirements in some states .

crs legislative institutes .

this two - part series provides training in the work of congress and the legislative process .

topics include the federal budget process , committee system and procedures , floor procedures , amendments , and resolutions .

district and staff institutes .

these institutes provide orientation for staff of district offices that includes discussions of crs services , the legislative and budget processes , casework , member allowances , ethics , and franking .

the program is supported by the house and senate .

new member seminar .

every two years crs offers new members an orientation seminar on public policy issues .

these sessions are held in january at the beginning of each new congress .

for additional information about crs seminars and events , call [phone number scrubbed] .

customized memoranda .

confidential memoranda prepared for a specific office are a major form of crs written communication .

these memoranda are solely for the use of the requesting office and are not distributed further unless permission has been given by that office .

memoranda are often used by crs attorneys and analysts to respond to inquiries focused on legislative and policy matters of individual member interest .

crs reports .

reports for congress on specific issues take many forms: policy analyses , statistical reviews , economic studies , legal analyses , historical studies , and chronological reviews .

reports are available on the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov .

congressional distribution memoranda .

matters that are not suitable for treatment in a crs report , but that may be of interest to more than one congressional office , can be the subject of general distribution memoranda provided to a congressional office upon request .

general distribution memoranda differ from reports because they are tailored ; are directed to a specific question or concern ; or are more technical or focused in nature .

staff in the congressional reading rooms and research centers provide telephone reference assistance and in - person consultation on resources and research for congressional staff .

a selected research collection , newspapers and journals , and assistance with online searching are available .

la follette congressional reading room monday - thurs: 10:00 a.m. – 8:00 p.m. ; friday: 10:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m. ; saturday: 10:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. except during recess or district / state work periods .

when congress is in session on a sunday or holiday , the hours are posted to the website .

rayburn research center: monday - friday 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. crs senate center: monday - friday 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m .

hours may change when congress is not in session .

jefferson congressional reading room: a members - only facility staffed by crs information professionals providing in - person service .

monday - friday 8:30 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. except during recess or district / state work periods .

russell senate center , b07 monday - friday 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m .

doors may open earlier for events .

crs website .

http: / / www.crs.gov .

the crs website provides 24-hour access to an array of crs services including full text of reports , a weekly "floor agenda," updates and analyses of the annual appropriations legislation , an interactive guide to the legislative process , online registration for crs seminars , and complete information on other crs services .

in operation since the 104 th congress , the crs website is accessible only to house and senate offices and other legislative branch agencies .

a linked format allows the user to move easily within a crs online document and link to the text and summary of relevant legislation and other crs products on the topic .

legislative information system .

http: / / www.congress.gov .

the legislative information system ( lis ) was available for the first time on capnet at the beginning of the 105 th congress .

the system provides members of congress and their staff with access to the most current and comprehensive legislative information available .

it can be accessed only by the house and senate and the legislative support agencies .

the lis has been developed under the policy direction of the senate committee on rules and administration and the house committee on house administration .

it has been a collaborative project of the offices and agencies of the legislative branch , including the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house ; house information resources and the senate sergeant at arms ; the government printing office ; the government accountability office ; the congressional budget office ; the congressional research service ; and the library of congress .

crs has responsibility for the overall coordination of the retrieval system ; the library of congress is responsible for its technical development and operation .

floor agenda .

the "floor agenda: crs products" page , a weekly compendium of crs products relevant to scheduled or expected floor action in the house and senate , is available on the crs website and through e - mail subscription to all members , committees , subcommittees , and congressional staff .

all crs products listed on the floor agenda are linked for electronic delivery to subscriber desktops .

crs programs listserv .

launched in fiscal 2001 , this e - mail notification system provides subscribers with descriptions of current crs programs and links to online registration forms .

issues before congress .

the issues before congress ( ibc ) system , accessible to congress from the crs home page , reflects policy areas identified by crs research staff as active and of current importance to congress .

all products presented as ibcs are maintained to address significant policy developments .

on occasion the system is used to facilitate the contribution of crs expertise in situations requiring immediate attention of congress on an unanticipated basis .

crs typically develops and maintains about 150 ibcs a year .

appropriations .

the crs appropriations web page continues to provide comprehensive legislative tracking and access to legislative analysis of each of the 12 annual appropriations bills .

crs provides a variety of audiovisual products and technical assistance in support of its service to congress .

these include producing video or audio copies of crs institutes and seminars that congressional staff can request for viewing in dvd format .

in addition , crs provides two hours of television programming each weekday for the senate closed - circuit system .

crs has adopted an interdisciplinary and integrative approach as it responds to requests from congress .

the service seeks to define complex issues in clear and understandable ways , identify basic causes of the problems under consideration , and highlight available policy choices and potential effects of action .

crs is organized into the following divisions and offices to support the analysis , research , and information needs of congress .

divisions american law division .

the american law division provides congress with legal analysis and information on the range of legal questions that emerge from the congressional agenda .

division lawyers and paralegals work with federal , state , and international legal resources in support of the legislative , oversight , and representational needs of members and committees of congress .

the division's work involves the constitutional framework of separation of powers , congressional - executive relations and federalism ; the legal aspects of congressional practices and procedures ; and the myriad questions of administrative law , constitutional law , criminal law , civil rights , environmental law , business and tax law , and international law that are implicated by the legislative process .

in addition , the division prepares the constitution of the united states of america — analysis and interpretation ( popularly known as the constitution annotated ) .

domestic social policy division .

the domestic social policy division offers congress research and analysis in the broad area of domestic social policies and programs .

analysts use multiple disciplines in their research , including program and legislative expertise , quantitative methodologies , and economic analysis .

issue and legislative areas include education and training , health care and financing , social security , public and private pensions , welfare , nutrition assistance , housing , immigration , drug control , crime and criminal justice , labor and occupational safety , unemployment and workers compensation , and issues related to children and families , persons with disabilities , the aged , the poor , and veterans .

foreign affairs , defense , and trade .

the foreign affairs , defense , and trade division is organized into seven regional and functional sections .

analysts follow worldwide political and economic and security developments for congress , including u.s. relations with individual countries and transnational issues such as terrorism , refugees , global economic problems , and global institutions such as the international monetary fund and the united nations .

they also address u.s. foreign aid programs , strategies , and resource allocations ; state department budget and functions ; international debt ; public diplomacy ; and legislation on foreign relations .

research responsibilities also include national security policy , military strategy , u.s. and foreign weapons systems , military operations , defense acquisition , military compensation , military health , the defense budget , and u.s. military bases .

trade - related legislation , policies , programs , and u.s. trade performance and investment flows are examined , as are trade negotiations and agreements , export promotion , import regulations , and tariffs .

government and finance division .

the government and finance division responds to congressional requests for assistance on all aspects of congress .

these include the congressional budget and appropriations process , the legislative process , congressional administration and staffing , and the organization and operations of congress and legislative branch agencies .

among the financial issues covered by the division are banking , financial institutions , insurance , mortgages , and securities ; taxation , public finance , fiscal and monetary policy , and the public debt ; the interaction between taxes and interest rates ; and macroeconomic policy .

in addition , the division responds to requests on the organization and management of the federal executive and judicial branches ; judicial and executive branch nominations ; government personnel and the civil service ; the presidency and vice presidency ; government information policy and privacy issues ; intergovernmental relations and forms of federal aid ; federalism ; statehood and u.s. territories ; the district of columbia ; economic developments ; federal planning for and response to emergencies , disasters , and acts of terrorism in the united states ; survey research and public opinion polls ; the census ; reapportionment and redistricting ; elections , campaign finance , lobbying , and political parties ; constitutional amendments ; and constitutional history .

resources , science , and industry division .

the resources , science , and industry division covers an array of legislative issues for congress involving natural resources and environmental management , science and technology , and industry and infrastructure .

resources work includes policy analysis on public lands and other natural resources issues ; environment ; agriculture , food , and fisheries ; and energy and minerals .

science coverage includes policy analysis on civilian and military research and development issues , information and telecommunications , space , earth sciences , and general science and technology .

support on transportation and industry issues includes policy analysis on transportation and transportation infrastructure issues , industrial market structure and regulation , and sector - specific industry analysis .

knowledge services group .

the knowledge services group includes information professionals who respond to congressional requests and partner with crs analysts and attorneys in providing authoritative and reliable information research and policy analysis to congress .

they write descriptive products and contribute to analytical products in policy research areas , advise analysts and congress in finding solutions for their information needs , make recommendations for incorporating new research materials in print and digital formats and provide or coordinate specialized training on these resources .

they also evaluate , acquire , and maintain research data and geospatial information to address various public policy issue areas .

they work closely with the research divisions to provide seminars , institutes , and other in - person briefings to members and their staff , and also provide direct support to congress in congressional reading rooms and research centers .

offices office of communications .

the office of communications is responsible for coordinating and overseeing crs communications with internal and external audiences .

the office assists crs staff in understanding how service policies , procedures , decisions , and activities relate to the crs mission of serving congress and how staff efforts fulfill that mission .

to achieve that goal , the office advises on communications - related aspects of crs initiatives ; ensures that internal and external communications are clear , consistent , and aligned with the crs mission ; coordinates efforts to improve the use of existing communications channels ; and plans , develops , and implements new uses of communications channels .

office of finance and administration .

the office of finance and administration oversees the financial , procurement , and administrative programs of the service .

this includes coordinating the strategic planning ; preparing the budget request ; formulating and executing the financial operating plan ; performing contracting and procurement actions ; supervising the service's status , role , activities , and interaction with the library in performing these functions .

office of the counselor to the director .

the office of the counselor to the director examines and defines policy and legal questions and issues affecting all aspects of the service , and serves as the principal legal and policy advisor to the crs director , deputy director , and other senior management officials .

the office develops and coordinates matters relating to internal crs policies , particularly as they affect the service's relationship with congressional clients and other legislative support agencies , and ensures that the service complies with applicable guidelines and directives contained in the reorganization act , in statements by appropriations and oversight committees , and in library regulations and crs policy statements .

the office of the counselor to the director also addresses policy and legal questions with respect to such matters as congressional requests , potential conflicts of interest and activities on the part of staff , and personnel policy and labor - management issues .

office of congressional information and publishing .

the office of congressional information and publishing facilitates and enhances congressional access to crs expertise and legislative information .

the office manages congressional research requests for crs services and collects and organizes data about the use of crs by congress ; edits , provides graphics support for , and publishes , crs reports exclusively for congress ; organizes , analyzes , and publishes legislative information ( including summaries of pending legislation ) ; and coordinates congress's legislative information system ( lis ) in partnership with the clerk of the house , secretary of the senate , and a number of other legislative branch offices and agencies .

office of information management and technology .

the office of information management and technology provides the information management capabilities and support required for crs legislation - related activities , communications , and service to congress .

this includes planning , procurement , development , operations , security , and maintenance of the information technology infrastructure and systems required to support the crs mission .

the office is also responsible for the overall information architecture and maintains information resources by identifying , assessing , acquiring , organizing , preserving , and tracking materials .

the office of workforce management and development .

the office of workforce management and development manages the service's ability to attract , develop , and retain quality talent needed to respond to the dynamic research , analysis , and information needs of congress .

the office provides a comprehensive package of services and programs to support and strengthen human capital capabilities .

these services and programs extend to the areas of staffing and workforce planning ; performance management , training and development , and staff recognition ; data management and analysis ; workforce flexibilities ; and personnel security .

the office also serves as liaison and collaborates with other library offices on human resource management issues and initiatives .

as part of service - wide planning efforts , crs managers attempt to anticipate major congressional issues .

the program identifies and defines major issues , structures them for more effective scrutiny by congress , and provides effective , timely , and comprehensive products and services to congress , which usually require multi - disciplinary and interdivisional contributions .

the issues chosen are national in scope , receive widespread public attention , have significant effects on the federal budget , economy , or social fabric of the nation , and are virtually certain to be the subject of congressional hearings and legislative action .

the legislative reorganization act of 1970 and specific provisions in various other acts direct and authorize crs to provide a great range of products and services to congress .

however , pursuant to these statutory authorities and understandings reached over time in consultation with the relevant oversight committees , the service has developed the following policies limiting or barring certain types of assistance .

when it appears that a congressional request should be declined on these policy grounds , that decision and notification to the requestor is to be made only after consultation with the appropriate section research manager or assistant director .

crs cannot prepare reports , seminars or undisclaimed products that are of a partisan nature or advocate bills or policies .

but crs will respond to requests for "directed writing" — statement drafts , casemaking or other disclaimed products clearly identified as prepared at the direction of the client and not for attribution as crs analysis or opinion .

in no case is excessive partisanship , incorrect factual data , moral denigration of opponents , or personal research damaging to members permissible .

crs cannot provide researched information focusing on individual members or living former members of congress ( other than holders of , or nominees to , federal appointive office ) , except at the specific request or with permission of the member concerned .

members of the crs staff shall not appear as witnesses before committees of congress in their capacity as crs employees or on matters relating to their official duties without the express consent of the director .

crs does not draft bills ( a function of the office of the legislative counsels ) , but will assist with the preparation of legislative proposals .

crs cannot meet deadlines or demands that could only be met by dropping or jeopardizing the quality of responses to urgent legislative requests related to the public policy work of congress , but the service will respond to all requests as rapidly as is feasible under prevailing workload conditions .

crs cannot accept "rush" or priority deadlines on constituent inquiries but will respond as expeditiously as is possible without compromising the quality of responses relating to current legislative business .

crs cannot undertake casework or provide translating services or briefings for constituents , but can lend assistance in responding to constituent matters , including identification of the appropriate agency or private entity to contact for further pursuit of the matter .

crs cannot give personal legal or medical advice , but will assist in the provision of background information , the identification of relevant issues for further scrutiny , and advice on sources of additional assistance .

crs cannot undertake scholastic or personal research for office staff , but can , on a nonpriority basis , help with bibliographic and reference services .

crs assistance for former members of congress should be limited to use of the la follette reading room and reference centers , the hotline service , the provision of readily available information and previously prepared crs congressional distribution products .

crs cannot undertake original research for former members , but on a nonpriority basis responds to requests for reference services and research guidance .

crs is not authorized to provide congressional offices with clerical assistance ( eg , typing , duplication , maintenance of mailing lists , continuing clipping services , etc. ) .

crs must not use its staff to index hearings or congressional documents other than those prepared by the service itself .

the library of congress is not authorized to subscribe to or lend on a regular basis current issues of periodicals and newspapers for the purpose of furnishing them regularly to individual congressional offices .

crs must not use its staff to support executive or other commissions that are not funded through the legislative branch appropriations act .

in those instances where members of congress are official members of a commission not served by crs , the service may supply customary assistance to the members , but queries should be placed through the members' offices by their official staffs , and the replies should be sent to the members' offices , not to the office of the commission .

crs does not conduct audits or field investigations .

crs is not authorized to provide its services in support of political campaign organizations .

while crs reference and research specialists serve all members and committees of congress , the director has the authority to assign staff to work temporarily for particular committees on request .

in current circumstances , however , no full - time assignments may be approved , and staff assigned to close support of a committee must be available to serve other clients .

when staff is adequate to permit the loan of subject specialists for short periods , the director may approve formal requests without reimbursement ; staff loans for periods of over 60 days must be reimbursed .

no full - time assignment of staff is approved if the assignment leaves the service unable to serve congress adequately .

as a general rule , the services of crs are provided exclusively to congress and , to the extent provided by law , to other congressional support agencies .

because of the benefits derived from the exchange of information with other governmental bodies ( including elected and appointed officials of foreign governments ) , the service may also at the discretion of the director exchange courtesies and services of a limited nature with such organizations , so long as such assistance benefits crs services to congress .

crs does not provide its services to congressional member organizations and informal caucuses not funded by legislative branch appropriations but will provide its normal services to the offices of members who belong to such entities and to formal congressional party organizations .

current lists of organizations that may place requests directly are available from the congressional services section .

fast access to all crs services phone [phone number scrubbed] ( press 1-5 to speak to an information specialist ) website http: / / www.crs.gov fax [phone number scrubbed] website navigation assistance [phone number scrubbed] crs experts phone [phone number scrubbed] ( press 1-5 to request an expert ) dial by name [phone number scrubbed] ( press 1-4 and spell last name then first name ) crs products website ( retrieve full text ) http: / / www.crs.gov in - person services and crs products ( note: hours may change when congress is not in session. ) .

hotline ( quick facts , statistics and web assistance ) [phone number scrubbed] la follette congressional reading room , madison , lm 202 , 707-7100 ( [phone number scrubbed] ) monday - thurs: 10:00 a.m. – 8:00 p.m. ; friday: 10:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m. ; saturday: 10:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. except during recess or district / state work periods .

when congress is in session on a sunday or holiday , the hours are posted on the website .

rayburn research center b355 ; 5-6958 , monday - friday 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. jefferson congressional reading room , jefferson 159 members of congress only monday - friday 9:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m. events crs senate center , russell b07 , 4-3550 monday - friday , 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m .

doors may open earlier for events .

programs and training for information , call [phone number scrubbed] or visit http: / / www.crs.gov and select the programs and events tab .

to set up a borrowing account with the library of congress collection email: [email address scrubbed] phone: [phone number scrubbed] fax: [phone number scrubbed] to request book pick - up: [phone number scrubbed] mailing address mary b. mazanec , director congressional research service the library of congress , lm 203 washington , dc 20540-7210 ( note: hill offices may use inside mail ) for questions , comments , or problems about crs services , please call [phone number scrubbed] .

since its founding in 1974 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has produced independent analyses of budgetary and economic issues to support the congressional budget process .

the agency is strictly nonpartisan and conducts objective , impartial analysis , which is evident in each of the dozens of reports and hundreds of cost estimates that its economists and policy analysts produce each year .

all cbo employees are appointed solely on the basis of professional competence , without regard to political affiliation .

cbo does not make policy recommendations , and each report and cost estimate discloses the agency's assumptions and methodologies .

all of cbo's products apart from informal cost estimates for legislation being developed privately by members of congress or their staffs are available to the congress and the public on cbo's website .

cbo provides budgetary and economic information in a variety of ways and at various points in the legislative process .

baseline budget projections and economic forecasts cbo's reports on the budget and economic outlook cover the 10-year period used in the congressional budget process .

those reports present and explain cbo's baseline budget projections and economic forecast , which are generally based on current law regarding federal spending and revenues .

the reports also describe the differences between the current projections and previous ones , compare the economic forecast with those of other forecasters , and show the budgetary impact of some alternative policy assumptions .

produced: several times annually .

the budget projections and economic forecast are generally issued each january and updated in august .

in addition , the budget projections are updated in march .

analysis of the president's budget cbo estimates the budgetary impact of the proposals in the president's budget using the agency's own economic forecast and estimating assumptions .

cbo's independent "reestimate" of the president's budget allows the congress to compare the administration's spending and revenue proposals with cbo's baseline spending and revenue projections and with other proposals using a consistent set of economic and technical assumptions .

produced: annually .

the budgetary analysis is generally issued in march , followed in april by an analysis of the impact of the president's budgetary proposals on the economy and , in turn , indirectly on the federal budget .

budget options periodically , cbo produces a reference volume examining options for reducing budget deficits .

the volume includes a wide range of options , derived from many sources , for reducing spending and increasing revenues .

for each option , the volume presents an estimate of its effects on the budget and a discussion of its pros and cons but makes no recommendations .

in addition , cbo produces numerous reports ( discussed below ) that examine policy options for specific federal programs and aspects of the tax code .

produced: generally in odd - numbered years , to correspond to the beginning of each new congress .

long - term budget projections cbo provides the congress with budget projections that go beyond the standard 10-year budget window .

those projections typically span 25 years but can extend as far as 75 years into the future .

the projections show the impact of long - term demographic trends and rising health care costs on federal spending , revenues , and deficits .

cbo also projects the economic impact of alternative long - term budget policies .

produced: annually , usually in june .

cost estimates cbo provides formal , written estimates of the cost of virtually every bill "reported" ( approved ) by congressional committees to show how the bill would affect spending or revenues over the next 5 or 10 years , depending on the type of spending involved .

each cost estimate includes a section describing the basis for the estimate .

for most tax legislation , cbo uses estimates provided by the staff of the joint committee on taxation , a separate group that works closely with the congressional tax - writing committees .

in addition to formal , written estimates , cbo provides a far greater number of preliminary , informal estimates as committees are considering what legislation to advance , as amendments to legislation are being debated , and at other stages in the legislative process .

produced: throughout the year , with formal estimates typically numbering between 500 and 700 annually .

analyses of federal mandates cbo analyzes the costs that proposed legislation would impose on state , local , and tribal governments and on the private sector .

if the estimated five - year cost of such a mandate exceeds specified thresholds , the agency reports the cost and provides the basis of the estimate .

cbo produces mandate statements with its cost estimates for each committee - approved bill .

produced: throughout the year .

in addition , cbo produces a report each spring listing all of its work analyzing mandates in the previous year .

monthly budget review cbo issues a monthly analysis of federal spending and revenue totals for the previous month , the current month , and the fiscal year to date .

those analyses help to inform the congress and the public about the monthly status of the budget .

produced: the fifth working day of each month .

scorekeeping for enacted legislation cbo provides the budget and appropriations committees with frequent tabulations of congressional action affecting spending and revenues .

those scorekeeping reports provide information about whether legislative actions are consistent with the spending and revenue levels set by the budget resolution .

produced: periodically during the year .

compilations of unauthorized appropriations and expiring authorizations cbo prepares a report listing all programs and activities funded for the current fiscal year for which authorizations of appropriations have expired or will expire during the current fiscal year .

produced: annually , in january .

reports on the troubled asset relief program the congress established the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) in 2008 to stabilize financial markets .

cbo regularly provides its estimate of the costs of the program and a comparison of that estimate to the preceding estimate from the administration's office of management and budget ( omb ) .

produced: within 45 days of the tarp report produced by omb ; annually starting in 2013 and twice per year in previous years .

reports on the american recovery and reinvestment act the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) requires cbo to comment on reports filed by recipients of arra funding about the number of jobs funded by arra .

cbo's reports provide the agency's own estimates of the effects of arra on total output and jobs .

produced: annually starting in 2013 and quarterly in previous years .

sequestration reports under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended by the budget control act of 2011 , cbo is required to issue reports that provide estimates of certain limits on discretionary budget authority ( that is , the authority provided by appropriation acts for the government to incur financial obligations ) .

separately , on the basis of its own estimates , omb will determine whether a sequestration ( cancellation of budgetary resources ) is required under those laws and , if so , the allocation of the cancellation of resources .

produced: twice a year .

analytic reports in addition to the reports discussed above , cbo prepares analytic reports that examine specific federal programs , aspects of the tax code , and budgetary and economic challenges .

the reports cover a wide range of subjects , including health care , economic growth , income security , education , taxes , energy , the environment , national security , financial issues , infrastructure , and more .

most cbo reports present a set of options for changes in the federal programs or tax rules being examined .

such reports generally include estimates of each option's budgetary effects , economic effects , or both , as well as a discussion of each option's pros and cons .

as with the agency's other products , these reports make no recommendations .

some cbo reports provide background information about cbo's other analyses to enhance the transparency of the agency's work .

most cbo reports are written at the request of the chairman or ranking minority member of a committee or subcommittee or of the leadership of either party in the house or senate .

the agency may also present its analyses as testimony before congressional committees rather than in report format .

in addition , cbo managers and analysts sometimes make presentations to professional groups , and slides from those presentations are generally posted on cbo's website .

the agency also sometimes summarizes its analyses in less traditional formats ( such as infographics ) , and those summaries are also available on cbo's website .

produced: throughout the year .

working papers cbo's working papers include papers that provide technical descriptions of official cbo analyses and papers that represent independent research by cbo analysts .

through those papers , cbo aims to enhance the transparency of its work and to encourage external review of that work .

working papers are not subject to cbo's regular review and editing process .

produced: throughout the year .

data and technical information to provide more detail about cbo's budgetary and economic projections and to add to the transparency of cbo's other analyses , the agency posts a considerable amount of data and other technical information on its website .

produced: throughout the year .

the speaker of the house of representatives and the president pro tempore of the senate jointly appoint the cbo director , after considering recommendations from the two budget committees .

directors are appointed for four - year terms , and they may be reappointed to the position ; in addition , a director serving at the expiration of a term may continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed .

the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 specifies that cbo's director is to be chosen without regard to political affiliation .

the rest of cbo's staff , including the deputy director , are appointed by the director .

cbo directors have established a firm tradition of retaining staff from their predecessors .

directors appoint all cbo employees solely on the basis of professional competence , without regard to political affiliation .

doug elmendorf is cbo's current director .

he was initially appointed on january 22 , 2009 , to complete the previous four - year term of office .

he was later reappointed to serve through january 3 , 2015 .

for over three decades the offices of senate legal counsel and house general counsel have developed parallel yet distinctly unique and independent roles as institutional legal "voices" of the two bodies they represent .

familiarity with the structure and operation of these offices and the nature of the support they may provide committees in the context of an investigative oversight proceeding is essential .

the office of senate legal counsel was created by title vii of the ethics in government act of 1978 "to serve the institution of congress rather than the partisan interests of one party or another. .

the counsel and deputy counsel are appointed by the president pro tempore of the senate upon the recommendation of the majority and minority leaders .

the appointment of each is made effective by a resolution of the senate , and each may be removed from office by a resolution of the senate .

the term of appointment of the counsel and deputy counsel is two congresses .

the appointment of the counsel and deputy counsel and the counsel's appointment of assistant senate legal counsel are required to be made without regard to political affiliation .

the office is responsible to a bipartisan joint leadership group , which is comprised of the majority and minority leaders , the president pro tempore , and the chairman and ranking minority member of the committees on the judiciary and on rules and administration .

the act specifies the activities of the office , two of which are of immediate interest to committee oversight concerns: representing committees of the senate in proceedings to aid them in investigations , and advising committees and officers of the senate .

the senate legal counsel may represent committees in proceedings to obtain evidence for senate investigations .

two specific proceedings are authorized .

the first proceeding is under the law providing committees the authority to grant witness immunity ( 18 u.s.c .

§6005 ) .

it provides that a committee or subcommittee of either house of congress may request an immunity order from a u.s. district court when the request has been approved by the affirmative vote of two - thirds of the members of the full committee .

by the same vote , a committee may direct the senate legal counsel to represent it or any of its subcommittees in an application for an immunity order .

the second proceeding involves authority under the ethics in government act of 1978 which permits the senate legal counsel to represent a committee or subcommittee of the senate in a civil action to enforce a subpoena .

prior to the ethics act , subpoenas of the senate could be enforced only through the cumbersome method of a contempt proceeding before the bar of the senate or by a certification to the u.s. attorney and a prosecution for criminal contempt of congress under 2 u.s.c .

sections 192 , 194 .

the ethics act authorizes the senate to enforce its subpoenas through a civil action in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

the house chose not to avail itself of this procedure and this enforcement method applies only to senate subpoenas .

senate subpoenas have been enforced in several civil actions .

see , for example , proceedings to hold in contempt a recalcitrant witness in the impeachment proceedings against judge alcee l. hastings and proceedings to enforce a subpoena duces tecum for the production of diaries of senator bob packwood .

the statute details the procedure for directing the senate legal counsel to bring a civil action to enforce a subpoena .

in contrast to an application for an immunity order , which may be authorized by a committee , only the full senate by resolution may authorize an action to enforce a subpoena .

the senate may not consider a resolution to direct the counsel to bring an action unless the investigating committee reports the resolution by a majority vote .

the statute specifies the required contents of the committee report ; among other matters , the committee must report on the extent to which the subpoenaed party has complied with the subpoena , the objections or privileges asserted by the witness , and the comparative effectiveness of a criminal and civil proceeding .

a significant limitation on the civil enforcement remedy is that it excludes from its coverage actions against officers or employees of the federal government acting within their official capacities , except where the refusal to comply is based on the assertion of a personal privilege or objection and not on a governmental privilege or objection that has been authorized by the executive branch .

its reach is limited to natural persons and to entities acting or purporting to act under the color of state law .

the ethics act details a number of advisory functions of the office of senate legal counsel .

principal among these are the responsibility of advising members , committees , and officers of the senate with respect to subpoenas or requests for the withdrawal of senate documents , and the responsibility of advising committees about their promulgation and implementation of rules and procedures for congressional investigations .

the office also provides advice about legal questions that arise during the course of investigations .

the act also provides that the counsel shall perform such other duties consistent with the nonpartisan purposes and limitations of title vii as the senate may direct .

thus , in 1980 , the office was used in the investigation relating to president carter's brother , billy , and his connection to libya .

the office worked under the direction of the chairman and vice - chairman of the subcommittee charged with the conduct of that investigation .

members of the office have also undertaken special assignments such as the senate's investigation of "abscam" and other undercover activities , the impeachment proceedings of judge harry claiborne , judge walter l. nixon , jr. , judge alcee l. hastings jr. , judge g. thomas porteous , jr. and the confirmation hearings of justice clarence e. thomas .

the office was called upon to assist in the senate's conduct of the impeachment trial of president clinton .

in addition , the counsel's office provides information and advice to members , officers , and employees on a wide range of legal and administrative matters relating to senate business .

unlike the house practice , the senate legal counsel plays no formal role in the review and issuance of subpoenas .

however , since it may become involved in civil enforcement proceedings , it has welcomed the opportunity to review proposed subpoenas for form and substance prior to their issuance by committees .

the office of senate legal counsel can be reached at 224-4435 .

the house office of general counsel has evolved since the mid - 1970s , from its original role as a legal advisor to the clerk of the house on a range of matters that fell within the jurisdiction of the clerk's office , to that of counsel for the institution .

at the beginning of the 103 rd congress , it was made a separate house office , reporting directly to the speaker , charged with the responsibility "of providing legal assistance and representation to the house. .

while the function and role of the house office of general counsel and senate legal counsel with respect to oversight assistance to committees and protection of institutional prerogatives are similar , there are some differences that will be noted below .

the general counsel , deputy general counsel , and other attorneys of the office are appointed by the speaker and serve at his pleasure .

the office "function[s] pursuant to the direction of the speaker , who shall consult with a bipartisan legal advisory group," which consists of the speaker himself , the majority leader , majority whip , minority leader , and minority whip .

the office has statutory authority to appear before state or federal courts in the course of performing its functions .

2 u.s.c .

section 130f .

the office may appear as amicus curiae on behalf of the speaker and the bipartisan legal advisory group in litigation involving the institutional interests of the house .

where authorized by statute or resolution , the office may represent the house itself in judicial proceedings .

the office also represents house officers in litigation affecting the institutional interests and prerogatives of the house .

finally , the office defends the house , its committees , officers , and employees in civil litigation relating to their official responsibilities , or when they have been subpoenaed to testify or to produce house records ( see house rule viii ) .

unlike senate committees , house committees may only issue subpoenas under the seal of the clerk of the house .

in practice , committees often work closely with the office of general counsel in drafting subpoenas and every subpoena issued by a committee is reviewed by the office for substance and form .

committees frequently seek the advice and assistance of the office of general counsel in dealing with various asserted constitutional , statutory , and common - law privileges , in responding to executive agencies and officials that resist congressional oversight , and in navigating the statutory process for obtaining a contempt citation with respect to a recalcitrant witness .

the office of general counsel represents the interests of house committees in judicial proceedings in a variety of circumstances .

the office represents committees in federal court on applications for immunity orders pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

section 6005 ; appears as amicus curiae in cases affecting house committee investigations ; defends against attempts to obtain direct or indirect judicial interference with congressional subpoenas or other investigatory authority ; represents committees seeking to prevent compelled disclosure of non - public information relating to their investigatory or other legislative activities ; and appears in court on behalf of committees seeking judicial assistance in obtaining access to documents or information such as documents that are under seal or materials which may be protected by rule 6 ( e ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure .

like the senate legal counsel's office , the house general counsel's office also devotes a large portion of its time to rendering informal advice to individual members and committees .

the office can be reached at [phone number scrubbed] .

its website address is http: / / generalcounsel.house.gov / , which is available only to house offices .

the government accountability office , formerly called the general accounting office , was established by the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( 31 u.s.c .

§702 ) as an independent auditor of government agencies .

over the years , congress has expanded gao's audit authority , added new responsibilities and duties , including performance , management and accountability evaluations , and strengthened gao's ability to perform independently of the executive branch .

gao's mission is to support the congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government .

gao is led by the comptroller general of the united states , who is appointed by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate , from a list of candidates selected by a bipartisan , bicameral congressional commission .

the comptroller general serves a term of 15 years .

gao issues hundreds of reports , testimony statements , and legal opinions each year .

gao's staff are located in washington , d.c. and in field offices throughout the country .

most gao reports are prepared in response to requests from members of congress , or requirements in statute or committee or conference reports .

gao is required to do work requested by committee chairs and , as a matter of policy , assigns equal status to requests from ranking minority members , and subcommittee leaders .

a small percentage of reviews are undertaken under the comptroller general's authority .

gao's policies for accepting and prioritizing mandates and requests are laid out in its congressional protocols .

gao's watchdog website , available on house and senate intranet , provides information on the congressional protocols , how to request gao reports , and information about ongoing reviews , among other things .

gao encourages members and staff to consult with its staff when considering a request or mandate for a report .

upon receiving a request , gao will contact the requester to confirm acceptance , or to discuss issues needing to be resolved .

such issues are outlined in the protocols , and may include existence of similar or duplicate requests .

in these cases gao may suggest consolidating requests .

an issue in litigation .

gao will typically not undertake reviews in these circumstances gao's authority to do the work and obtain data.for example , gao does not have authority to obtain information from the private sector or state and local governments without a connection to federal spending or programs .

whether gao is the most appropriate organization to undertake the work .

gao will refer to requester to other organizations in these cases .

gao's available resources .

gao may not have resources to undertake the scope of work requested , or may not have staff with expertise available to begin the work right away .

gao will work with the requesters on scope and priorities in these cases .

upon beginning work , gao will consult with requesters and conduct research to design methodologies that can answer the agreed - upon questions in an objective , fact - based , nonpartisan , nonideological , fair , and balanced way .

gao will confirm in writing the questions to be addressed , and the methodological approach.gao will keep requesters informed throughout its work .

gao's reports typically support congressional oversight through focusing on: auditing agency operations to determine whether federal funds are being spent efficiently and effectively ; identifying opportunities to address duplication , overlap , waste or inefficiencies in the use of public funds ; reporting on how well government programs and policies are meeting their objectives ; performing policy analyses and outlining options for congressional consideration ; or investigating allegations of illegal and improper activities .

gao's objective is to produce high - quality reports , testimonies , briefings , and other products and services that are objective , fact - based , nonpartisan , nonideological , fair , and balanced .

the agency operates under strict professional standards , including government auditing standards and a quality assurance framework.gao obtains information through surveys , interviews , database analysis , and document reviews , among other techniques .

all numbers and statements of fact presented in gao work are thoroughly checked and referenced .

gao obtains comments on its findings and recommendations from the agencies it reviews , and includes these comments in its reports .

gao's products include oral briefings , testimony and written reports .

all non - classified reports are made available to the public through posting on gao's website .

gao can also provide technical assistance to members and staff , based on its past work , through , for example , briefings by its subject - matter experts .

in addition to its audits and evaluations , gao offers a number of other services .

forensic audits and investigative service .

the forensic audits and investigative services ( fais ) team conducts forensic audits and investigations of fraud , waste , and abuse .

its primary mission is to support congress by improving the performance and accountability of government through auditing and investigating allegations of illegal or improper conduct related to federal funds , programs , or activities .

fais also conducts evaluations of security vulnerabilities and supports other gao reviews where an investigative component is needed .

fais conducts its work in accordance with the government auditing standards and the standards for investigations established by the council of inspectors general on integrity and efficiency legal services .

gao provides various legal services .

for example , upon request , gao may render a legal decision or opinion on questions involving the use of , and accountability for , public funds or on other legal issues of interest to congressional committees .

gao publishes the principles of federal appropriations law ( known as the red book ) and teaches a class that provides an orientation to federal fiscal laws .

gao attorneys are available for informal technical assistance .

in addition , under the competition in contracting act , gao provides an objective , independent , and impartial forum for the resolution of bid protests of awards of federal contracts in 100 days .

under other authorities , gao reviews all major rules proposed by federal agencies and provides reports to congress ; and received agency reports about vacancies in presidentially appointed , senate confirmed positions and issues legal opinions under the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 .

accounting and financial management policy .

gao prescribes accounting principles and standards for the executive branch .

the comptroller general appoints the advisory council on government auditing standards , which advises gao's preparation of the generally accepted government audit standards , which is used by auditors of government entities , and entities that receive government awards , among others .

audit / evaluation community support .

gao also provides other services to help the audit and evaluation community improve and keep abreast of current developments .

for example , it publishes and distributes papers on current audit and evaluation methodologies and approaches ; assists in various training programs sponsored by these organizations , and sponsors an international auditor fellowship program to help other nations improve their audit functions .

committee support .

occasionally , on request of committee leadership , gao details staff to work for congressional committees for up to one year .

in these cases , the staff assigned represent a committee and not gao .

gao encourages members and staff to consult with its staff when considering a request or mandate for a report .

gao's office of congressional relations ( 512-4400 ) will help identify an appropriate gao point of contact .

additional information is available on http: / / www.gao.gov or the "watchdog" site which is available only to members and staff via the house and senate intranets .

request letters should be addressed to the honorable gene l. dodaro comptroller general of the united states 441 g street nw washington dc 20548 gao will accept letters attached to email sent to [email address scrubbed] or in hard copy .

they may also be sent to staff of the congressional relations office , whose contact information is listed on the watchdog site .

the office of management and budget , http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb , came into existence in 1970 ; its predecessor agency , the bureau of the budget , was established in 1921 .

initially created as a unit in the treasury department , since 1939 the agency has been a part of the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

omb , though created by congress , is the president's agent for the management and implementation of policy , including the federal budget .

omb's major responsibilities include assisting the president in the preparation of budget proposals and development of a fiscal program .

supervising and controlling the administration of the budget in the executive branch , including transmittal to congress of proposals for deferrals and rescissions .

keeping the president informed about agencies' activities ( proposed , initiated , and completed ) , in order to coordinate efforts , expend appropriations economically , and minimize overlap and duplication .

administering the process of review of draft proposed and final agency rules established by executive order 12866 .

administering the process of review and approval of collections of information by federal agencies and reducing the burden of agency information collection on the public under the paperwork reduction act of 1995 .

overseeing the manner in which agencies disseminate information to the public ( including electronic dissemination ) ; how agencies collect , maintain , and use statistics ; how agencies' archives are maintained ; how agencies develop systems for insuring privacy , confidentiality , security , and the sharing of information collected by the government ; and how the government acquires and uses information technology , pursuant to the paperwork reduction act of 1995 , the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , and other legislation .

studying and promoting better governmental management , including making recommendations to agencies regarding their administrative organization and operations .

clearing and coordinating agencies' draft testimony and legislative proposals and making recommendations about presidential action on legislation .

assisting in the preparation , consideration , and clearance of executive orders and proclamations .

planning and developing information systems that provide the president with agency and program performance data .

establishing and overseeing implementation of financial management policies and requirements for the federal government as required by the chief financial officers act of 1990 .

assisting in development of regulatory reform proposals and programs for paperwork reduction , and then the implementation of these initiatives .

improving the economy and efficiency of the federal procurement process by providing overall direction for procurement policies , regulations , procedures , and forms .

establishing policies and methods that reduce fraud , waste , and abuse , and coordinating the work of the inspectors general through the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency ( p.l .

110-409 ) .

omb is inevitably drawn into institutional and partisan struggles between the president and congress .

difficulties for congress notwithstanding , omb is the central clearinghouse for executive agencies and is , therefore , a rich source of information for investigative and oversight committees .

since enactment of the 1974 budget act , as amended , congress has more budgetary information than ever before .

extensive budgetary materials are also available from the executive branch .

some of the major sources of budgetary information are available on and off capitol hill .

they include ( 1 ) the president and executive agencies ( recall that under the budget and accounting act of 1921 , the president presents annually a national budget to congress ) ; ( 2 ) the congressional budget office ; ( 3 ) the house and senate budget committees ; ( 4 ) the house and senate appropriations committees ; and ( 5 ) the house and senate legislative committees .

in addition , crs and gao prepare reports that address the budget and related issues .

worth mention is that discretionary spending , the component of the budget that the appropriations committees oversee through the appropriations process , accounts for about one - third of federal spending .

other house and senate committees , particularly ways and means and finance , oversee more than $1 trillion in spending through reauthorizations , direct spending measures , and reconciliation legislation .

in addition , ways and means and finance oversee a diverse set of programs , including tax collection , tax expenditures , and some user fees , through the revenue process .

the oversight activities of all of these committees is enhanced through the use of the diverse range of budgetary information that is available to them .

budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2012 contains the budget message of the president and information on the president's budget proposals by budget function .

analytical perspectives , budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2012 contains analyses that are designed to highlight specified subject areas or provide other significant presentations of budget data that place the budget in perspective .

this volume includes economic and accounting analyses ; information on federal receipts and collections ; analyses of federal spending ; information on federal borrowing and debt ; baseline or current services estimates ; and other technical presentations .

the analytical perspectives volume also contains supplemental material with several detailed tables , including tables showing the budget by agency and account and by function , subfunction , and program , that is available on the internet and as a cd - rom in the printed document .

historical tables provides data on budget receipts , outlays , surpluses or deficits , federal debt , and federal employment over an extended time period , generally from 1940 or earlier to 2012 or 2015 .

to the extent feasible , the data have been adjusted to provide consistency with the 2012 budget and to provide comparability over time .

the appendix , budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2012 contains detailed information on the various appropriations and funds that constitute the budget .

the appendix contains financial information on individual programs and appropriation accounts .

it includes for each agency: the proposed text of appropriations language ; budget schedules for each account ; legislative proposals ; explanations of the work to be performed and the funds needed ; and proposed general provisions applicable to the appropriations of entire agencies or group of agencies .

information is also provided on certain activities whose transactions are not part of the budget totals .

several other points about the president's budget and executive agency budget products are worth noting .

first , the president's budgetary communications to congress continue after the january / february submission and usually include a series of budget amendments and supplementals , the mid - session review , statements of administration policy ( saps ) on legislation , and even revised budgets on occasion .

second , most of these additional communications are issued as house documents and are available on the web from gpo access or the omb home page ( in the case of saps ) .

third , the initial budget products often do not provide sufficient information on the president's budgetary recommendations to enable committees to begin developing legislation , and that further budgetary information is provided in the "justification" materials ( see below ) and the later submission of legislative proposals .

finally , the internal executive papers ( such as agency budget submissions to omb ) often are not made available to congress .

committees on appropriations .

the subcommittees of the house and senate appropriations committees hold extensive hearings on the fiscal year appropriations requests of federal departments and agencies .

each federal department or agency submits justification material to the committees on appropriations .

their submissions can run from several hundreds of pages to over two thousand pages .

the appropriations subcommittees typically print this material with the hearing record of the federal officials concerning these requests .

budget committees .

house and senate budget committees , in preparing to report the annual concurrent budget resolution , conduct hearings on overall federal budget policy .

these hearings and other fiscal analyses made by these panels address various aspects of federal programs and funding levels which can be useful sources of information .

other committees .

to assist the budget committees in developing the concurrent budget resolution , other committees are required to prepare "views and estimates" of programs in their jurisdiction .

committee views and estimates , usually packaged together and issued as a committee print , also may be a useful source of detailed budget data .

internal agency studies and budget reviews .

these agency studies and reviews are often conducted in support of budget formulation and can yield useful information about individual programs .

the budgeting documents , evaluations , and priority rankings of individual agency programs can provide insights into executive branch views of the importance of individual programs .

committees and members can acquire useful information about executive branch programs and performance from the beneficiaries of those programs , private organizations , and interest groups .

an effective oversight device , for example , is to ask beneficiaries how well federal programs and services are working .

a variety of methods might be employed to solicit the views of those on the receiving end of federal programs and services , including investigations and hearings , field and on - site meetings , surveys and opinion polls , and websites .

the results of such efforts can assist committees in obtaining policy - relevant information about program performance and in evaluating the problems people might be having with federal administrators and agencies .

there are numerous think tanks , universities , or associations , for instance , that periodically conduct studies of public policy issues and advise members and others on how well federal agencies and programs are working .

similarly , numerous interest groups are active in monitoring areas such as civil rights , education , or health and they are not reluctant to point out alleged bureaucratic failings to committees and members .

some of these groups may also assist committees and members in bringing about improvements in agencies and programs .

for example , the project on government oversight ( pogo ) , an independent , nonprofit organization , that seeks a more effective , accountable , open , and ethical federal government .

the group's website is http: / / www.pogo.org .

there are also scores of social , political , scientific , environmental , and humanitarian nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) located around the world .

working with governments , corporations , foundations , and other entities are such ngos as greenpeace , amnesty international , the world resources institute , the red cross , and the save the children fund .

many ngos might provide valuable assistance to congressional overseers because they "do legal , scientific , technical , and policy analysis ; provide services ; shape , implement , monitor , and enforce national and international commitments ; and change institutions and norms. .

appendix a. illustrative subpoena general instructions 1 .

in complying with this subpoena , you are required to produce all responsive documents that are in your possession , custody , or control , whether held by you or your past or present agents , employees , and representatives acting on your behalf .

you are also required to produce documents that you have a legal right to obtain , documents that you have a right to copy or have access to , and documents that you have placed in the temporary possession , custody , or control of any third party .

no records , documents , data or information called for by this request shall be destroyed , modified , removed or otherwise made inaccessible to the committee .

2 .

in the event that any entity , organization or individual denoted in this subpoena has been , or is also known by any other name than that herein denoted , the subpoena shall be read to also include them under that alternative identification .

3 .

each document produced shall be produced in a form that renders the document susceptible of copying .

4 .

documents produced in response to this subpoena shall be produced together with copies of file labels , dividers or identifying markers with which they were associated when this subpoena was served .

also identify to which paragraph from the subpoena that such documents are responsive .

5 .

it shall not be a basis for refusal to produce documents that any other person or entity also possesses non - identical or identical copies of the same document .

6 .

if any of the subpoenaed information is available in machine - readable form ( such as punch cards , paper or magnetic tapes , drums , disks , or core storage ) , state the form in which it is available and provide sufficient detail to allow the information to be copied to a readable format .

if the information requested is stored in a computer , indicate whether you have an existing program that will print the records in a readable form .

7 .

if the subpoena cannot be complied with in full , it shall be complied with to the extent possible , which shall include an explanation of why full compliance is not possible .

8 .

in the event that a document is withheld on the basis of privilege , provide the following information concerning any such document: ( a ) the privilege asserted ; ( b ) the type of document ; ( c ) the general subject matter ; ( d ) the date , author and addressee ; and ( e ) the relationship of the author and addressee to each other .

9 .

if any document responsive to this subpoena was , but no longer is , in your possession , custody , or control , identify the document ( stating its date , author , subject and recipients ) and explain the circumstances by which the document ceased to be in your possession , or control .

10 .

if a date set forth in this subpoena referring to a communication , meeting , or other event is inaccurate , but the actual date is known to you or is otherwise apparent from the context of the request , you should produce all documents which would be responsive as if the date were correct .

11 .

other than subpoena questions directed at the activities of specified entities or persons , to the extent that information contained in documents sought by this subpoena may require production of donor lists , or information otherwise enabling the re - creation of donor lists , such identifying information may be redacted .

12 .

the time period covered by this subpoena is included in the attached schedule a .

13 .

this request is continuing in nature .

any record , document , compilation of data or information , not produced because it has not been located or discovered by the return date , shall be produced immediately upon location or discovery subsequent thereto .

14 .

all documents shall be bates stamped sequentially and produced sequentially .

15 .

two sets of documents shall be delivered , one set for the majority staff and one set for the minority staff .

when documents are produced to the subcommittee , production sets shall be delivered to the majority staff in room b346 rayburn house office building and the minority staff in room 2101 rayburn house office building .

general definitions 1 .

the term "document" means any written , recorded , or graphic matter of any nature whatsoever , regardless of how recorded , and whether original or copy , including , but not limited to , the following: memoranda , reports , expense reports , books , manuals , instructions , financial reports , working papers , records notes , letters , notices , confirmations , telegrams , receipts , appraisals , pamphlets , magazines , newspapers , prospectuses , interoffice and intra office communications , electronic mail ( e - mail ) , contracts , cables , notations of any type of conversation , telephone call , meeting or other communication , bulletins , printed matter , computer printouts , teletypes , invoices , transcripts , diaries , analyses , returns , summaries , minutes , bills , accounts , estimates , projections , comparisons , messages , correspondence , press releases , circulars , financial statements , reviews , opinions , offers , studies and investigations , questionnaires and surveys , and work sheets ( and all drafts , preliminary versions , alterations , modifications , revisions , changes , and amendments of any of the foregoing , as well as any attachments or appendices thereto ) , and graphic or oral records or representations of any kind ( including without limitation , photographs , charts , graphs , microfiche , microfilm , videotape , recordings and motion pictures ) , and electronic , mechanical , and electric records or representations of any kind ( including , without limitation , tapes , cassettes , discs , and recordings ) and other written , printed , typed , or other graphic or recorded matter of any kind or nature , however produced or reproduced , and whether preserved in writing , film , tape , disc , or videotape .

a documents bearing any notation not a part of the original text is to be considered a separate document .

a draft or non - identical copy is a separate document within the meaning of this term .

2 .

the term "communication" means each manner or means of disclosure or exchange of information , regardless of means utilized , whether oral , electronic , by document or otherwise , and whether face to face , in a meeting , by telephone , mail , telexes , discussions , releases , personal delivery , or otherwise .

3 .

the terms "and" and "or" shall be construed broadly and either conjunctively or disjunctively to bring within the scope of this subpoena any information which might otherwise be construed to be outside its scope .

the singular includes plural number , and vice versa .

the masculine includes the feminine and neuter genders .

4 .

the term "white house" refers to the executive office of the president and all of its units including , without limitation , the office of administration , the white house office , the office of the vice president , the office of science and technology policy , the office of management and budget , the united states trade representative , the office of public liaison , the office of correspondence , the office of the deputy chief of staff for policy and political affairs , the office of the deputy chief of staff for white house operations , the domestic policy council , the office of federal procurement policy , the office of intergovernmental affairs , the office of legislative affairs , media affairs , the national economic council , the office of policy development , the office of political affairs , the office of presidential personnel , the office of the press secretary , the office of scheduling and advance , the council of economic advisors , the council on environmental quality , the executive residence , the president's foreign intelligence advisory board , the national security council , the office of national drug control , and the office of policy development .

march 10 , 1998 custodian of documents international brotherhood of teamsters 25 louisiana avenue , n.w .

washington , d.c. 20001 schedule a 1 .

all organizational charts and personnel rosters for the international brotherhood of teamsters ( "teamsters" or "ibt" ) , including the drive pac , in effect during calendar years 1991 through 1997 .

2 .

all ibt operating , finance , and administrative manuals in effect during calendar years 1991 through 1997 , including , but not limited to those that set forth ( 1 ) operating policies , practices , and procedures ; ( 2 ) internal financial practices and reporting requirements ; and ( 3 ) authorization , approval , and review responsibilities .

3 .

all annual audit reports of the ibt for the years 1991 through 1996 performed by the auditing firm of grant thornton .

4 .

all ibt annual reports to its membership and the public for years 1991 through 1997 , including copies of ibt annual audited financial statements certified to by independent public accountants .

5 .

all books and records showing receipts and expenditures , assets and liabilities , profits and losses , and all other records used for recording the financial affairs of the ibt including , journals ( or other books of original entry ) and ledgers including cash receipts journals , cash disbursements journals , revenue journals , general journals , subledgers , and workpapers reflecting accounting entries .

6 .

all federal income tax returns filed by the ibt for years 1991 through 1997 .

7 .

all minutes of the general board , executive board , executive council , and all standing committees , including any internal ethics committees formed to investigate misconduct and corruption , and all handouts and reports prepared and produced at each committee meeting .

8 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , any contribution , donation , expenditure , outlay , in - kind assistance , transfer , loan , or grant ( from drive , drive e&l fund , or ibt general treasury ) to any of the following entities / organizations: a .

citizen action b .

campaign for a responsible congress c. project vote d. national council of senior citizens e. vote now '96 f. afl - cio g. afscme h. democratic national committee i .

democratic senatorial campaign committee ( "dscc" ) j .

democratic congressional campaign committee ( "dccc" ) k. state democratic parties 1 .

clinton - gore '96 m. seiu 9 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about any of the following individuals / entities: a. teamsters for a corruption free union b. teamsters for a democratic union c. concerned teamsters 2000 d. martin davis e. michael ansara f. jere nash g. share group h. november group i. terrence mcauliffe j. charles blitz k. new party 1 .

james p. hoffa campaign m. delancy printing n. axis enterprises o. barbara arnold p. peter mcgourty q. charles mcdonald r. theodore kheel 10 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information on about , communications between the teamsters and the white house regarding any of the following issues: a .

united parcel service strike b. diamond walnut company strike c. pony express company organizing efforts d. davis bacon act e. nafta border crossings f. ron carey reelection campaign g. ibt support to 1996 federal election campaigns .

i .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , communications between the teamsters and the federal election commission .

12 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , communications between the teamsters and the democratic national committee , dscc , or dccc .

13 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , communications between the teamsters and the clinton - gore '96 campaign committee .

14 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , policies and procedures in effect during 1996 regarding the approval of expenditures from the ibt general treasury , drive e&l fund , and drive pac .

15 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about the retention by the ibt of the law firm covington & burling and / or charles ruff .

16 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about work for the ibt performed by the firm palladino & sutherland and / or jack palladino .

17 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about work for the ibt performed by ace investigations and / or guerrieri , edmund , and james .

18 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about ibt involvement in the 1995-1996 oregon senate race ( ron wyden vs. gordon smith ) .

19 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , ron carey's campaign for reelection as general president of the teamsters .

20 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about organization , planning , and operation of the 1996 ibt convention .

21 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about the following: a. trish hoppey b. john latz c. any individual with the last name of "golovner" .

d. convention management group .

22 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about the household finance corporation .

23 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , any "affinity credit card" program or other credit card program sponsored by or participated in by the ibt .

24 .

a list of all bank accounts held by the international brotherhood of teamsters including the name of the bank , account number , and bank address .

25 .

all documents referring or relating to , or containing information about , payments made by the ibt to any official or employee of the independent review board .

26 .

unless otherwise indicated , the time period covered by this subpoena is between january 1991 and december 1997 .

appendix b .

examples of white house response to congressional requests the white house november 4 , 1982 memorandum for the heads of executive departments and agencies subject: procedures governing responses to congressional request for information the policy of this administration is to comply with congressional requests for information to the fullest extent consistent with the constitutional and statutory obligations of the executive branch .

while this administration , like its predecessors , has an obligation to protect the confidentiality of some communications , executive privilege will be asserted only in the most compelling circumstances , and only after careful review demonstrates that assertion of the privilege is necessary .

historically , good faith negotiations between congress and the executive branch has minimized the need for invoking executive privilege , and this tradition of accommodation should continue as the primary means of resolving conflicts between the branches .

to ensure that every reasonable accommodation is made to the needs of congress , executive privilege shall not be invoked without specific presidential authorization .

the supreme court has held that the executive branch may occasionally find it necessary and proper to preserve the confidentiality of national security secrets , deliberative communications that form a part of the decision - making process , or other information important to the discharge of the executive branch's constitutional responsibilities .

legitimate and appropriate claims of privilege should not thoughtlessly be waived .

however , to ensure that this administration acts responsibly and consistently in the exercise of its duties , with due regard for the responsibilities and prerogatives of congress , the following procedures shall be followed whenever congressional requests for information raise concerns regarding the confidentiality of the information sought: 1 .

congressional requests for information shall be complied with as promptly and as fully as possible , unless it is determined that compliance raises a substantial question of executive privilege .

a "substantial question of executive privilege" exists if disclosure of the information requested might significantly impair the national security ( including the conduct of foreign relations ) , the deliberative processes of the executive branch or other aspects of the performance of the executive branch's constitutional duties .

2 .

if the head of an executive department or agency ( "department head" ) believes , after consultation with department counsel , that compliance with a congressional request for information raises a substantial question of executive privilege , he shall promptly notify and consult with the attorney general through the assistant attorney general for the office of legal counsel , and shall also promptly notify and consult with the counsel to the president .

if the information requested of a department or agency derives in whole or in part or from information received from another department or agency , the latter entity shall also be consulted as to whether disclosure of the information raises a substantial question of executive privilege .

3 .

every effort shall be made to comply with the congressional request in a manner consistent with the legitimate needs of the executive branch .

the department head , the attorney "general and the counsel to the president may , in the exercise of their discretion in the circumstances , determine that executive privilege shall not be invoked and release the requested information .

4 .

if the department head , the attorney general or the counsel to the president believes , after consultation , that the circumstances justify invocation of executive privilege , the issue shall be presented to the president by the counsel to the president , who will advise the department head and the attorney general of the president's decision .

5 .

pending a final presidential decision on the matter , the department head shall request the congressional body to hold its request for the information in abeyance .

the department head shall expressly indicate that the purpose of this request is to protect the privilege pending a presidential decision , claim of privilege .

6 .

if the president decides to invoke executive privilege , the department head shall advise the requesting congressional body that the claim of executive privilege is being made with the specific approval of the president .

any questions concerning these procedures or related matters should be addressed to the attorney general , through the assistant attorney general for the office of legal counsel , and to the counsel to the president .

ronald reagan the white house september 28 , 1994 memorandum for all executive department and agency general counsels from: lloyd n. cutler , special counsel to the president subject: congressional requests to departments and agencies for documents protected by executive privilege the policy of this administration is to comply with congressional requests for information to the fullest extent consistent with the constitutional and statutory obligations of the executive branch .

while this administration , like its predecessors , has an obligation to protect the confidentiality of core communications , executive privilege will be asserted only after careful review demonstrates that assertion of the privilege is necessary to protect executive branch prerogatives .

the doctrine of executive privilege protects the confidentiality of deliberations within the white house , including its policy councils , as well as communications between the white house and executive departments and agencies .

executive privilege applies to written and oral communications between and among the white house , its policy councils and executive branch agencies , as well as to documents that describe or prepares for such communications ( e.g .

"talking points" ) .

this has been the view expressed by all recent white house counsels .

in circumstances involving communications relating to investigations of personal wrongdoing by government officials , it is our practice not to assert executive privilege , either , in judicial proceedings or in congressional investigations and hearings .

executive privilege must always be weighed against other competing governmental interests , including the judicial need to obtain relevant evidence , especially in criminal proceedings , and the congressional need to make factual findings for legislative and oversight purposes .

in the last resort , this balancing is usually conducted by the courts .

however , when executive privilege is asserted against a congressional request for documents , the courts usually decline to intervene until after the other two branches have exhausted the possibility of working out a satisfactory accommodation .

it is our policy to work out such an accommodation whenever we can , without unduly interfering with the president's need to conduct frank exchange of views with his principal advisors .

historically , good faith negotiations between congress and the executive branch have minimized the need for invoking executive privilege .

executive privilege belongs to the president , not individual departments or agencies .

it is essential that all requests to departments and agencies for information of the type described above be referred to the white house counsel before any information is furnished .

departments and agencies receiving such request should therefore follow the procedures set forth below , designed to ensure that this administration acts responsibly and consistently with respect to executive privilege issues , with due regard for the responsibilities and prerogatives of congress: first , any document created in the white house , including a white house policy council , or in a department or agency , that contains the deliberations of , or advice to or from , the white house , should be presumptively treated as protected by executive privilege .

this is so regardless of the document's location at the time of the request or whether it originated in the white house or in a department or agency .

second , a department or agency receiving a request for any such document should promptly notify the white house counsel's office , and direct any inquiries regarding such a document to the white house counsel's office .

third , the white house counsel's office , working together with the department or agency ( and , where appropriate , the department of justice ) , will discuss the request with appropriate congressional representatives to determine whether a mutually satisfactory recommendation is available .

fourth , if efforts to reach a mutually satisfactory accommodation are unsuccessful , and if release of the document would pass a substantial question of executive privilege , the counsel to the president will consult with the department of justice and other affected agencies to determine whether to recommend that the president invoke the privilege .

we believe this policy will facilitate the resolution of issues relating to disclosures to congress and maximize the opportunity for reaching mutually satisfactory accommodations with congress .

we will of course try to cooperate with reasonable congressional requests for information in ways that preserve the president's ability to exchange frank advice with his immediate staff and the heads of the executive departments and agencies .

appendix c. selected readings aberbach , joel d. keeping a watchful eye: the politics of congressional oversight .

washington: brookings institution , 1990 .

jk585.a63 congressional oversight: methods and techniques .

committee print , prepared for the subcommittee on oversight procedures of the senate committee on government operations by the congressional research service and the general accounting office , 94 th congress , 2 nd session .

washington: gpo , 1976 .

fisher , louis .

constitutional conflicts between congress and the president .

lawrence , kansas: university press of kansas , 2007 , 5 th revised edition .

kf4565.f57 1997 .

foreman , christopher h. signals from the hill: congressional oversight and the challenge of social regulation .

new haven: yale university press , 1988 .

jk585.f68 hamilton , james .

the power to probe: a study of congressional investigations .

new york: vintage books , 1976 .

harris , joseph p. congressional control of administration .

washington: brookings institution , 1964 .

jk1061.h3 history of the united states house of representatives , 1789-1994 .

h.doc .

103-324 , 103 rd congress , 2 nd session .

washington: gpo , 1994 .

chapter xi , "oversight," pp .

233-266 .

crs report 97-936 , congressional oversight , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

congressional oversight of the presidency .

annals , vol .

499 , september 1988 , pp .

75-89 .

crs report rl32113 , congressional intervention in the administrative process: legal and ethical considerations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32617 , a perspective on congress ' s oversight function ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

mayhew , david r. divided we govern: party control , lawmaking , and investigations , 1946-1990 .

new haven: yale university press , 1991 .

jk2261.m36 mccubbins , mathew d. and thomas schwartz .

congressional oversight overlooked: police patrol versus fire alarms .

american journal of political science , vol .

2 , february 1984 , pp .

165-79 .

national academy of public administration .

panel on congress and the executive .

beyond distrust: building bridges between congress and the executive .

washington: napa , 1992 .

ogul , morris s. congress oversees the bureaucracy: studies in legislative supervision .

pittsburgh: university of pittsburgh press , 1976 .

jk585.048 oleszek , walter j .

congressional procedures and the policy process , 6 th ed .

washington: congressional quarterly press , 2004 .

chapter 10 , legislative oversight .

kf4937.o44 ornstein , norman f. and thomas e. mann .

when congress checks out .

foreign affairs , vol .

85 , 2006 , pp .

67-80 .

rosenberg , morton .

congress's prerogative over agencies and agency decisionmakers: the rise and demise of the reagan administration's theory of the unitary executive .

george washington law review , vol .

57 , january 1989 , pp .

627-703 .

rosenbloom , david h. building a legislative - centered public administration: congress and the administrative state , 1946-1999 .

tuscaloosa , ala.: the university of alabama press , 2000 .

kf1601.r58 schlesinger , arthur m. and roger bruns , eds .

congress investigates: a documented history , 1792-1974 ( 5 vols. ) .

new york: chelsea house publishers , 1975 .

jk1123.a2s34 study on federal regulation: congressional oversight of regulatory agencies .

senate doc .

95-26 , 95 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 1977 .

u.s. general accounting office .

investigators' guide to sources of information .

gao report osi - 97-2 .

washington: gao , 1997 .

west , william f. controlling the bureaucracy: institutional constraints in theory and practice .

armonk , new york and london , england: m.e .

sharpe: 1995 .

jk421.w44 the budget process fisher , louis .

presidential spending power .

princeton , n.j.: princeton university press , 1975 .

345 p. hj257.2.f57 crs report 98-720 , manual on the federal budget process ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] and allen schick .

schick , allen .

congress and money .

washington: urban institute , 1980 .

604 p. hj2051.s34 wilmerding , lucius , jr .

the spending power: a history of the efforts of congress to control expenditures .

new haven , conn.: yale university press , 1943 .

317 p. hj2013.u5w5 authorization and appropriation processes devins , neal e. regulation of government agencies through limitation riders , duke law journal , v. 1987 , 1987:456 .

fisher , louis .

annual authorizations: durable roadblocks to biennial budgeting , public budgeting & finance , v. 3 , spring 1983: 24 .

_____ .

the authorization - appropriation process in congress: formal rules and informal practices , catholic university law review , v. 29 , 1979: 51 .

fenno , richard f. , jr .

the power of the purse .

boston , mass .

: little , brown , 1966 .

704 p. jk1074.f4 leboeuf , jacques b .

limitations on the use of appropriations riders by congress to effectuate substantive policy changes , hastings constitutional law quarterly , v. 19 , winter 1992: 457 .

leloup , lance t. appropriations politics in congress: the house appropriations committee and the executive agencies , public budgeting & finance , v. 4 , winter 1984: 78 .

u.s. general accounting office , office of the general counsel .

principles of federal appropriations law .

vols .

i , ii , and iii .

2004 .

the confirmation process carter , stephen l. the confirmation mess: cleaning up the federal appointments process .

new york: basic books , 1994 .

252 p. jk736.c37 gerhardt , michael j .

the federal appointments process .

durham and london: duke university press , 2000 .

400 p. jk731.g47 _____ .

toward a comprehensive understanding of the federal appointments process , harvard journal of law and public policy , v. 21 , no .

4 , 1998: 468 .

harris , joseph p. the advice and consent of the senate: a study of the confirmation of appointments by the united states senate .

berkeley , cal .

: university of california press , 1953 .

457 p. jk1274.h3 hogue , henry .

the law: recess appointments to article iii courts , presidential studies quarterly , v. 34 , 2004: 656 .

haynes , george h. the senate of the united states: its history and practice .

boston , mass .

: houghton mifflin co. , 1938 .

2 vols .

1118 p. jk1161.h28 kim , haeryon .

congressional influence on the fcc: an analysis of confirmation hearings for commission chairmen , 1969-1989 , communications and the law , v. 15 , 1993: 37 .

mackenzie , g. calvin .

the politics of presidential appointments .

new york: the free press , 1981 .

298 p. jk736.m33 crs report rl32551 , 9 / 11 commission recommendations: the senate confirmation process for presidential nominees , by [author name scrubbed] .

ross , william g. the senate's constitutional role in confirming cabinet nominees and other executive officials , syracuse law review , vol .

48 , 1998: 1123 .

the impeachment process bazan , elizabeth b. impeachment: an overview of constitutional provisions , procedure , and practice .

crs report 99-186 ( out of print ; available from the authors ) .

black , charles l. , jr. impeachment: a handbook .

new haven , conn.: yale university press , 1974 .

80 p. lc 73-92315 bushnell , eleanor .

crimes , follies , and misfortunes: the federal impeachment trials .

urbana , ill.: university of chicago press , 1992 .

380 p. kf8781.b87 gerhardt , michael j .

the federal impeachment process: a constitutional and historical analysis .

princeton , n.j.: princeton university press , 1996 .

233 p. kf4958.g47 labowitz , john r. presidential impeachment .

new haven: yale university press , 1978 .

257 p. kf5075.l33 maskell , jack .

censure of the president by the congress .

crs report 98-343 ( out of print ; available from the authors ) .

posner , richard a .

an affair of state: the investigation , impeachment , and trial of president clinton .

cambridge , mass .

: harvard university press , 1999 .

276 p. kf5076.c57p67 rae , nicol c. and [author name scrubbed] .

impeaching clinton: partisan strife on capitol hill .

lawrence: university press of kansas , 2004 .

234 p. e886.2.r435 rehnquist , william h. grand inquests: the historic impeachments of justice samuel chase and president andrew johnson .

new york: william morrow and co. , 1992 .

303 p. e302.6c4r44 u.s. congress .

impeachment: selected materials , committee on the judiciary , house of representatives , 93 rd congress , 1 st session , october 1973 .

718 p. _____ .

impeachment: selected materials on procedure , committee on the judiciary , house of representatives , 93 rd congress , 2 nd session , january 1974 .

900 p. _____ .

constitutional grounds for impeachment: modern precedents , committee on the judiciary , house of representatives , 105 th congress , 2 nd session , ser .

no .

9 , november 1998 .

94 p. _____ .

impeachment: selected materials , committee on the judiciary , house of representatives , 105 th congress , 2 nd session , ser .

no .

10 , november 1998 .

1854 p. the investigative process beard , glenn a .

congress v. the attorney - client privilege: a "full and frank" discussion , american criminal law review , v. 35 , 1997: 119 .

berger , raoul .

congressional subpoenas to executive officials .

columbia law review , v. 75 , 1975: 865 .

berger , raoul .

executive privilege: a constitutional myth .

cambridge , mass .

: harvard university press , 1974 .

brand , stanley m. battle among the branches: the two hundred year war .

north carolina law review , v. 65 , 1987: 901 .

brand , stanley m. and connelly , sean .

constitutional confrontations: preserving a prompt and orderly means by which congress may enforce investigative demands against executive branch officials .

catholic university law review , v. 36 , 1986: 71 .

bush , joel d. congressional executive access disputes: legal standards and political settlements .

journal of law and politics , v. 9 , summer 1993: 719 .

clavelaux , ronald l. the conflict between executive privilege and congressional oversight: the gorsuch controversy .

duke law journal , v. 1983 , no .

6: 1333 .

cole , lance .

the fifth amendment and compelled production of personal documents after united states v. hubbell — new protection for private papers ? .

american journal of criminal law , v. 29 , spring 2002: 123 .

devins , neal .

congressional - executive information disputes: a modest proposal — do nothing .

administrative law review , vol .

48 , winter 1996: 109 .

dimock , marshall e. congressional investigating committees .

baltimore: johns hopkins university press , 1929 .

jk1123.a2e2 crs report r42811 , congressional investigations of the department of justice , 1920-2012: history , law , and practice , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

fisher , louis .

the politics of executive privilege .

durham , n.c.: carolina academic press , 2004 .

272 p. jk468.s4f57 crs report rl34097 , congress's contempt power and the enforcement of congressional subpoenas: law , history , practice , and procedure , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34114 , congress's contempt power and the enforcement of congressional subpoenas: a sketch , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42670 , presidential claims of executive privilege: history , law , practice , and recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31351 , presidential advisers' testimony before congressional committees: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

ghio , r.s .

the iran - contra prosecutions and the failure of use immunity .

stanford law review , v. 45 , 1992: 229 .

grabow , john c. congressional investigations: law and practice .

new jersey: prentice hall law and business , 1988 .

kf4942.g73 hamilton , james .

the power to probe: a study in congressional investigations .

new york: vintage books , 1976 .

kf4942.h34 hamilton , james and grabow , john c. a legislative proposal for resolving executive privilege disputes precipitated by congressional subpoenas .

harvard journal legislation , v. 21 , winter 1984: 145 .

iraola , roberts .

congressional oversight , executive privilege , and requests for information relating to federal criminal investigations and prosecutions .

iowa law review , v. 87 , 2002: 1559 .

moreland , allen b .

congressional investigations and private persons .

southern california law review , v. 40 , winter 1967: 189 .

peterson , todd d. prosecuting executive branch officials for contempt of congress .

new york university law review , v. 66 , 1991: 563 .

_____.congressional oversight of open criminal investigations .

notre dame law review , v. 75 , 2002: 1373 .

roberts , john c. are congressional committees constitutional ? .

radical textualism , separation of powers , and the enactment process , and the enactment process .

case western rescue law review , v. 52 , 2001: 489 .

rosenthal , paul c. and grossman , robert s. congressional access to confidential information collected by federal agencies .

harvard journal of legislation , v. 15 , 1977: 74 .

rozell , mark j .

executive privilege: presidential power , secrecy , and accountability .

lawrence: university press of kansas , 2002 ( 2d edition , revised ) .

jk468.s4 r67 schlesinger , arthur m. , jr. , and bruns , rogers ( eds. ) .

congress investigates: 1792-1974 .

new york: chelsea house publishers .

1975 ( 5 vols .

 ) .

jk 1123.a2 s34 shane , peter m. legal disagreement and negotiation in a government of laws: the case of executive privilege claims against congress .

minnesota law review , v. 71 , february 1987: 461 .

shane , peter m. negotiation for knowledge: administrative responses to congressional demands for information .

administrative law review , v. 44 , spring 1992: 197 .

sklamberg , harold .

investigation versus protection: the constitutional limits on congress' power to immunize witnesses .

north carolina law review , v. 78: november 1999: 153 .

stathis , stephen w. executive cooperation: presidential recognition of the investigative authority of congress and the courts .

journal of law and politics , v. 3 , fall 1986: 187 .

taylor , telford .

grand inquest: the story of congressional investigations .

new york: simon and schuster , 1995 .

kf4942.t38 tiefer , charles .

congressional oversight of the clinton administration and congressional procedure .

administrative law review , v. 50 , 1998: 199 .

_____.the law: president bush's first executive privilege claim: the fbi / boston investigation .

presidential studies quarterly , v. 33 , march 2003: 201 .

vermeule , adrian .

the constitutional law of congressional procedure .

university of chicago law review , v. 71 , spring 2004: 361 .

walsh , lawrence e. the independent counsel and the separation of powers .

houston law review , v. 25 , january 1988: 1 .

wald , patricia and siegel , jay .

the d.c .

circuit and the struggle for control of presidential information .

georgetown law journal , v. 90 , march 2002: 737 .

wright , ronald f. congressional use of immunity grants after iran - contra .

minnesota law review , v. 80 , december 1995: 407 .

statutory offices of inspector general crs report r40675 , statutory offices of inspectors general ( igs ) : methods of appointment and legislative proposals , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40099 , the special inspector general for the troubled asset relief program ( sigtarp ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

duffy , diane t. and [author name scrubbed] .

into the woods: mapping new directions for oigs .

journal of public inquiry , fall - winter 1999 .

fong , phyllis k. , the ig reform act and the new ig council: dawn of a new era , journal of public inquiry , fall - winter 2008-2009 , pp .

1-6 .

hendricks , michael et al .

inspectors general: a new force in evaluation .

san francisco: jossey - bass , inc. , 1990 .

kaiser , frederick m. the watchers' watchdog: the cia inspector general .

international journal of intelligence and counterintelligence , vol .

3 , 1989. pp .

55-75 .

light , paul c. monitoring government: inspectors general and the search for accountability .

washington: brookings , 1993 .

hj9801.l54 newcomer , kathryn e. the changing nature of accountability: the role of the inspectors general in federal agencies .

public administration review , vol .

58 , march / april , 1998 .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on government operations .

establishment of offices of inspector general in certain executive departments and agencies .

h.rept .

95-584 , 95 th congress , 1 st session washington: gpo , 1977 .

_____ .

the inspector general act of 1978: a 10-year review .

h.rept .

100-1027 , 100 th congress , 2 nd session washington: gpo , 1988 .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on oversight and government reform .

improving government accountability .

h.rept .

110-354 , 110 th congress , 1 st session washington: gpo , 2007 .

u.s. congress .

house .

subcommittee on government efficiency .

25 th anniversary of the inspector general act .

hearings , 108 th congress , 1 st session washington: gpo , 2003 .

u.s. congress .

house .

subcommittee on government management and organization .

inspectors general: independence and accountability .

hearing , 110 th congress , 1 st session washington: gpo , 2007 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on governmental affairs .

establishment of inspector and auditor general in certain executive departments and agencies .

s. rept .

95-1071 , 95 th congress , 2 nd session washington: gpo , 1978 .

_____ .

the inspector general act: 20 years later .

hearings , 105 th congress , 2 nd session .

washington: gpo , 1998 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the inspector general reform act of 2007 .

s.rept .

110-262 , 110 th congress , 1 st session washington: gpo , 2007 .

u.s. government accountability office ( formerly , general accounting office ) .

designated federal entities: survey of governance practices and the inspector general role .

gao report gao - 09-270 .

washington: gao , 2009 .

_____ .

federal inspectors general: an historical perspective .

gao report t - aimd - 98-146 .

washington: gao , 1998 .

_____.highlights of the comptroller general's panel on federal oversight and the inspectors general .

gao report gao - 06-931sp .

washington: gao , 2006 .

_____ .

inspectors general: enhancing federal accountability .

gao report gao - 04-117t .

washington: gao , 2003 .

_____ .

inspectors general: office consolidation and related issues .

gao report gao - 02-575 .

washington: gao , 2002 .

_____ .

inspectors general: opportunities to enhance independence and accountability .

gao report gao - 07-1089t .

washington: gao , 2007 .

reporting , consultation , and other sources of information crs report rl31160 , disapproval of regulations by congress: procedure under the congressional review act , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30795 , general management laws: a compendium ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl32339 , federal regulations: efforts to estimate total costs and benefits of rules , by [author name scrubbed] .

collier , ellen c. reporting requirements .

in joint committee on the organization of congress .

congressional reorganization: proposals for change .

senate print 103-19 , 103 rd congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 1993. p. 135 .

_____ .

foreign policy by reporting requirement .

the washington quarterly , vol .

11 , winter 1988 .

johannes , john .

statutory reporting requirements: information and influence for congress .

in abdo baaklini , ed. , comparative legislative reforms and innovations .

new york: suny press , 1977. pp .

33-60 .

kerwin , cornelius .

rulemaking: how government agencies write laws and make policy , 2 nd ed .

washington: cq press , 1999 .

u.s. general accounting office .

investigators' guide to sources of information .

gao report osi - 97-2 .

washington: gao , 1997 .

u.s. general accounting office .

a systematic management approach is needed for congressional reporting requirements .

gao report pad - 82-12 .

washington: gao , 1981 .

u.s. house of representatives .

clerk .

reports to be made to congress .

house document 108-14 , 108 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 2003 .

u.s. vice president al gore .

national performance review .

creating a government that works better & costs less: streamlining management control .

washington: office of the vice president , 1993 ( reduce the burden of congressionally mandated reports , pp .

33-36 ) .

resolutions of inquiry crs report rl31909 , house resolutions of inquiry , by [author name scrubbed] .

history of the united states house of representatives , 1789-1994 , h. doc .

103-324 , 103 rd congress , 2 nd session .

washington: gpo , 1994 ( resolutions of inquiry , pp .

260-262 ) .

methods and techniques art , robert j .

congress and the defense budget: enhancing policy oversight , political science quarterly , v. 100 , summer 1985: 227-248 .

bowers , james r. regulating the regulators: an introduction to the legislative oversight of administrative rulemaking .

new york: praeger , 1990 .

140p .

kf5411.b69 hill , james p. the third house of congress versus the fourth branch of government: the impact of congressional committee staff on agency regulatory decision - making , john marshall law review , v. 19 , winter 1986: 247-273 .

kaiser , frederick m. congressional oversight of the presidency , annals of the american academy of political and social science , v. 499 , september 1988: 75-89 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on government operations ( now titled homeland security and governmental affairs ) .

subcommittee on oversight procedures .

committee print .

congressional oversight: methods and techniques .

94 th congress , 2 nd session , july 1976 .

washington: gpo , 1976 .

254p .

special studies and investigations by staff and others johannes , john r. to serve the people: congress and constituency service .

lincoln , university of nebraska press , 1984 .

jk1071.j63 kaiser , frederick m. a congressional office of constituent assistance: proposals , rationales , and possible objections .

crs report 91-893 ( out of print ; available from the authors ) .

pontius , john s. casework in a congressional office .

crs report 98-878 ( out of print ; available from the authors ) .

the press and media cook , timothy e. making laws and making news .

washington: the brookings institution , 1989 .

210 p. jk1447.c66 hess , stephen .

live from capitol hill .

washington: the brookings institution , 1991 .

178 p. pn4888.p6h48 mann , thomas and norman ornstein , eds .

congress , the press , and the public .

washington: the american enterprise institute and the brookings institution , 1994 .

212 p. jk1140.c62 ritchie , donald a .

press gallery: congress and the washington correspondents .

cambridge , mass .

: harvard university press , 1991 .

pn4899.w3r58 specialized investigations congressional quarterly .

guide to congress .

washington: congressional quarterly , inc. , 2000 , 5 th ed .

vol .

i , pp .

249-280 .

dimock , marshall e. congressional investigating committees .

baltimore: johns hopkins press , 1929 .

kf4942.d5 eberling , ernest j .

congressional investigations .

new york: columbia university press , 1929 .

jk1123.a2e2 fisher , louis .

constitutional conflicts between congress and the president .

lawrence , kansas: university press of kansas , 1997 , 4 th revised ed .

pp .

160-195 .

kf4565.f57 hamilton , james .

the power to probe: a study of congressional investigations .

new york: vintage books , 1976 .

kf4942.h34 kaiser , frederick m. impact and implications of the iran - contra affair on congressional oversight of the executive .

international journal of intelligence and counterintelligence , vol .

7 , summer 1994 , pp .

205-234 .

mayhew , david r. divided we govern: party control , lawmaking , and investigations , 1946-1990 .

new haven: yale university press , 1991 .

jk2261.m36 schlesinger , arthur m. jr. and roger bruns .

congress investigates: a documented history .

new york: chelsea house , 1975 ( 5 vols. ) .

jk1123.a2s34 taylor , telford .

the grand inquest: the story of congressional investigations new york: simon and schuster , 1955 .

kf4942.t38 appropriations limitations and riders banks , william c. and peter raven - hansen .

national security law and the power of the purse .

new york , oxford university press , 1994 .

260 p. kf4651.b36 devins , neal .

regulation of government agencies through limitation riders , duke law journal , v. 1987: 456 .

fisher , louis .

the authorization - appropriation process in congress: formal rules and informal practices , catholic university law review , v. 29 , 1979:5 .

leboeuf , jacques b .

limitations on the use of appropriations riders by congress to effectuate substantive policy changes , hastings constitutional law quarterly , v. 19 , 1992: 457 .

the legislative veto biden , joseph r. , jr. who needs the legislative veto ? .

syracuse law review , v. 35 , 1984: 685 .

breyer , stephen .

the legislative veto after chadha .

georgetown law journal , v. 72 , 1984: 785 .

craig , barbara hinson .

chadha: the story of an epic constitutional struggle .

new york: oxford university press , 1988 .

kf228.c43c73 fisher , louis .

the legislative veto: invalidated , it survives , law & contemporary problems , v. 56 , 1993: 273 .

gibson , martha liebler .

weapons of influence: the legislative veto , american foreign policy , and the irony of reform .

boulder , colo. , westview press , 1992 .

188p .

jx1706.g53 kaiser , frederick m. congressional action to overturn agency rules: alternatives to the 'legislative veto. .

administrative law review , v. 32 , 1980: 667 .

korn , jessica .

the power of separation: american constitutionalism and the myth of the legislative veto .

princeton , n.j.: princeton university press , 1996 .

178p .

jk305.k67 independent counsel eastland , terry .

ethics , politics and the independent counsel .

washington , national legal center for the public interest , 1989 .

180 p. kf4568.e17 1989 .

harriger , katy j .

the special prosecutor in american politics , 2d ed .

revised .

lawrence: university press of kansas , 2000 .

325 p. kf4568.h37 jost , kenneth .

independent counsels: should congress make major changes in the law ? .

cq researcher , v. 7 , no .

7 , february 21 , 1997: 145-167 .

koukoutchos , brian stuart .

constitutional kinetics: the independent counsel case and the separation of powers .

wake forest law review , v. 23 , 1988: 635 .

maskell , jack .

the independent counsel law .

the federal lawyer , july 1998: 28-39 .

nolan , beth .

removing conflicts from the administration of justice: conflicts of interest and independent counsels under the ethics in government act .

georgetown law journal , v. 79 , 1990: 1-80 .

walsh , lawrence e. the independent counsel and the separation of powers .

houston law review , v. 25 , 1988: 1 .

general bimber , bruce .

information as a factor in congressional politics , legislative studies quarterly , v. xvi , november 1991: 585-605 .

carnegie commission on science , technology , and government .

science , technology , and congress: analysis and advice from the congressional support agencies .

washington: the carnegie commission , 1991 .

70p .

chubb , john e. interest groups and the bureaucracy .

stanford , calif.: stanford university press , 1983 .

319 p. gilmour , robert s. and alexis a. halley , eds .

who makes public policy ? .

chatham , n.j.: chatham house publishers , inc. , 1994 .

390 p. jk585.w48 heinz , john p. , et al .

the hollow core: private interests in national policy making .

cambridge , mass .

: harvard university press , 1993 .

450 p. jk1118.h55 u.s. congress .

joint committee on the organization of congress .

support agencies .

hearing before the joint committee on the organization of congress .

103 rd congress , 1 st session , june 10 , 1993 , washington: gpo , 1993 .

1577p .

kf25.o7 congressional research service http: / / www.crs.gov carney , eliza newlin .

billington's book wars , national journal , v. 24 , march 21 , 1992: 695-698 .

cole , john y. jefferson's legacy: a brief history of the library , library of congress bulletin , v. 50 , april 8 , 1991: 124-130 .

dalrymple , helen .

congressional research service: think tank , policy consultant and information factory , library of congress information bulletin , v. 49 , september 24 , 1990: 319-326 .

gude , gilbert .

congressional research service: the research and information arm of congress , government information quarterly , v. 2 , january 1985: 5-11 .

robinson , william h. the congressional research service: policy consultant , think tank , and information factory , in organizations for policy analysis: helping government think .

edited by carol h. weiss .

newbury park , calif.: sage publications , 1992 , pp .

181-200 .

government accountability office ( formerly the general accounting office ) http: / / www.gao.gov abikoff , kevin t. the role of the comptroller general in light of bowsher v. synar , columbia law review , v. 87 , november 1987: 1539-1563 .

_____.gao versus the cia: uphill battles against an overpowering force .

international journal of intelligence and counterintelligence , v. 15 , 2002: 330-389 .

mosher , frederick c. a tale of two agencies: a comparative analysis of the general accounting office and the office of management and budget .

baton rouge , la .

: louisiana state university press , 1984 .

219 p. hjg802.m682 rozell , mark j .

the role of general accounting office evaluation in the post reform congress: the case of general revenue sharing , international journal of public administration , v. 7 , september 1985: 267-290 .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on the budget .

addressing government waste , fraud , and abuse .

108 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 2003 .

421 p. u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on governmental affairs .

the roles , mission and operation of the u.s. general accounting office .

report prepared by the national academy of public administration .

senate print 103-87 , 103 rd congress , 2 nd session .

washington: gpo , 1994 .

106 p. u.s. congress .

house .

committee on rules .

congressional oversight: a "how - to" series of workshops .

committee print .

106 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 2000 .

see pp .

90-143 .

u.s. general accounting office .

gao history , 1921-1991 , by roger r. trask .

gao report op - 3-mp .

washington: gao , 1991 .

u.s. government accountability office .

strategic plan http: / / www.gao.gov .

congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov howard , james a .

government economic projections: a comparison between cbo and omb , public budgeting & finance , v. 7 , autumn 1987: 14-25 .

crs report 98-720 , manual on the federal budget process ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] and allen schick , august 28 , 1998 .

crs report rl31880 , congressional budget office: appointment and tenure of the director and deputy director , by [author name scrubbed] .

schick , allen .

congress and money .

washington , d.c.: the urban institute , 1980 .

604 p. hj2051.s34 .

twogood , r. philip .

reconciling politics and budget analysis: the case of the congressional budget office , public budgeting and financial management , v. 3 , no .

1 , 1991: 65-87 .

offices of senate legal counsel and house general counsel salokar , rebecca mae .

legal counsel for congress: protecting institutional interests , congress and the presidency .

vol .

20 , no .

2 , autumn 1993: 131-155 .

tiefer , charles .

the senate and house counsel offices: dilemmas of representing in court the institutional congressional client , law and contemporary problems , v. 61 , spring 1998: 48-63 .

appendix d. other resources congressional oversight video series oversight: a key congressional function .

former representative lee hamilton delivered the keynote address to a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

in this program , mr. hamilton emphasizes the importance of traditional oversight and reviews factors that contribute to successful oversight .

program length: 60 minutes .

product no .

: mm70003 .

the constitutional context of oversight .

michael stern , senior counsel with the house general counsel's office , and michael davidson , former senate legal counsel , discuss the constitutional context of oversight .

in addition , the two attorneys address a variety of oversight topics , including congressional investigations .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

program length: 60 minutes .

product no .

: mm70003 , 1999 congressional oversight seminars .

video tape. , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the "rules & tools" of oversight .

this program focuses on the formal institutional rules that committees must follow to insure the legitimacy and fairness of oversight proceedings .

the nature of the formidable powers of inquiry available to congressional committees and the practicalities of their effective utilization are also explored .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

program length: 60 minutes .

product no .

: mm70003 , 1999 congressional oversight seminars .

video tape. , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

sources of oversight assistance .

this session focuses on where congressional committees can obtain assistance in conducting oversight .

especially relevant are inspectors general , chief financial officers , and congress's own support agencies , the congressional budget office , congressional research service , and government accountability office .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspect of congressional oversight .

program length: 46 minutes .

product no .

: mm70003 , 1999 congressional oversight seminars .

video tape. , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

fiscal oversight: "follow the money. .

this seminar examines congressional oversight of fiscal and budgetary activities , focusing on the role of the house and senate appropriations committees in the annual budget cycle and key support activities of the congressional budget office to congress on budgetary matters generally .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

program length: 45 minutes .

product no .

: mm70007 .

outside actors in the oversight process .

this program addresses how non - congressional individuals can assist in the investigative process and in monitoring executive branch performance .

the panel includes a journalist , members of public and private interest groups , and a former counsel with the house commerce committee , subcommittee on oversight and investigations .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

program length: 50 minutes .

product no .

: mm70003 , 1999 congressional oversight seminars .

video tape. , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

preparing for an oversight investigation .

this program probes the "ins and outs" of how to prepare for congressional investigations from the perspective of both the investigator and those being investigated .

taped as part of a 1999 series of crs programs examining various aspects of congressional oversight .

program length: 59:50 .

product no .

: mm70003 , 1999 congressional oversight seminars .

video tape. , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

congress , the president , the courts , and the separation of powers .

product no .

: mm70097 .

copies of crs video programs are available on loan to congressional offices .

for the schedule of crs programs on channel 6 of the house and channel 5 of the senate , call [phone number scrubbed] .

for further information about any of these programs , please call [phone number scrubbed] .

