on october 22 , 1999 , the president signed into law the fy2000 appropriationsact for the u.s. department of agriculture and related agencies ( p.l .

106-78 , h.r .

1906 ) .

p.l .

106-78 contains $60.56 billion in regular ( non - emergency ) appropriations and $8.7 billion in emergency spending for farmincome and disaster assistance .

on november 29 , 1999 , the president signed into law a consolidated appropriations act for fy2000 ( p.l .

106-113 ) which contains several provisionsaffecting agricultural programs , including: 1 ) an additional $576 million inemergency farm assistance ; 2 ) a two - year extension of the northeast dairy compactuntil september 30 , 2001 and 3 ) a requirement that usda adopt a fluid farm milkpricing option ( 1a ) supported by eastern and southern milk producers that is closeto current pricing policy .

the measure also includes a 0.38% across - the - board cutin total discretionary budget authority for fy2000 .

this will require a $49 millioncut within usda and a $4 million cut in fda programs funded by p.l .

106-78 , withspecific cuts to be determined by the administration .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out its widely variedresponsibilities through approximately 30 separate internal agencies staffed by some100,000 employees .

usda is responsible for many activities outside of theagriculture budget function .

hence , spending for usda is not synonymous withspending for farmers , nor with the agriculture appropriations bill , which includesfunds for non - usda programs , notably the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

usda outlays for the most recently completed fiscal year ( fy1999 ) were $63.9 billion .

by far the largest outlay within the department , $32.3 billion , or one - half of total outlays in fy1999 , was for its food and nutrition programs , primarily thefood stamp program ( the costliest of all usda programs ) , various child nutritionprograms , and the women , infants and children ( wic ) program .

total fy1999outlays also include $22.2 billion , or just over one - third of total outlays , for farm andforeign agricultural services .

within this mission area of usda are the programsfunded through the commodity credit corporation ( eg , commodity supportpayments , the conservation reserve program , and certain trade programs ) , cropinsurance , farm loans , and foreign food aid programs .

another $4.4 billion ( 7% ) wasspent in fy1999 on an array of natural resource and environment programs , nearlythree - fourths of which funded the forest service ( which is funded through theinterior appropriations bill , not the agriculture appropriations bill ) , and the balancefor a number of conservation programs for farm producers .

usda programs forresearch and education ( $1.89 billion in outlays for fy1999 ) , rural development ( $527 million ) , marketing and regulatory activities ( $1.645 billion ) , and meat andpoultry inspection ( $604 million ) account for most of the balance of usda spending .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) is funded through both congressionalappropriations and user fees whose total level of collections is set each year by theusda and related agencies appropriations act .

for fy2000 , the fy2000 agricultureappropriations act ( p.l .

106-78 ) provides an appropriation of $1.052 billion for fda,which is $90 million below the administration request , $33 million below thehouse - passed level , $8 million above the senate - passed level , and nearly $70 millionabove the fy1999 appropriated level .

included in p.l .

106-78 is $1.04 billion forfda salaries and expenses for activities such as pre - market approval of drugs anddevices , collecting reports of injury from products under fda regulatory jurisdiction,and carrying out food safety efforts .

the balance of the fda appropriation is $11.35million for fda's buildings and facilities .

the buildings and facilities funding is $20million below the administration request and the house - passed level , and $3 millionabove the senate level .

conferees deleted a provision in the house - passed bill that would have prohibited fda from using any of its fy2000 funds for "testing , development , orapproval of any drug for the chemical inducement of abortion. .

in september 1996,fda had issued a "conditional approval" to the population council for the drugmifepristone , or ru - 486 , to be used for the termination of early pregnancy .

in doingthis , fda concluded that mifepristone is safe and effective , but additionalinformation on issues such as manufacturing and labeling must be submitted andevaluated before the agency determines whether or not the drug can be marketed inthe united states .

fda has yet to make its determination .

p.l .

106-78 approved the requested $3 million to be used towards completion of the final phase of the renovations at the national center for toxicologicalresearch in jefferson , arkansas .

the conferees prohibited any closing , relocations,or changes to occur in the st. louis , missouri fda division of drug analysis , themichigan district office laboratory , or in the fda detroit , michigan district office.the conferees specified that for fy2000 , fda may not reduce funding and staffingfor the detroit office below the level found in the office as of july 31 , 1999 .

p.l .

106-78 provides fda with $188 million or $30 million in additional funds over fy1999 levels for the president's food safety initiative .

with this additionalfunding , the act requires that $3 million go to the national center for food safetyand technology , and the accompanying committee report directs fda to report , bymarch 1 , 2000 , on the activities the agency has taken to improve the coordination andcooperation with the u.s. customs service over imported foods .

with this increase,the conferees want fda to use $250,000 to continue support for cooperative researchon molluscan shellfish safety , and for fda's education program to decreaseconsumption of raw shellfish .

the conferees also directed usda and fda todevelop by december 1 , 1999 , a plan of action to achieve the goal of reassuring thepublic on the safety of the u.s. food supply , to educate americans on foodproduction , and to identify ongoing or proposed activities to achieve this goal .

p.l .

106-78 also gives fda $100,000 to fund a design contest to find solutions to microbial contamination of ground water use and treatment by thewaste - management education and research consortium ( werc ) .

also , theconference report requires fda to publish , by march 2000 , a feasibility study onappropriate methods of informing consumers of bottled water contents .

the conference agreement also mentions the development of resistance in food borne and other bacteria to antibiotics used to treat humans and used for livestockproduction .

the agreement requires fda to report , by january 2000 , on the status offda's development of regulations on electronic data submission requirements on theuse of growth promoting antibiotics in animals that may compromise humantherapies and on alternatives to this practice .

the agreement report directs fda andusda to develop a joint strategy for addressing resistance and to report to thecommittee by january 2000 on that strategy .

the strategy is to include a time frameand cost of a risk assessment that would compare the level of risk posed by other usesto the level of risk posed by using antibiotics on the farm .

the conferees increased funding by $11.4 million for the food additive petition review program of which $5.4 million is for food additive petition review , and $6million to implement the food contact substances program as authorized in currentlaw .

report language requests fda to negotiate with the industry to proposelegislation to authorize user fees to fund this food contact substance notificationprogram and to submit a proposal to the house commerce committee , so that theprogram can be implemented in fy2000 .

after fda receives a food additive petition requesting the use of irradiation on ready - to - eat meats and poultry , and fruits and vegetables , p.l .

106-78 requires fdato propose a rule within six months and to issue a final rule within twelve months ofreceipt of the petition .

the conferees believed that agencies with jurisdiction over meat , poultry and food products should have consistent recall protocols .

by january 30 , 2000 , the conferees expect fda's recall coordinator to report to congress on its authorities,operating procedures , budget , and a description of actions taken during recent recalls .

the conference report questioned whether the agency had used "sound science" in a proposed 1997 rule on the use of ephedrine alkaloids ( naturally occurringchemical stimulants ) in dietary supplements .

report language asks fda to postponefinalizing the proposed rule until the agency provides more scientific evidence toensure strict compliance with the dietary supplement health and education act .

italso directed the agency to report back within six months on the methodology theagency would use to enforce this proposed rule .

within the next 5 years , the office of generic drugs expects a heavier work load when about $22 billion of brand name drugs come off patent and are likely tobecome generic drugs .

p.l .

106-78 provides $1.9 million so the office can hire atleast 11 more reviewers to process these applications .

the conferees also agreed thatfda use $200,000 of the $1.6 million appropriations increase to hire two newfull - time employees in the center of veterinary medicine to review aquaculture drugapplications .

in august 1992 , congress authorized an fda - administered program for training in clinical pharmacology at medical schools without such a program .

the conferenceagreement provides fda with $500,000 , about $200,000 below the fy1999 level offunding , for clinical pharmacology grants awarded on a competitive basis .

p.l .

106-78 prohibits fda from developing , establishing , or operating any "general user fee" program .

the report language explains that the administrationshould submit legislative proposals to the appropriate authorizing committees .

the conferees agreed that of the $154 million fy2000 appropriation for the center for devices and radiological health , $1 million is to be used in oversightactivities regarding reprocessed medical devices , and $55.5 million and 522 full - timeemployees are to be used for pre - market application review activities to meetstatutorily - set review deadlines .

report language notes that fda failed to meet the june 1 , 1999 , deadline for publication of a rule concerning the use of foreign marketing data in review of newsunscreen active ingredients in the sunscreen over - the - counter drug monograph .

theconferees direct the fda to propose a rule , not later than sixty days after enactmentof this act , and finalize such a rule twelve months after enactment .

p.l .

106-78 maintains for fy2000 a funding level of $34 million for the president's youth tobacco prevention activities .

in addition , the conferees directedfda to submit a report , within 180 days of the date of enactment of the act , on theeffects of reducing illegal tobacco sales to minors and the effect on compliance of theuse of automated identification systems .

the conference report also encourages fda to enforce good manufacturing practices and work with interested people , including the centers for disease controland prevention ( cdc ) and the national hemophilia foundation , to investigatepossible contamination of blood and blood products .

fda is expected to report tocongress , by march 1 , 2000 , on actions it has taken to respond to this public healthconcern .

table 3 .

u.s. department of agriculture and related agencies appropriations , fy1999 vs. fy2000 ( $ inmillions ) note: an item with an asterisk ( * ) represents the total amount of direct and guaranteed loans that can be made given the requested or appropriated loan subsidylevel .

only the subsidy level is included in the totals .

na = not yet available .

 ( 1 ) the administration total does not include an advance appropriation request of $4.8 billion for the food stamp program for fy2001 , or a $200 million request forrural housing programs .

 ( 2 ) scorekeeping adjustments reflect the savings or costs of provisions that affectmandatory programs , plus the permanent annual appropriation made to usda'ssection 32 program .

 ( 3 ) fy2000 enacted levels do not reflect a 0.38% rescission required by p.l .

106-113 on total discretionary spending for fy2000 .

this will require total spending cuts ofapproximately $49 million from usda , $4 million from fda , and $240,000 fromcftc , for programs funded by p.l .

106-78 , with specific cuts to be determined bythe administration .

source: house appropriations committe .

