the minority leader of the modern house is the head of the "loyal opposition. .

as the minority party's nominee for speaker at the start of a new congress , the minority leader traditionally hands the gavel to the speaker - elect , who is usually elected on a straight party - line vote .

the speakership election illustrates the main problem that confronts the minority leader: the subordinate status of the minority party in an institution noted for majority rule .

as david bonior , d - mi , explained: "this body , unlike the other , operates under the principle that a determined majority should be allowed to work its will while protecting the rights of the minority to be heard. .

minority party lawmakers are certain to be heard , but whether they will be heeded is sometimes another matter .

thus , the uppermost goal of any minority leader is to recapture majority control of the house .

the minority leader is elected every two years by secret ballot of his or her party caucus or conference .

these party leaders are typically experienced lawmakers when they win election to this position .

the current minority leader , kevin mccarthy , r - ca , served 12 years in the house , including as majority leader , prior to assuming his current role ( a position he also held during his time in the california state assembly ) .

speaker nancy pelosi , d - ca , served in the house for 16 years when she first became minority leader in the 108 th congress ( 2003-2004 ) .

following her first tenure as speaker from 2007 to 2010 , pelosi was again elected minority leader in the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) , at which point she was a 24-year veteran of the house .

when her predecessor , john boehner , r - oh , was elected minority leader in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , he had served in the house for 18 years including as majority leader , committee chair ( education and the workforce ) , and , prior to that , chair of the republican conference .

richard gephardt , d - mo , began his tenure as minority leader in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) as an 18-year house veteran and a former majority leader and chair of the democratic caucus .

gephardt's predecessor , robert michel , r - il , became minority leader in 1981 after 24 years in the house .

much like his successors , john rhodes , r - az , had served in the house for 20 years when he was elected minority leader in 1973 .

while the position itself is usually occupied by members with significant house experience , the roles and responsibilities of the minority leader are not well - defined .

to a large extent , the duties of the minority leader are based on tradition and custom .

representative bertrand snell , r - ny , minority leader from 1931 to 1938 , described the position in the following way: he is spokesman for his party and enunciates its policies .

he is required to be alert and vigilant in defense of the minority's rights .

it is his function and duty to criticize constructively the policies and programs of the majority , and to this end employ parliamentary tactics and give close attention to all proposed legislation .

since snell's description , other responsibilities have been added to the job .

broadly speaking , the role of the minority leader in the contemporary congress is twofold: to serve as the leader and spokesperson for the minority party , and to participate in certain institutional prerogatives afforded to members in the minority .

how the minority leader handles these responsibilities is likely to depend on a variety of elements , including personality and contextual factors ; the size and cohesion of the minority party ; whether or not the party controls the white house ; the general political climate both inside and outside the house ; and expectations of the party's performance in upcoming elections .

the next section of the report discusses the historical origin of this position , and the sections that follow take account of the various party and institutional responsibilities of the minority leader .

to a large extent , the position of minority leader is a late - 19 th - century innovation .

prior to this time congressional parties were often relatively disorganized , so it was not always evident who functioned as the opposition floor leader .

decades went by before anything like our modern two - party congressional system emerged on capitol hill with official titles for those who were selected as party leaders .

however , from the beginning days of congress , various house members intermittently assumed the role of "opposition leader. .

some scholars suggest that representative james madison of virginia informally functioned as the first "minority leader" because in the first congress he led the opposition to treasury secretary alexander hamilton's fiscal policies .

during this early period , it was common for neither major party grouping ( federalists and republicans ) to have an official leader .

in 1813 , for instance , a scholar recounts that the federalist minority of 36 members needed a committee of 13 "to represent a party comprising a distinct minority" and "to coordinate the actions of men who were already partisans in the same cause. .

in 1828 , a foreign observer of the house offered this perspective on the absence of formal party leadership on capitol hill: i found there were absolutely no persons holding the stations of what are called , in england , leaders , on either side of the house... .

it is true , that certain members do take charge of administration questions , and certain others of opposition questions ; but all this so obviously without concert among themselves , actual or tacit , that nothing can be conceived less systematic or more completely desultory , disjointed .

internal party disunity compounded the difficulty of identifying lawmakers who might have informally functioned as a minority leader .

for instance , "seven of the fourteen speakership elections from 1834 through 1859 had at least twenty different candidates in the field .

thirty - six competed in 1839 , ninety - seven in 1849 , ninety - one in 1859 , and 138 in 1855. .

with so many candidates competing for the speakership , it is not at all clear that one of the defeated lawmakers then assumed the mantle of "minority leader. .

the democratic minority from 1861 to 1875 was so completely disorganized that they did not "nominate a candidate for speaker in two of these seven congresses and nominated no man more than once in the other five .

the defeated candidates were not automatically looked to for leadership. .

in the judgment of one congressional scholar , since 1883 "the candidate for speaker nominated by the minority party has clearly been the minority leader. .

however , this assertion is subject to dispute .

on december 3 , 1883 , the house elected democrat john g. carlisle of kentucky as speaker .

republicans nominated j. warren keifer of ohio , who was speaker the previous congress .

but keifer was viewed by his colleagues as a discredited leader in part because as speaker he arbitrarily handed out "choice jobs to close relatives ... all at handsome salaries. .

keifer received "the empty honor of the minority nomination .

but with it came a sting — for while this naturally involves the floor leadership , he was deserted by his [party] associates and his career as a national figure terminated ingloriously. .

representative thomas reed , r - me , who later became speaker , assumed the de facto role of minority floor leader in keifer's stead .

"[a]lthough keifer was the minority's candidate for speaker , reed became its acknowledged leader , and ever after , so long as he served in the house , remained the most conspicuous member of his party. .

although congressional historians disagree as to the exact time period when the minority leadership emerged officially as a party position , it seems safe to conclude that the position was established during the latter part of the 19 th century .

this era was "marked by strong partisan attachments , resilient patronage - based party organizations , and ... high levels of party voting in congress. .

these conditions were conducive to the establishment of a more highly differentiated house leadership structure in which members assumed more specialized roles within the institution .

 ( see the appendix for a list of house minority leaders selected since 1899. ) .

one other historical point merits brief mention .

until the 61 st congress ( 1909-1910 ) , "it was the custom to have the minority leader also serve as the ranking minority member on the two most powerful committees , rules and ways and means. .

today , the minority leader no longer serves on these committees but does chair the republican steering committee , a party leadership committee responsible for making recommendations to the conference regarding the committee assignments of house republicans .

the minority leader has a number of formal and informal party responsibilities .

formally , the rules of each party specify certain roles and responsibilities for their leader .

for example , under republican conference rules for the 116 th congress ( 2019-2020 ) , the minority leader nominates party members to the committees on rules and house administration , subject to conference approval .

republican conference rules also authorize the minority leader to appoint a "leadership member" to the committee on the budget who "will serve as the second highest - ranking republican on the committee," and to "recommend to the house all republican members of such joint , select , and ad hoc committees as shall be created by the house , in accordance with law. .

beyond their formal responsibilities , minority leaders are expected to handle a wide range of informal party assignments .

lewis deschler , a former house parliamentarian ( 1928-1974 ) , summarized the diverse duties of a party's floor leader: a party's floor leader , in conjunction with other party leaders , plays an influential role in the formulation of party policy and programs .

he is instrumental in guiding legislation favored by his party through the house , or in resisting those programs of the other party that are considered undesirable by his own party .

he is instrumental in devising and implementing his party's strategy on the floor with respect to promoting or opposing legislation .

he is kept constantly informed as to the status of legislative business and as to the sentiment of his party respecting particular legislation under consideration .

such information is derived in part from the floor leader's contacts with his party's members serving on house committees , and with the members of the party's whip organization .

these and several other party roles merit further discussion because they influence significantly the minority leader's overarching objective: to retake majority control of the house .

"i want to get [my] members elected and win more seats," said former minority leader richard gephardt , d - mo .

"that's what [my party colleagues] want to do , and that's what they want me to do. .

five activities illustrate how minority leaders seek to accomplish this primary goal .

beyond the party responsibilities of the minority leader are a number of institutional obligations associated with their position as a top house official .

many of these assignments or roles are spelled out in the standing rules of the house , while others have devolved upon the position in other ways .

to be sure , the minority leader is provided with extra staff resources — beyond those accorded him or her as a representative — to assist in carrying out diverse leadership functions .

there are limits on the institutional role of the minority leader , because the majority party exercises disproportionate influence over the legislative agenda , partisan ratios on committees , staff resources , administrative operations , and the day - to - day schedule and management of floor activities .

under the rules of the house , the minority leader has certain roles and responsibilities .

they include , among others , the following .

given the concentration of agenda control and other institutional resources in the majority leadership , the minority leader faces real challenges in promoting and publicizing the party's priorities , serving the interests of his rank - and - file members , managing intraparty conflict , and forging party unity .

the ultimate goal of the minority leader is to lead the party into majority status .

yet there is no set formula on how this is to be done .

"if the history of elections is any guide," wrote a congressional scholar , "it seems apparent that the congressional record of the minority party is only one of many factors that may result in majority status .

most of the other factors cannot be controlled by the minority party and its leaders . .

there is one central dilemma that confronts the minority leader: inferior numbers .

this limitation can be overcome on occasion with the right strategic approach , but on many issues this might not be possible .

one study of the house minority party summarizes the strategic challenge succinctly: the minority party in the house faces a strategic problem: how do you respond when given only a small slice of the legislative pie ? .

do you accept the slice you've been given , bargain for more , or use every means at your disposal to win the right to cut the pie yourself ? .

it is this problem , and how the minority party chooses to solve it , that underlies the logic of minority party politics in the house of representatives .

