the origin of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) is rooted in a reorganization of the executive branch under the nixon administration .

reorganization plan no .

3 of 1970 proposed the establishment of epa to integrate the administration of numerous federal pollution control laws that had been carried out by several federal agencies .

this plan was part of a broader effort to reorganize an array of environmental responsibilities of many federal agencies , which also resulted in the creation of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

the nixon administration created epa and noaa through this reorganization with congressional approval under procedures established in the reorganization act of 1949 , as amended .

the reorganization act authorizes the president to propose reorganizations to congress that would promote the "better execution" of federal laws , the "more effective" management of individual agencies and their functions , and the "efficiency of the operations of government to the fullest extent practicable. .

president nixon determined that the consolidation of federal pollution control responsibilities under one agency was necessary to meet these statutory objectives , and proposed a reorganization of the executive branch to establish epa under reorganization plan no .

3 .

the plan was based largely on recommendations of the "ash council," which president nixon had formed to examine the organization of environmental responsibilities among federal agencies .

the 91 st congress approved this plan , leading to the creation of epa on december 2 , 1970 .

over time , epa's authorities have grown as congress has enacted an increasing number of environmental statutes and major amendments to these statutes .

epa's primary responsibilities have evolved to include the regulation of air quality , water quality , and chemicals in commerce ; the development of regulatory criteria for the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes ; and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

although epa sets uniform pollution control standards and regulations on a national level , the implementation and enforcement of many of these federal standards and regulations are delegated to the states .

epa also provides financial assistance in the form of grants to states and local governments to aid them in administering pollution control programs and in complying with certain federal environmental requirements .

the states also have enacted their own pollution control authorities and programs , which complement the federal role of epa in protecting human health and the environment .

this report presents a summary of the body of federal environmental statutes that together constitute the main authorities of epa , but this report is not comprehensive in terms of discussing all federal statutes that may authorize certain activities of the agency .

this report highlights prominent provisions of the selected statutes discussed herein , characterizes the purpose and scope of major programs and activities authorized in each statute , and explains the definitions of key statutory terms that establish the parameters of the agency's authorities in these instances .

although congress somewhat recently has renewed the authorization of appropriations for certain epa programs and activities through targeted amendments to various statutes , a more comprehensive reauthorization of many of the statutes that epa administers has not been enacted for a number of years .

even though the authorization of appropriations may expire , program authority ( often referred to as an agency's "enabling" authority ) generally does not expire unless repealed , or unless there is a "sunset" date for the program authority itself .

if the authorization of appropriations for a specific program or activity has expired , congress still may provide funding through the annual appropriations process to continue that program or activity , if certain rules for floor consideration are not enforced or are waived .

house and senate rules generally do not allow the appropriation of funding for a program or activity that congress has not authorized in law , but these rules are subject to points of order and are not self - enforcing .

congress therefore may appropriate funding for a specific program or activity for which the authorization of appropriations has expired , if no member raises a point of order , or the rules are waived for consideration of a particular bill .

congress typically has done so to continue the appropriation of funding for epa programs and activities for which the authorization of appropriations has expired .

once enacted , appropriations provide the legal authority for an agency to obligate federal funds in that particular fiscal year .

congress appropriates funding for epa within the interior , environment , and related agencies annual appropriations bill .

 ( for a discussion of enacted funding for fy2013 , see crs report r43207 , environmental protection agency ( epa ) : appropriations for fy2013 in p.l .

113-6 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

this report focuses primarily on epa's program authorities under the statutes discussed herein .

a list of major amendments to the parent statute is provided at the beginning of each summary .

the final table at the end of each summary lists the individual provisions of the statute , cross - referencing the sections of the public laws to the sections of the united states code where each provision is codified .

the summaries in this report outline the major provisions of each statute , but are not comprehensive in terms of discussing every provision of these statutes in their entirety .

for the purpose of brevity , the summaries omit certain details and secondary provisions that would necessitate a lengthier examination .

furthermore , some prominent provisions are only briefly mentioned , which are beyond the scope of the summaries provided herein .

moreover , this report provides an analytical summary of the major provisions of the statutes as laid out in existing law as of this writing .

this report does not examine issues associated with their implementation or with regulations that epa may have proposed or promulgated to carry out these statutes .

other crs reports offer information on current developments and issues associated with the implementation of various statutory authorities of epa and the agency's regulatory role under these statutes , many of which are cited in this report where relevant to the discussion .

the clean air act , codified as 42 u.s.c .

7401 et seq . , seeks to protect human health and the environment from emissions that pollute ambient , or outdoor , air .

it requires the environmental protection agency to establish minimum national standards for air quality , and assigns primary responsibility to the states to assure compliance with the standards .

areas not meeting the standards , referred to as "nonattainment areas," are required to implement specified air pollution control measures .

the act establishes federal standards for mobile sources of air pollution and their fuels and for sources of 187 hazardous air pollutants , and it establishes a cap - and - trade program for the emissions that cause acid rain .

it establishes a comprehensive permit system for all major sources of air pollution .

it also addresses the prevention of pollution in areas with clean air and protection of the stratospheric ozone layer .

the principal law governing pollution of the nation's surface waters is the federal water pollution control act , or clean water act .

originally enacted in 1948 , it was totally revised by amendments in 1972 that gave the act its current shape .

the 1972 legislation spelled out ambitious programs for water quality improvement that have since been expanded and are still being implemented by industries and municipalities .

congress made certain fine - tuning amendments in 1977 , revised portions of the law in 1981 , and enacted further amendments in 1987 .

table 5 lists the original law and major amendments to it .

for a review of ongoing implementation of the act , see crs report r40098 , water quality issues in the 111 th congress: oversight and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] .

the ocean dumping act has two basic aims: to regulate intentional ocean disposal of materials , and to authorize related research .

title i of the marine protection , research , and sanctuaries act of 1972 ( mprsa , p.l .

92-532 ) , which is often referred to just as the ocean dumping act , contains permit and enforcement provisions for ocean dumping .

research provisions are contained in title ii , concerning general and ocean disposal research .

title iv established a regional marine research program , and title v addresses coastal water quality monitoring .

title iii of the mprsa , not addressed here , authorizes the establishment of marine sanctuaries .

table 7 shows the original enactment and subsequent amendments .

the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , title xiv of the public health service act , is the key federal law for protecting public water supplies from harmful contaminants .

first enacted in 1974 and substantively amended in 1986 and 1996 , the act is administered through programs that establish standards and treatment requirements for public water supplies , control underground injection of wastes , finance infrastructure projects , and protect sources of drinking water .

the 1974 law established the current federal - state arrangement in which states may be delegated primary implementation and enforcement authority for the drinking water program .

the state - administered public water supply supervision ( pwss ) program remains the basic program for regulating the nation's public water systems , and 49 states have assumed this authority .

sdwa appropriations were authorized through fy2003 .

the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ) established the federal program regulating solid and hazardous waste management .

rcra actually amends earlier legislation ( the solid waste disposal act of 1965 ) , but the amendments were so comprehensive that the act is commonly called rcra rather than its official title .

the act defines solid and hazardous waste , authorizes epa to set standards for facilities that generate or manage hazardous waste , establishes a permit program for hazardous waste treatment , storage , and disposal facilities , and authorizes epa to set criteria for disposal facilities that accept municipal solid waste .

rcra was last reauthorized by the hazardous and solid waste amendments of 1984 .

the amendments set deadlines for permit issuance , prohibited the land disposal of many types of hazardous waste without prior treatment , established criteria applicable to municipal solid waste landfills , and established a new program regulating underground storage tanks .

the authorization for appropriations under this act expired september 30 , 1988 , but funding for epa's programs in this area has continued ; the act's other authorities do not expire .

by the end of the 1970s , congress had enacted several environmental laws to regulate sources of pollution in the united states , but had not yet addressed responsibility for contamination resulting from releases of pollutants into the environment .

in the late 1970s , the discovery of severely contaminated sites , such as "love canal" in new york and times beach in missouri , raised questions as to whether there should be a federal role in cleaning up environmental contamination to protect the public from potential harm .

congress enacted the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla , p.l .

96-510 ) to authorize the federal government to clean up contaminated sites in the united states and to make the "potentially responsible parties" connected to those sites financially liable for the cleanup costs .

cercla created the superfund program to carry out these authorities .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administers the program .

subsequent amendments to cercla also authorized epa to administer a separate grant program to support the cleanup of abandoned or idled "brownfields" properties to encourage their redevelopment .

cercla established a broad liability scheme that holds both past and current owners and operators of contaminated facilities financially responsible for the costs of cleanup .

at waste disposal sites , generators of the waste sent to the site for disposal , and transporters of the waste who selected the site for disposal , also are responsible for the cleanup costs .

if these potentially responsible parties cannot be found or cannot pay for the cleanup , cercla authorizes the federal government to finance the cleanup to ensure the protection of human health and the environment .

these costs borne by the federal government are referred to as "orphan shares. .

the broad liability scheme of cercla is intended to capture all parties that may have had some involvement in the actions that resulted in contamination of the environment , in order to minimize the burden of the costs of cleanup on the general taxpayer who had no involvement .

this approach to liability is based on the principle that polluters should be required to pay for the environmental damage that they cause , often referred to as the "polluter pays principle. .

cercla established the hazardous substance superfund trust fund to finance cleanup actions taken by the federal government at contaminated sites where the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found .

a combination of special taxes on industry and revenues from the general fund of the u.s. treasury initially financed the superfund trust fund , but the authority to collect the industry taxes expired at the end of 1995 .

as the remaining revenues were expended over time , congress increased the contribution of general treasury revenues in an effort to make up for the shortfall from the expired industry taxes .

the availability of superfund trust fund monies to finance the cleanup of contaminated sites is subject to appropriations by congress .

considering the liability of the federal government as a potentially responsible party at its own facilities , the cleanup of federal facilities is not funded with superfund trust fund monies under the superfund program , but with other federal monies appropriated for other programs administered by the agencies responsible for these facilities .

the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of energy ( doe ) administer the cleanup of most contaminated federal facilities .

epa and the states are responsible for overseeing and enforcing the implementation of cercla at federal facilities to ensure that applicable requirements are met .

to prioritize cleanup actions , cercla directed epa to establish and maintain a national priorities list ( npl ) of the most contaminated sites in the united states which present the greatest risks to human health and the environment .

the npl includes both non - federal sites and federal facilities that are deemed to present a sufficient level of risk to warrant listing .

epa may require the potentially responsible parties to directly perform or pay for cleanup actions themselves .

alternatively , epa may clean up a contaminated site up - front with appropriated superfund monies and later recover those funds from the potentially responsible parties ( with the exception of the cleanup of federal facilities which must be funded up - front by the administering agencies ) .

in the event that the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found , appropriated superfund monies may be used to pay the orphan shares of cleanup costs at a site , under a cost - sharing agreement with the state in which the site is located .

the following sections summarize the major cleanup authorities of cercla and other relevant provisions of the act .

the topics discussed herein include the overall scope and reach of cleanup actions authorized under the statute , the process under which cleanup actions are selected and carried out at individual sites , the financial liability of potentially responsible parties for the costs of cleanup actions , the superfund trust fund that may pay for cleanup actions when the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found , enforcement of cleanup liability against the potentially responsible parties to minimize the need for federal tax revenues to finance the cleanup of contaminated sites , the applicability of cercla to federal facilities , and federal assistance for the cleanup of brownfields properties .

a more in - depth examination of these statutory authorities is presented in crs report r41039 , comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act: a summary of superfund cleanup authorities and related provisions of the act , by [author name scrubbed] .

it should be emphasized that how and to what degree a specific contaminant at an individual site must be cleaned up under cercla are not specified in the law itself .

the specific actions that are required to clean up contaminants at individual sites are determined on a site - by - site basis .

although cercla established a general process for making cleanup decisions , more specific direction is provided in epa regulation and agency guidance .

other federal agencies that administer the cleanup of federal facilities under cercla have developed additional guidance documents that apply to their own respective facilities .

although the statutory authorities upon which federal agencies have based their cleanup regulations and guidance are discussed in this report , the content of these regulations and guidance is not examined here .

the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra , codified at 42 u.s.c .

11001-11050 ) was enacted in 1986 as title iii of the superfund amendments and reauthorization act ( p.l .

99-499 ) .

epcra established state commissions and local committees to develop and implement procedures for coping with releases of hazardous chemicals , and mandated annual reporting to government officials on environmental releases of such chemicals by the facilities that manufacture or use them in significant amounts .

epa facilitates planning , enforces compliance when necessary , and provides public access to information about environmental releases of toxic chemicals .

the pollution prevention act of 1990 requires the environmental protection agency to establish an office of pollution prevention , develop and coordinate a pollution prevention strategy , and develop source reduction models .

the act requires owners and operators of manufacturing facilities to report annually on source reduction and recycling activities , and authorizes epa to collect data collection on pollution prevention .

the toxic substances control act ( tsca , 15 u.s.c .

2601 et seq. ) .

authorizes epa to screen existing and new chemicals used in u.s. manufacturing and commerce to identify potentially dangerous products or uses that should be subject to federal control .

both naturally occurring and synthetic chemicals are subject to tsca , with the exception of chemicals regulated under other federal laws concerning food , drugs , cosmetics , firearms , ammunition , pesticides , tobacco , or mixtures .

epa may require manufacturers and processors of chemicals to conduct and report the results of tests to determine the effects of potentially dangerous chemicals on living things .

based on test results and other information , epa must regulate the manufacture , importation , processing , distribution , use , and / or disposal of any chemical that presents an unreasonable risk of injury to human health or the environment .

a variety of regulatory tools is available to epa under tsca ranging in severity from a total ban on production , import , and use to a requirement that a product bears a warning label at the point of sale .

tsca directs epa to use the least burdensome option that can reduce risk to a level that is reasonable given the benefits provided by the chemical product or process .

the original legislation included a single title , which has since been designated title i .

as enacted , tsca included a provision requiring epa to take specific measures to control the risks from polychlorinated biphenyls ( pcbs ) ( section 6 ( e ) ) .

title i was amended in 2008 to restrict sales of elemental mercury ( p.l .

110-414 ) .

in addition , five titles have been added to address specific concerns — asbestos in 1986 ( title ii , p.l .

99-519 ) , radon in 1988 ( title iii , p.l .

100-551 ) , lead in 1992 ( title iv , p.l .

102-550 ) , schools in 2007 ( title v , p.l .

110-140 ) , and formaldehyde in 2010 ( title vi , p.l .

111-199 ) .

title ii directs epa to set standards for asbestos mitigation in schools and requires asbestos contractors to be trained and certified .

title iii directs epa to provide technical assistance to states that choose to support radon monitoring and control .

title iv provides similar assistance with respect to abatement of lead - based paint hazards .

title v addresses environmental issues at schools , including energy efficiency .

finally , title vi establishes limits on emissions of formaldehyde from composite wood products .

epa is responsible for implementing federal pesticide policies under two statutes: the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ) , governing the sale and use of pesticide products within the united states ; and the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , which limits pesticide residues on food in interstate commerce ( including imports ) .

there are an estimated 18,000 pesticide products currently in use .

these generally are regulated under fifra , but approximately 5,800 pesticide products used in food production also are regulated under the ffdca , as discussed below .

fifra requires epa to regulate the sale and use of pesticides in the united states through registration and labeling .

pesticides are broadly defined in fifra section 2 ( u ) as chemicals and other products used to kill , repel , or control pests .

familiar examples include pesticides used to kill insects and weeds that can reduce the yield , and sometimes harm the quality , of agricultural crops , ornamental plants , forests , wooden structures ( eg , through termite damage ) , and pastures .

but the broad definition of "pesticide" in fifra section 2 also applies to products with less familiar "pesticidal uses. .

for example , substances are pesticides when used to control mold , mildew , algae , and other nuisance growths on equipment , in surface water , or on stored grains .

the term also applies to disinfectants and sterilizing agents , animal repellents , rat poison , and many other substances .

fifra directs epa to restrict the use of pesticides as necessary to prevent unreasonable adverse effects on people and the environment , taking into account the costs and benefits of various pesticide uses .

the act prohibits sale of any pesticide in the united states unless it is registered ( licensed ) and labeled to indicate approved uses and restrictions .

it is a violation of the law to use a pesticide in a manner that is inconsistent with the label instructions .

epa registers each pesticide product for each approved use .

for example , a product may be registered for use on green beans to control mites , as a seed treatment for cotton , and as a treatment for structural cracks .

in addition , fifra requires epa to reregister each older pesticide product that was first registered prior to 1984 and to review all registered pesticides ( including those that have completed the one - time reregistration requirement ) periodically on a 15-year cycle based on new data that meet current regulatory and scientific standards .

establishments that manufacture or sell pesticide products must register with epa .

facility managers are required to keep certain records and to allow inspections by federal or state regulatory officials .

for the 600 or more pesticides ( i.e. , active ingredients ) registered for use in food production , the ffdca section 408 authorizes epa to establish maximum allowable residue levels ( also known as "tolerances" ) to ensure that human exposure to the pesticide ingredients in food and animal feed will be "safe. .

a "safe" tolerance is defined in the law as a level at which there is "a reasonable certainty of no harm" from the exposure , even when considering total cumulative and aggregate pesticide exposure of children .

under ffdca , foods with a residue of a pesticide ingredient for which there is no tolerance established , or with a residue level exceeding an established tolerance limit , are declared "unsafe" and "adulterated" ; such foods cannot be sold in interstate commerce or imported to the united states .

pesticides may not be registered under fifra for use on food unless tolerances ( or exemptions ) have been established under the ffdca .

fifra authorizes epa to fund registration - related activities ( including registration reviews and tolerance assessments ) by collecting fees from pesticide registrants ( i.e. , manufacturers and formulators ) to supplement appropriations .

the national environmental policy act ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

4321 et seq. ) .

was enacted in 1969 and signed into law by president nixon on january 1 , 1970 ( p.l .

91-190 ) .

nepa was the first of several major environmental laws enacted in the 1970s .

under title i of the act , congress declared a national policy that stated , in part , that it is "the continuing policy of the federal government ... to use all practicable means and measures ... to create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in productive harmony , and fulfill the social , economic , and other requirements of present and future generations of americans. .

nepa also created the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) in the executive office of the president .

among other duties , ceq was required to develop and recommend to the president national policies to foster and promote the improvement of environmental quality .

in the 1970's , ceq played a key role in shaping regulations for implementation of nepa .

one of the best - known elements of nepa is its directive to federal agencies to incorporate environmental considerations in their planning and decision - making through a systematic interdisciplinary approach .

specifically , nepa requires all federal agencies to prepare a detailed statement of the environmental impact of and alternatives to major federal actions significantly affecting the environment .

the "detailed statement" was subsequently referred to as an environmental impact statement ( eis ) .

judicial interpretation of nepa ultimately determined that the act did not require agencies to elevate environmental concerns over other considerations .

rather , the courts determined , nepa requires only that the agency take a "hard look" at a project's environmental consequences before taking action .

if the adverse environmental effects of the proposed action are adequately identified and evaluated , the agency is not constrained by nepa from deciding that other benefits outweigh the environmental costs .

in 1978 , ceq formally promulgated regulations , binding on all federal agencies , implementing nepa's provisions .

in addition to ceq , congress authorized epa to perform certain duties to ensure the proper implementation of nepa's eis requirements ( discussed below ) .

nepa applies to all major federal actions , including projects and programs entirely or partly funded , assisted , conducted , regulated , or approved by federal agencies .

to ensure that environmental impacts of those actions are considered before final decisions are made , nepa requires the preparation of an environmental impact statement ( eis ) for any major federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment .

an eis is a full disclosure document that provides a description of the proposed action , and the existing environment , as well as analysis of the anticipated beneficial and adverse environmental effects of all reasonable alternatives .

as required under ceq's regulations , some level of analysis is also required when environmental impacts are uncertain or not significant .

projects for which it is not initially clear whether impacts will be significant require the preparation of an environmental assessment ( ea ) .

an ea is a concise public document that analyzes the environmental impacts of a proposed federal action and provides sufficient evidence to determine the level of significance of the impacts .

it is followed by either a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) or a decision to prepare an eis .

categorical exclusions are actions that do not individually or cumulatively have a significant social , economic , or environmental effect , and which the applicable agency has determined from past experience have no significant impact .

such actions are excluded from the requirement to prepare an eis or ea .

prior to completing the appropriate nepa documentation , the responsible federal official ( the "lead agency" ) is required to consult with and obtain the comments of any federal agency which has jurisdiction by law or special expertise ( a "cooperating agency" ) with respect to any environmental impact involved .

for any given federal action , compliance with a wide variety of legislative and regulatory requirements , enforceable by multiple agencies , may be required .

nepa documentation may be required to document compliance with all applicable environmental laws , executive orders , and other related requirements .

most agencies use the nepa process as a means of coordinating or demonstrating compliance with all applicable environmental requirements .

in this capacity nepa may function as an "umbrella statute," meaning any study , review , or consultation required by law , that is related to the environment , may be conducted within the framework of the nepa process .

complex federal projects such as highway construction projects , forest thinning , or oil and gas development projects , may trigger compliance with literally dozens of federal , state , tribal , and local environmental statutory and regulatory requirements .

these , in turn , require the participation or input of possibly dozens of agencies .

some members of congress have expressed concerns that the interagency coordination required of such projects is often inefficient , leading to unnecessary delays in needed projects .

improved interagency cooperation has been identified by some members of congress as a critical element to the success of streamlining the nepa process .

the ceq's regulations implementing nepa currently include a variety of provisions intended to expedite the compliance process .

in particular , ceq's regulations specify procedures to reduce paperwork and delay .

the regulations also direct agencies to efficiently facilitate the process of complying with multiple statutory and regulatory requirements .

to do so , the regulations direct agencies , among other requirements , to: integrate nepa's requirements with other required planning and environmental review procedures .

prepare environmental reviews concurrently with one another , rather than consecutively .

establish appropriate time limits on eiss .

integrate the nepa process into early planning and prepare the eis early in the process .

emphasize interagency cooperation before the eis is prepared , rather than submission of adversary comments on a completed document .

insure the swift and fair resolution of lead agency disputes .

nepa is broad , with requirements potentially affecting all federal agencies .

also , epa is not authorized to enforce nepa's requirements ; instead , federal agencies are required to implement its requirements themselves .

however , epa does have two distinct roles in the nepa process .

the first regards its duty , under section 309 of the clean air act , to review and comment publicly on the environmental impacts of proposed federal activities , including those for which an eis is prepared .

after conducting its review , epa rates two elements of the action: the adequacy of the eis and the environmental impact of the action .

the eis may be rated "adequate," "needs more information," or "inadequate. .

the lead agency would be required to respond appropriately depending upon epa's rating .

with regard to rating the environmental impacts of an action , epa would rate a project in one of the following four ways: lack of objections , environmental concerns , environmental objections , environmentally unsatisfactory .

if epa determines that the action is environmentally unsatisfactory , it is required to refer the matter to ceq to resolve any interagency dispute .

epa's second duty is an administrative one , in which it carries out the operational duties associated with the eis filing process .

in 1978 , these duties were transferred to epa by ceq in accordance with a memorandum of agreement ( moa ) entered into by epa and ceq .

under the terms of the moa , epa's office of federal activities is designated the official recipient of all eiss prepared by federal agencies .

epa maintains a national eis filing system .

by maintaining the system , epa facilitates public access to eiss by publishing weekly notices in the federal register of eiss available for public review , along with summaries of epa's comments .

apart from these duties , like any other federal agency , epa may participate in the nepa process as a lead agency when it is sponsoring its own federal actions .

currently , nepa documentation is required of epa for research and development activities , construction of epa facilities , wastewater treatment plant construction under the clean water act , epa - issued national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permits for new sources , and for certain projects funded through epa annual appropriations acts .

legislation has specifically limited epa's requirement to comply with nepa for certain actions .

for example , section 7 ( c ) of the energy supply and environmental coordination act of 1974 ( 15 u.s.c .

793 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) exempts actions taken under the clean air act from the requirements of nepa .

epa is also exempted from the procedural requirements of environmental laws , including nepa , for response actions pursuant to requirements under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) .

courts also have consistently recognized that epa procedures or environmental reviews under enabling legislation are functionally equivalent to the nepa process and thus exempt from the procedural requirements in nepa .

