in the united states , states have traditionally exercised primary responsibility for the administration of elections for federal and state offices .

because of this decentralized authority , there is often significant variation in how different states regulate elections .

for instance , states are likely to use different methods to establish boundaries for electoral districts , to register voters , to administer elections , to report election results , and to otherwise regulate the electoral process .

the federal government , however , also has significant authority to regulate how elections are run , and in many instances it has directed how states are to administer the election process .

for instance , in 1986 , congress passed the uniformed and overseas citizens absentee voting act .

this act was intended to ensure that members of the uniformed services and u.s. citizens who live abroad are able to register and vote in federal elections .

the law was enacted to improve absentee registration and voting for this group of voters .

similarly , in 1993 , congress passed the national voter registration act ( "motor voter act" ) with the intention of making it easier for all citizens to register to vote .

the motor voter act requires that , for federal elections , states must establish procedures so that eligible citizens are afforded the opportunity to register at the time they apply for or renew a driver's license , by mail , or in person .

congressional interest in the process of holding elections increased even more as a result of the disputed 2000 presidential elections .

in 2002 , congress passed the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava ) .

hava provides federal requirements for several aspects of election administration , including voting systems , provisional ballots , voter information , voter registration , and the provision of identification by certain voters .

for instance , hava requires that voting systems used in federal elections provide for error correction by voters ( either directly or via voter education and instruction ) , manual auditing for the voting system , accessibility to disabled persons ( at least one fully accessible machine per polling place ) and alternative languages , and a method to meet federal machine error - rate standards .

systems are also required to maintain voter privacy and ballot confidentiality , and states are required to adopt uniform standards for what constitutes a vote on each system .

hava also provides extensive regulation of the manner in which states maintain voter registration lists .

various proposals have been made that would further this enhanced level of federal control over the administration of election procedures .

for instance , suggestions have been made that state agencies be required to share information to facilitate accurate registration lists ; to standardize mail - in and absentee balloting ; to establish a uniform closing time for polls ; to provide for multiple - day elections ; and to standardize the number and accessibility of polling stations .

other suggestions include standardizing the supervision of voting ; how votes are counted , compiled , and published ; and how to allocate electoral votes within a state based on popular votes .

congress could also decide to regulate even more fundamental aspects of federal elections .

for instance , some states utilize commissions to establish the size and shape for electoral districts , and congress might require that states adopt some form of commission to inform this process .

or congress might choose to regulate the primary process .

for instance , it has been suggested that congress could require states to hold "top - two" primaries , in which all candidates run on one slate , and the top two vote getters then oppose each other in a general election .

further , suggestions have been made that the federal government could determine what form of voter identification can be required at the state level .

this report focuses on congress's constitutional authority to regulate how states establish and implement election procedures .

in evaluating any such proposals , an initial question to be asked is which elections will be affected .

as noted , state and local authorities have a significant role in regulating state and federal elections .

congress , however , also has authority to regulate elections , and that authority may vary depending on whether the election is for the presidency , the house , the senate , or for state or local offices .

further , there may be variation in whether a particular aspect of an election , such as balloting procedures , is amenable to congressional regulation .

consequently , evaluating the authority of congress to establish standardized election procedures would appear to require a consideration of a variety of different proposals and scenarios .

the authority of congress to legislate regarding these various issues in different types of elections would appear to derive principally from four constitutional provisions: the elections clause the times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives , shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof ; but the congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations , except as to the places of chusing senators .

u.s. const .

article i , §4 , cl .

1 .

day of chusing presidential electors clause the congress may determine the time of chusing the [presidential] electors , and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the united states .

u.s. const .

article ii , §1 , cl .

4 .

fourteenth amendment equal protection clause no state shall make or enforce any law which shall ... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .

 .

 .

 .

 .

the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article .

u.s. const .

xiv , §§1 & 5 .

fifteenth amendment the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude .

the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

u.s. const .

xv , §§1 & 2 .

although the constitution is silent on various aspects of the voting process , the constitution seems to anticipate that states would be primarily responsible for establishing procedures for elections .

federal authority to direct how states administer these regulations , however , is also provided for in the constitution .

congress's power is at its most broad in the case of house elections , which have historically always been decided by a system of popular voting .

its power may be more limited in elections for senators or president , and is at its narrowest as regards state elections .

congress does not have general legislative authority to regulate the manner and procedures used for elections at the state and local level .

nor , as noted above , does it appear to have complete authority to regulate presidential elections .

congress does , however , have extensive authority to prevent voter disenfranchisement by a state or locality .

for instance , the civil war amendments , the nineteenth amendment , the twenty - fourth amendment , and the twenty - sixth amendment all seek to prevent discrimination in access to voting , and authorize congress to exercise power over federal , state , and local elections to implement these protections .

the most significant of these provisions is congress's enforcement authority under the fourteenth amendment to provide for equal protection and under the fifteenth amendment to prevent disenfranchisement based on race .

as noted , modern election law is mostly regulated at the state level , but there are a variety of federal laws that direct how states will implement certain aspects of elections .

while concurrent jurisdiction between the states and federal government over a particular issue area is relatively common , it is less common for the federal government to direct how the states will exercise its authority in such area .

in other contexts , the directing or "commandeering" of states to implement federal programs can raise tenth amendment concerns .

this , however , does not appear to be the case with election laws .

the tenth amendment provides that "powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution , nor prohibited by it to the states , are reserved to the states respectively , or to the people. .

initially , the supreme court interpreted the tenth amendment to have substantive content , so that certain "core" state functions would be beyond the authority of the federal government to regulate .

thus , in national league of cities v. usery , the court struck down federal wage and price controls on state employees as involving the regulation of core state functions .

the court , however , overruled national league of cities in garcia v. san antonio metropolitan transit authority .

in sum , the court in garcia seems to have said that most disputes over the effects on state sovereignty of federal commerce power legislation are to be considered political questions , and that the states should look for relief from federal regulation through the political process .

the court soon turned , however , to the question of how the constitution limits the process by which the federal government regulates the states .

in new york v. united states , congress had attempted to regulate in the area of low - level radioactive waste .

in a 1985 statute , congress provided that states must either develop legislation on how to dispose of all low - level radioactive waste generated within the state , or the state would be forced to take title to such waste , which would mean that it became the state's responsibility .

the court found that although congress had the authority under the commerce clause to regulate low - level radioactive waste , it had only the power to regulate the waste directly .

here , congress had attempted to require the states to perform the regulation , and decreed that the failure to do so would require the state to deal with the financial consequences of owning large quantities of radioactive waste .

in effect , congress sought to "commandeer" the legislative process of the states .

in the new york case , the court found that this power was not found in the text or structure of the constitution , and it was thus a violation of the tenth amendment .

thus , the question arises as to whether tenth amendment challenges can be brought when the federal government directs states on how to implement elections .

for instance , there have been several challenges to the motor voter act .

the motor voter act provides that a state driver's license application contain information enabling it to also serve as an application to register to vote in federal elections ; requires states to create a mail - order form for registering to vote ; and provides that states designate all offices that dispense welfare or provide benefits to the disabled as voter registration agencies .

in addition , the law requires that states assist voting by persons in certain vulnerable populations .

these provisions of the motor voter act have been found to fall within the power of congress .

as noted , congress has the authority under article i , section 4 , cl .

1 to provide for the "the times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives. .

in acorn v. edgar , for instance , the seventh circuit observed that the language of article i , section 4 , cl .

1 "is broadly worded and has been broadly interpreted. .

the court noted that the phrase "manner of holding elections" has been interpreted to include registering voters , and the power under the section has been held to extend beyond general federal elections to include even regulation of primaries .

further , the court noted that such authority as is found in article i , section 4 , cl .

1 is supplemented by the necessary and proper clause .

as noted , one might ask whether the principles of the tenth amendment would apply in this circumstance , so that directing state agencies to implement federal regulations would violate the "anti - commandeering" requirements of the tenth amendment .

however , such a tenth amendment argument was rejected in edgar .

the court in that case noted that the tenth amendment has no application to article i , section 4 , cl .

1 which clearly contemplates that states will have the burden of administering federal elections .

thus , this clause , unlike most other provisions of the constitution , is direct authority for congress to regulate states as to the "times , places and manner" of elections .

the court in edgar did note that there may be some theoretical limits to how congress exercises its power under article i , section 4 , cl .

1 .

for instance , the court contemplated that if congress attempted to use that power to "destroy state government" by deeming all employees of the state full - time federal voting registrars in order to make sure that every eligible federal voter in every state was registered , then the limits of the authority might be considered .

however , the court found that requirements imposed by the motor voter act or similar proposals did not represent an extraordinary financial or administrative burden on the state .

the spending clause grants congress the authority "to pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the united states...." under this power , congress has expansive authority to spend money for the general welfare , which could encompass making monies available to state and local governments to modify their election procedures .

further , the allocation of such grant monies could be conditioned on compliance by state or local officials with national standards for election procedures .

such grant conditions need not be limited by the authority of congress discussed above to directly legislate on the issue , but could address election procedures regardless of whether they were for the house , senate , presidential , state , or local elections .

considering the number of federal programs and the amount of federal funds provided to the states , this represents a significant power for congress to exercise .

although most grant conditions by congress are constitutionally uncontroversial , the supreme court has suggested that there are limits on the spending clause authority .

in south dakota v. dole , congress enacted the national minimum drinking age amendment of 1984 , which directed the secretary of transportation to withhold a percentage of federal highway funds from states in which the age for purchase of alcohol was below 21 years .

the state of south dakota , which permitted 19-year - olds to purchase beer , brought suit , arguing that the law was an invalid exercise of congress's power under the spending clause to provide for the "general welfare. .

the supreme court held that , as the indirect imposition of such a standard was directed toward the general welfare of the country , it was a valid exercise of congress's spending power .

the court did , however , note some limits to this power .

first , a grant condition must be related to the particular national projects or programs to which the money was being directed .

in dole , the congressional condition imposing a specific drinking age was found to be related to the national concern of safe interstate travel , which was one of the main purposes for highway funds being expended .

second , the court suggested that in some circumstances , the financial inducements offered by congress might be so coercive as to pass the point at which "pressure turns into compulsion," which would suggest a violation of the tenth amendment .

in dole , however , the percentage of highway funds that were to be withheld from a state with a drinking age below 21 was relatively small , so that congress's program did not coerce the states to enact higher minimum drinking ages than they would otherwise choose .

in the context of election regulation , it would appear that any proposed legislation to influence state behavior regarding elections would , under dole , have to involve federal funds that are in some way related to the funding of elections .

it is not clear , however , that the coercion analysis of dole would be applicable in all cases .

for instance , as noted previously in acorn v. edgar , the supreme court had found that tenth amendment commandeering limitations were not applicable to congressional authority over congressional elections , as the constitution contemplates that congress can dictate the manner in which the states administer such elections .

thus , it would appear that the tenth amendment limitations found in the coercion doctrine would apply only to those election contexts where congress did not already have legislative authority to regulate that state .

