this report describes the terms most commonly used when discussing the federal individual income tax .

the format of this report is structured to follow the general order of the irs form 1040 — the form individuals use to determine their income tax .

many taxpayers , however , determine their tax liability with the use of tax preparation software ( eg , turbotax® ) and paid tax preparers , which eliminates the need to be familiar with form 1040 .

therefore , taxpayers who rely on tax preparation software or services may not be familiar with some of the concepts presented in this report .

total income , also sometimes referred to as gross income , is the broadest measure of income used for tax purposes .

it is the total of all realized income recognized by the tax law .

it is measured net of business expenses but before any other deductions or adjustments .

it includes employee compensation such as wages , salaries , and tips ; taxable interest and dividend income ; business and farm income ( net of expenses ) ; realized capital gains ; income from rents , royalties , trusts , estates , and partnerships ; and taxable pensions and annuities .

gross income does not include income explicitly excluded from tax .

an exclusion is an item of income that is not included as income for tax purposes because the tax code explicitly excludes — or exempts — it from taxation .

examples of items of income which are exempt from federal income taxation and , hence , excluded from gross income , are state and local bond interest income , public assistance ( welfare ) , small gifts , employer contributions for health care , and employer - provided contributions to retirement plans .

social security and railroad retirement income may or may not be excluded from income subject to tax .

the taxability of social security and railroad retirement depends on the amount of other income the taxpayer receives .

other forms of income excluded from taxation are a clergy member's tax - free housing allowance , qualified foster care payments , and qualified scholarship and fellowship grants .

under certain conditions , a taxpayer can exclude a limited amount of disability pay such as workers' compensation .

except for tax - exempt interest , exclusions generally are not required to be reported to the internal revenue service .

a taxpayer's gross income is listed on line 22 of the form 1040 found in appendix a .

the individual components of a taxpayer's gross income are listed on lines 7 to 21 .

exclusions are not listed explicitly on the form 1040 .

adjustments to income , also known as above - the - line deductions , are allowed for certain payments made by the taxpayer and are generally related to the earning of income .

these payments are deducted from gross income in arriving at adjusted gross income .

payments that may qualify for an above - the - line deduction may include contributions to keogh or traditional ( but not roth ) individual retirement accounts ( iras ) , forfeited penalties on early withdrawals of savings , interest paid on student loans , moving expenses , and alimony payments .

adjustments to income function similarly to deductions .

however , unlike deductions , adjustments are made to arrive at adjusted gross income , and hence can be claimed by all qualified taxpayers , whether or not they use the standard deduction amount or have itemized deductions ( see " deductions " ) .

the sum of a taxpayer's adjustments to income is listed on line 36 on the form 1040 .

the individual components of a taxpayer's total adjustments to income are listed on lines 23 to 35 .

adjusted gross income ( agi ) is equal to a taxpayer's total income minus adjustments to income ( see previous two sections ) .

agi is the basic measure of income under the federal income tax and is the income measurement before deductions and personal exemptions are taken into account .

agi is commonly used as the base for computing many of the limits under the tax law , such as those on the itemized deduction for medical and dental expense and miscellaneous itemized deductions .

a taxpayer's adjusted gross income is listed on line 37 of the form 1040 and is carried over to line 38 so that the taxpayer may continue onto page 2 of the form 1040 .

deductions from adjusted gross income are allowed for certain types of expenditures of income .

deductions may be claimed in one of two ways .

first , taxpayers can choose to itemize ( explicitly list ) their deductible expenses .

itemized deductions are allowed for many purposes , including certain medical expenses ; state and local property taxes , income ( or sales ) taxes , and a few other taxes ; home mortgage interest , points , and limited amounts of other interest paid ( but not personal interest ) ; contributions to charitable organizations ; certain casualty and theft losses less $100 per event ; investment expenses ; tax preparation fees ; certain unreimbursed employee business expenses ; and a few other "miscellaneous" expenses .

alternatively , a taxpayer can choose to claim the so - called standard deduction , which was intended to reduce the complexity of paying taxes .

the standard deduction varies depending on filing status ( single , married filing jointly , head of household ) , whether the taxpayer is over 65 , and whether the taxpayer is blind .

for 2016 the standard deductions were as follows: $12,600 for married taxpayers filing jointly or qualified widow ( er ) s ; $6,300 for single taxpayers ; and $9,300 for taxpayers who qualify as the head of a household .

the standard deductions for those who are 65 or older and for those who are legally blind are increased by $1,550 if single or head of household and $1,250 if married filing jointly .

these increases apply per classification .

thus , a 70-year - old blind and single taxpayer would be eligible for a $3,100 increase in his or her standard deduction .

these amounts are adjusted annually for inflation .

only individuals with deductions that can be itemized in excess of the standard deduction find it worthwhile to itemize .

these tend to be taxpayers in the middle to high income ranges .

for the 2014 tax year ( the most recent data ) , approximately 30% of taxpayers itemized their deductions .

whichever deduction the taxpayer claims — itemized or standard — the deduction amount is subtracted from agi .

deductions function like adjustments and exclusions in their effect on tax liability .

deductions reduce a taxpayer's tax liability , but only by a percentage of the amount deducted .

an individual in the 35% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $35 for each $100 deduction while an individual in the 25% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $25 for each $100 deduction .

hence , the same deduction can be worth different amounts to different taxpayers depending on their marginal tax bracket .

more simply stated , the tax savings from deductions are generally equal to the taxpayer's tax rate times the amount of the deduction .

so higher - income taxpayers typically benefit more than lower - income taxpayers from deductions .

a taxpayer's standard or total itemized deductions are listed on line 40 of the form 1040 .

the individual components of the itemized deduction are listed on lines 1 to 28 on schedule a to form 1040 in appendix a .

before calculating total income , personal exemptions are allowed for the taxpayer , his or her spouse ( if married and filing a joint return ) , and each dependent .

if a taxpayer's agi is less than $155,650 each exemption claimed reduces income subject to taxation by $4,050 for tax year 2016 ( this amount is adjusted for inflation annually ) .

if a taxpayer's agi is greater than $155,650 , then they must reference the worksheet for determining the deduction for exemptions on page 23 of irs publication 501 .

the personal exemptions combined with the standard deduction amount are designed to remove low - income households from the tax rolls , and exempt a minimum level of income from taxation for other families .

the value of the personal exemptions is reduced or eliminated for certain taxpayers with a relatively high agi .

the number of exemptions a taxpayer claims is listed on line 6 of the form 1040 .

the value to the taxpayer of claiming this particular number of exemptions is found on line 42 .

taxable income , the narrowest measure of income used on the income tax return , is equivalent to adjusted gross income reduced by either the standard deduction or itemized deduction and the personal exemption .

taxable income is the base upon which the income tax rates are applied to calculate income tax liability .

taxable income is listed on line 43 of the form 1040 .

tax liability , also sometimes referred to as gross tax liability , is a taxpayer's tax liability prior to the subtraction of tax credits .

for most taxpayers , gross tax liability is equal to regular income tax liability , which is calculated by applying the marginal tax rate schedule to taxable income .

the structure of the marginal tax rate schedule is progressive , which means higher - earning taxpayers face higher tax rates on the last dollar that they earn .

to understand how the marginal tax structure is applied , consider the 2016 marginal tax rate schedule provided in appendix b .

the 2016 tax schedule shows the various tax rates and income ranges to which those rates are applied .

a married couple with a taxable income of $80,000 would fall into the 25% tax bracket .

this means that the first $18,550 of their taxable income would be taxed at a rate of 10% , their next $56,750 of income would be taxed at 15% , and the last $4,700 of income would be taxed at 25% .

a small fraction of taxpayers ( 4.8% in 2016 ) must also account for the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) when computing their gross tax liability .

the amt is calculated in the following manner .

first , an individual adds back certain tax deductions and tax preference items to taxable income .

this amount then becomes the amt tax base .

next , a basic exemption is allowed and subtracted from the amt tax base .

a two - tiered tax rate structure of 26% and 28% is then assessed against the remaining amt tax base to determine the amt liability .

if the amt liability exceeds a taxpayer's regular income liability a taxpayer must add the difference between the two to his or her regular income tax liability to arrive at gross tax liability .

congress , in 1969 , enacted the predecessor to the current individual amt to make sure that everyone paid at least a minimum of taxes and still preserve the economic and social incentives in the tax code .

a taxpayer's regular income tax liability is listed on line 44 of the form 1040 .

the amt liability is listed on line 45 of the form 1040 , and the gross tax liability is listed on line 47 of the form 1040 .

nonrefundable tax credits are subtracted from gross tax liability to arrive at a taxpayer's final tax liability .

thus , nonrefundable tax credits generally reduce an individual's tax liability directly , on a dollar - for - dollar basis , and are available to all qualified taxpayers .

a taxpayer may not claim more nonrefundable tax credits than his or her tax liability .

therefore , the only time in which nonrefundable tax credits do not result in a dollar - for - dollar reduction in an individual's tax liability is when the amount of nonrefundable tax credits exceeds the individual's tax liability .

a different class of tax credits , known as refundable tax credits , can be claimed even when they exceed an individual's tax liability .

refundable tax credits are discussed later in this report .

examples of nonrefundable credits are the credit for the elderly and the permanently and totally disabled , the credit for child and dependent care expenses , and the foreign tax credit .

the total amount of nonrefundable tax credits is found on line 55 of the form 1040 .

the individual nonrefundable credits are listed on lines 48 to 54 .

total tax liability , also sometimes referred to as final tax liability , is the amount of federal income tax owed by the taxpayer to the federal government after taking into account allowable refundable tax credits .

thus , total tax liability represents the taxpayer's total federal income tax bill for the tax year .

a taxpayer's total tax liability is found on line 63 of the form 1040 .

most taxpayers make periodic tax payments throughout the year via income withholdings that are credited against their federal income tax liability .

employees typically have a certain percentage of their paycheck withheld ( w - 2 withholding , named for the irs form w - 2 ) each pay period by their employer .

taxpayers who receive nonwage or nonsalary income , such as interest or dividend payments , debt cancelation , and certain other types of income , generally have a fraction of this income withheld ( 1099 withholding , again , named for irs form 1099 ) by the compensating party .

the withheld amounts are then forwarded to the irs .

some taxpayers make estimated tax payments throughout the year — typically quarterly .

there are a variety of reasons why estimated tax payments may be required — for example , when the taxpayer earns income not subject to withholding or when there is an expectation that a taxpayer may owe more than a certain amount in taxes even after accounting for withholdings and credits .

a taxpayer estimates the taxes owed on the income he or she earned in a particular quarter and pays this amount during the year rather than waiting until april 15 of the following year .

refundable tax credits are another form of tax "payment. .

refundable tax credits are similar to nonrefundable tax credits except that a taxpayer may claim refundable tax credits in an amount greater than his or her tax liability .

when the amount of refundable credits exceeds a taxpayer's tax liability , the treasury makes a direct payment to the taxpayer for the difference .

the primary refundable credits are the earned income tax credit and the child tax credit .

a taxpayer's total tax payment is found on line 74 of the form 1040 .

the individual components of a taxpayer's total tax payment are found on lines 64 to 73 .

a tax refund is a payment by the federal government to a taxpayer whose withheld taxes , estimated tax payments , and refundable credits exceeded final tax liability , entitling him or her to a refund for overpayment of the tax bill .

the amount of refunded taxes owed to a taxpayer may be found on line 75 of the form 1040 .

when a taxpayer's total tax liability exceeds federal taxes withheld , estimated tax payments , and refundable credits , then the taxpayer will owe the federal government an additional amount to cover the shortfall in paid taxes .

taxes owed are found on line 78 of the form 1040 .

appendix a .

2016 irs form 1040 2016 irs schedule a ( form 1040 ) appendix b .

2016 marginal tax rate schedul .

