the federal reserve's ( the fed's ) responsibilities as the nation's central bank fall into four main categories: monetary policy , provision of emergency liquidity through the lender of last resort function , supervision of certain types of banks and other financial firms for safety and soundness , and provision of payment system services to financial firms and the government .

congress has delegated responsibility for monetary policy to the fed , but retains oversight responsibilities to ensure that the fed is adhering to its statutory mandate of "maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates. .

the fed has defined stable prices as a longer - run goal of 2% inflation — the change in overall prices , as measured by the personal consumption expenditures ( pce ) price index .

by contrast , the fed states that "it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment ; rather , the committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment , recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. .

monetary policy can be used to stabilize business cycle fluctuations ( alternating periods of economic expansions and recessions ) in the short run , while it mainly affects inflation in the long run .

the fed's conventional tool for monetary policy is to target the federal funds rate — the overnight , interbank lending rate .

this report provides an overview of how monetary policy works and recent developments , a summary of the fed's actions following the financial crisis , and ends with a brief overview of the fed's regulatory responsibilities .

in december 2008 , in the midst of the financial crisis and the "great recession," the fed lowered the federal funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25% .

this was the first time rates were ever lowered to what is referred to as the zero lower bound .

the recession ended in 2009 , but as the economic recovery consistently proved weaker than expected in the years that followed , the fed repeatedly pushed back its time frame for raising interest rates .

as a result , the economic expansion was in its seventh year and the unemployment rate was already near the fed's estimate of full employment when it began raising rates on december 16 , 2015 .

this was a departure from past practice — in the previous two economic expansions , the fed began raising rates within three years of the preceding recession ending .

since then , the fed has continued to raise rates in a series of steps to incrementally tighten monetary policy .

the fed raised rates once in 2016 , three times in 2017 , and four times in 2018 , by 0.25 percentage points each time .

the fed has stated that "some further gradual increases in ... the federal funds rate" are necessary to fulfill its mandate .

the fed describes its plans as "data dependent," meaning they would be altered if actual employment or inflation deviate from its forecast .

although monetary policy is now less stimulative than it had been at the zero lower bound , the fed is still adding stimulus to the economy as long as the federal funds rate is below what economists call the "neutral rate" ( or the long - run equilibrium rate ) .

to illustrate , the federal funds rate is currently similar to the inflation rate , meaning that the real ( i.e. , inflation - adjusted ) federal funds rate is around zero .

however , there is uncertainty as to what constitutes a neutral rate today .

by historical standards , a zero real interest rate would be well below the neutral rate , but the neutral rate appears to have fallen following the financial crisis , so that current rates may be close to the neutral rate today .

typically , the fed keeps interest rates below the neutral rate when the economy is operating below full employment , at neutral levels when the economy is near full employment , and above the neutral rate when the economy is at risk of overheating .

indeed , the fed identifies this as one of its "three key principles of good monetary policy. .

because of lags between changes in interest rates and their economic effects , in the past , the fed has often preemptively changed its monetary policy stance before the economy reaches the state that the fed is anticipating .

in this business cycle , the fed has maintained a ( progressively less ) stimulative monetary policy throughout the expansion , boosting economic activity .

in one sense , this policy could be viewed as having successfully delivered on the fed's mandated goals of full employment and stable prices .

the unemployment rate has been below 5% since 2015 and is now lower than the rate believed to be consistent with full employment .

other labor market measures are also consistent with full employment , with the possible exception of the still - low labor force participation rate .

economic theory posits that lower unemployment will lead to higher inflation in the short run , but inflation has not proven responsive to lower unemployment in recent years .

after remaining persistently below the fed's 2% target from mid - 2012 to early 2018 as measured by core pce , inflation has remained around 2% in 2018 as measured by headline or core pce .

economic growth has also picked up beginning in the second quarter of 2017 , after being persistently low by historical standards throughout the expansion .

contributing to the 2018 growth acceleration , a more expansionary fiscal policy ( larger structural budget deficit ) added more stimulus to the economy in the short run .

two notable policy changes contributing to fiscal stimulus in 2018 were the 2017 tax cuts ( p.l .

115-97 ) and the boost to discretionary spending in fy2018 and fy2019 agreed to in p.l .

115-123 .

the fed did little to offset this fiscal stimulus , as the pace of monetary tightening in 2018 was only slightly faster than in 2017 .

despite strong economic data ( which is only available with a lag ) , the fed announced in january 2019 that it would be "patient" before raising rates again in light of increased economic uncertainty and financial volatility .

the fed's intended policy path poses risks .

if the fed waits too long to raise rates again , the economy could overheat , resulting in high inflation and posing risk to financial stability .

as an example of how overly stimulative monetary policy can lead to the latter , critics contend that the fed contributed to the precrisis housing bubble by keeping interest rates too low for too long during the economic recovery starting in 2001 .

critics see these risks as outweighing any marginal benefit associated with monetary stimulus when the economy is already so close to full employment .

raising rates more quickly would also provide more "headroom" for the fed to lower rates more aggressively during the next economic downturn .

the potential percentage point reduction in rates before hitting the zero bound is currently smaller than the rate cuts that the fed has undertaken in past recessions .

alternatively , there is uncertainty about whether strong growth , low unemployment , inflation around 2% , and the generally benign economic environment will continue .

economic expansions do not "die of old age" ; nevertheless , the current expansion is already the second longest on record and cannot last forever .

the flattening of the yield curve ( i.e. , long - term treasury yields are similar to short - term treasury yields ) is seen by some as a warning signal that rates are too high .

although there is a risk of stimulative monetary policy causing the economy to overheat , there is also a risk that tightening too quickly could be harmful if the economy slows .

some critics would prefer clear evidence that inflation is above the fed's target or financial conditions are unstable before the fed raises rates again .

monetary policy refers to the actions the fed undertakes to influence the availability and cost of money and credit to promote the goals mandated by congress , a stable price level and maximum sustainable employment .

because the expectations of households as consumers and businesses as purchasers of capital goods exert an important influence on the major portion of spending in the united states , and because these expectations are influenced in important ways by the fed's actions , a broader definition of monetary policy would include the directives , policies , statements , economic forecasts , and other fed actions , especially those made by or associated with the chairman of its board of governors , who is the nation's central banker .

the fed's federal open market committee ( fomc ) meets every six weeks to choose a federal funds target and sometimes meets on an ad hoc basis if it wants to change the target between regularly scheduled meetings .

the fomc is composed of the 7 fed governors , the president of the federal reserve bank of new york , and 4 of the other 11 regional federal reserve bank presidents serving on a rotating basis .

when the united states experienced the worst financial crisis since the great depression , the fed undertook increasingly unprecedented steps in an attempt to restore financial stability .

these steps included reducing the federal funds rate to the zero lower bound , providing direct financial assistance to financial firms , and "quantitative easing. .

these unconventional policy decisions continue to have consequences for monetary policy today , as the fed embarks on monetary policy "normalization. .

on october 29 , 2014 , the fed announced that it would stop making large - scale asset purchases at the end of the month .

now that qe is completed , attention has turned to the fed's "exit strategy" from qe and zero interest rates .

the fed laid out its plans to normalize monetary policy in a statement in september 2014 .

it plans to continue implementing monetary policy by targeting the federal funds rate .

the basic challenge to doing so is that the fed cannot effectively alter the federal funds rate by altering reserve levels ( as it did before the crisis ) because qe has flooded the market with excess bank reserves .

in other words , in the presence of more than $2 trillion in bank reserves , the market - clearing federal funds rate is close to zero even if the fed would like it to be higher .

the most straightforward way to return to normal monetary policy would be to remove those excess reserves by shrinking the balance sheet through asset sales .

the fed does not intend to sell any securities , however .

instead , it is gradually reducing the balance sheet by ceasing to roll over securities as they mature , which began in september 2017 — almost three years after qe ended .

initially , it allowed only $6 billion of treasuries and $4 billion of mbs to run off each month , which was gradually increased to $30 billion of treasuries and $20 billion of mbs per month , where it will remain until normalization is completed .

the fed believes that it would only cease shrinking the balance sheet or use qe again in the future if it its ability to stimulate the economy using reductions in the federal funds rate were insufficient .

the fed intends to ultimately reduce the balance sheet until it holds "no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. .

the fed has stated that it foresees a balance sheet size that is consistent with this goal will be larger than it was before the crisis .

in part , that is because other liabilities on the fed's balance sheet are larger — there is more currency in circulation now than there was before the crisis , and the treasury has kept larger balances on average in its account at the fed .

but the balance sheet will also be significantly larger because the fed decided in january 2019 to continue using its new method of targeting the federal funds rate even after normalization is completed .

under the new method , the federal funds rate is not determined by supply and demand in the market for bank reserves , and the fed would prefer to maintain abundant bank reserves so that it does not have to use open market operations to respond to changes in banks' demand for reserves .

by contrast , if it went back to the pre - crisis method of targeting the federal funds rate , only minimal excess reserve balances would be necessary ( but perhaps more than before the crisis ) , so its balance sheet could be much smaller .

the fed has not yet announced when the wind - down will be completed or how large the balance sheet would be upon completion , but the january 2019 fomc minutes noted the wind - down could be completed as soon as this year .

in that case , the balance sheet would not be much smaller than its current size of $4 trillion when normalization is completed — more than four times larger than its pre - crisis size .

although the fed has stated that it intends to eventually stop holding mbs , the fed would still have sizable mbs holdings in 2025 , according to projections from the new york fed .

in order to raise the federal funds rate in the presence of large reserves , the fed has raised the two market interest rates that are close substitutes — it has directly raised the rate it pays banks on reserves held at the fed and used large - scale reverse repurchase agreements ( repos ) to alter repo rates .

in 2008 , congress granted the fed the authority to pay interest on reserves .

because banks can earn interest on excess reserves by lending them in the federal funds market or by depositing them at the fed , raising the interest rate on bank reserves should also raise the federal funds rate .

in this way , the fed can lock up excess liquidity to avoid any potentially inflationary effects because reserves kept at the fed cannot be put to use by banks to finance activity in the broader economy .

in practice , the interest rate that the fed has paid banks on reserves has been slightly higher than the federal funds rate , which some have criticized as a subsidy to banks .

reverse repos are another tool for draining liquidity from the system and influencing short - term market rates .

they drain liquidity from the financial system because cash is transferred from market participants to the fed .

as a result , interest rates in the repo market , one of the largest short - term lending markets , rise .

the fed has long conducted open market operations through the repo market , but since 2013 it has engaged in a much larger volume of reverse repos with a broader range of nonbank counterparties , including the government - sponsored enterprises ( such as fannie mae and freddie mac ) and certain money market funds , through a new overnight reverse repurchase operations facility .

the fed is currently not capping the amount of overnight reverse repos offered through this facility .

there has been some concern about the potential ramifications of the fed becoming a dominant participant in this market and expanding its counterparties .

for example , will counterparties only be willing to transact with the fed in a panic , and will the fed be exposed to counterparty risk with nonbanks that it does not regulate ? .

the fed has distinct roles as a central bank and a regulator .

its main regulatory responsibilities are as follows: b ank regulation .

the fed supervises bank holding companies ( bhcs ) and thrift holding companies ( thcs ) , which include all large and thousands of small depositories , for safety and soundness .

the dodd - frank act requires the fed to subject bhcs with more than $50 billion in consolidated assets to enhanced prudential regulation ( i.e. , stricter standards than are applied to similar firms ) in an effort to mitigate the systemic risk they pose .

the fed is also the prudential regulator of u.s. branches of foreign banks and state banks that have elected to become members of the federal reserve system .

often in concert with the other banking regulators , it promulgates rules and supervisory guidelines that apply to banks in areas such as capital adequacy , and examines depository firms under its supervision to ensure that those rules are being followed and those firms are conducting business prudently .

the fed's supervisory authority includes consumer protection for banks under its jurisdiction that have $10 billion or less in assets .

p rudential regulat ion of nonbank systemically important financial institutions .

the dodd - frank act allows the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) to designate nonbank financial firms as systemically important ( sifis ) .

designated firms are supervised by the fed for safety and soundness .

since enactment , the number of designated firms has ranged from four , initially , to none today .

r egulation of the payment system .

the fed regulates the retail and wholesale payment system for safety and soundness .

it also operates parts of the payment system , such as interbank settlements and check clearing .

the dodd - frank act subjects payment , clearing , and settlement systems designated as systemically important by the fsoc to enhanced supervision by the fed ( along with the securities and exchange commission and the commodity futures trading commission , depending on the type of system ) .

m argin requirements .

the fed sets margin requirements on the purchases of certain securities , such as stocks , in certain private transactions .

the purpose of margin requirements is to mandate what proportion of the purchase can be made on credit .

the fed attempts to mitigate systemic risk and prevent financial instability through these regulatory responsibilities , as well as through its lender of last resort activities and participation on the fsoc ( whose mandate is to identify risks and respond to emerging threats to financial stability ) .

the fed has focused more on attempting to mitigate systemic risk through its regulations since the financial crisis , and has also restructured its internal operations to facilitate a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation .

