land management is a principal mission for four federal agencies: the bureau of land management ( blm ) , the national park service ( nps ) , and the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) ; and the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture .

together , these agencies administer 626 million acres , about 95% of all federal lands .

in addition , the agencies have various programs that provide financial and technical assistance to state or local governments , other federal agencies , and / or private landowners .

the four agencies have substantial annual budget authority: $15.1 billion in fy2009 — $1.76 billion for the blm ; $3.67 billion for the nps ; $2.72 billion for the fws ; and $7.00 billion for the fs .

most of the fy2009 funds — $12.4 billion ( 82% ) — came from annual appropriations , but each agency has numerous trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority that provides funding without any subsequent action by congress .

many of the accounts with mandatory spending authority are quite modest , but a few exceed $100 million in annual funding .

the mandatory spending is generally valued by the agencies and supported by many interest groups .

however , other groups have expressed concerns about the incentive structures and impacts on taxpayers of the trust funds and special funds with mandatory spending authority .

this report summarizes the mandatory spending provided to the four major federal land management agencies ; it excludes all programs that have appropriations in the annual interior appropriations acts .

it discusses relevant issues for congress , then defines and describes mandatory spending , and presents a general overview of the types of sources and uses of such mandatory spending .

these are followed by descriptions of each agency's accounts with mandatory spending authority .

the information is drawn largely from the agencies' annual budget justifications that are submitted to the appropriations committees , and from the statutes that provided each mandatory spending authority .

the report concludes with a summary and comparison of the agencies' programs .

congress is responsible for enacting all appropriations for agency programs .

for many trust funds and special funds , congress has provided mandatory spending , which requires no annual enactments by the appropriations committees .

a number of issues arise for congress in providing mandatory spending .

some general issues are relevant for all such spending , while other issues are relevant only for one of the purposes for which such spending is generally provided — grant programs that provide benefits to particular groups who pay the fees ; agency activities for federal land management ; and compensation programs to state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

the constitution ( article i , § 9 ) prohibits withdrawing funds from the treasury unless they are appropriated by law , but there is no constitutional limit on the duration of an appropriation .

most programs receive their funds through appropriations bills enacted each year ( called discretionary funds ) .

some , however , are established with mandatory spending ( also called direct spending or permanent appropriations ) in the law that created them .

two terms — trust fund and special fund — commonly used in federal budget documents are often misunderstood , because the "federal budget meaning of the word 'trust,' as applied to trust fund accounts , differs significantly from the private sector usage. .

in a glossary of federal budget terms , one distinction between trust funds and special funds is that trust funds are designated as trust funds in their authorizing legislation .

confusion over the operation of federal trust funds and special funds is typically greatest where there is a disparity between the receipts supplying the account and the amount obligated annually ; generally , the greater the disparity between receipts and obligations , the greater the confusion over "special" funding that is not immediately available for spending .

the authorizing legislation for many , but not all , trust funds and special funds includes mandatory spending authority .

mandatory spending can generally be identified in the authorization by the phrase "available without further appropriation" ( or similar language ) , meaning the funds in these accounts can be spent by the relevant agency without any additional action by congress .

the money in any trust fund or special fund created without such language generally can be spent only when congress enacts an appropriation from that account .

these funds depend on current or discretionary appropriations , and are not included in this report .

this section describes the accounts with mandatory spending authority of each of the four federal land management agencies .

it includes full descriptions of each fund with at least $25 million in total fy2005-fy2009 budget authority .

the descriptions include the enabling legislation , the source and uses of the funds , and the fy2005-fy2009 budget authority .

the accounts are listed in decreasing amount of total budget authority over the five fiscal years .

also , for each agency , there is an "other accounts" entry to identify accounts with less than $5 million in average annual budget authority over the five years .

some of these other accounts had $0 in budget authority , generally because the fund is relatively new ( i.e. , sufficient receipts have not yet accumulated ) .

each of the four major federal land management agencies has numerous special funds and trust funds with mandatory spending authority — money available to be spent without further action by congress .

most of these accounts are funded by receipts from the sale , lease , or use of federal lands and resources .

other funding sources include excise taxes , license fees , import duties , donations , and the u.s. treasury .

for many accounts , the amount deposited is dictated by the authorizing legislation ; the excise tax rates for the pittman - robertson fund , for example , are specified in law , while deposits of import duties for the reforestation trust fund are limited to $30 million annually .

for other accounts , the agency has some discretion in determining the deposits ; for example , the fs and blm determine whether a timber sale is salvage , with the receipts deposited in specific accounts .

the mandatory spending authorities for these four agencies generally are used for one of three purposes: to fund agency activities ; to compensate state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands ; or to fund grants , with a formula allocation or through competition .

mandatory spending for agency activities can be contentious , especially if the fund can be used for several , possibly competing purposes and the agency has the discretion to allocate the funds among those purposes .

in contrast , the grant programs typically have not been controversial , and are likely to remain uncontroversial as long as the payers and the beneficiaries are nearly identical .

the compensation programs have generally not been controversial , largely because the compensation level has been established in law .

the fs 25% payments and the blm o&c payments have generated congressional interest in recent years , because declining federal timber sales have substantially reduced their compensation payments .

congress has enacted a temporary substitute in the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-393 ) , as amended .

congress is likely to renew the debate over the mandatory spending for these programs before the current temporary provisions expire at the end of fy2011 .

the blm has 31 trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority .

of these , 12 had average annual budget authority exceeding $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 .

all but one are funded from agency receipts for the sale or use of lands and resources ; the exception is one of the largest — the o&c county payments , which is currently ( and temporarily ) funded in large part from the general treasury .

average annual budget authority for the 28 accounts for fy2005-fy2009 totaled $824 million , accounting for 44% of blm funding .

nine of the accounts ( $198 million ) are compensation programs and the other 22 ( $626 million ) fund blm activities .

the nps has 17 trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority .

of these , 7 had average annual budget authority exceeding $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 .

all the accounts are funded from agency receipts .

average annual budget authority for the 17 accounts for fy2005-fy2009 totaled $335 million , accounting for 12% of nps funding .

only two of the accounts ( both less than $0.5 million ) are compensation programs ; the other 15 fund nps activities .

the fws has the fewest trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority , with 10 .

of these , half had average annual budget authority exceeding $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 .

average annual budget authority for the 10 accounts for fy2005-fy2009 totaled $798 million , 36% of total fws funding .

many are funded from agency receipts , but the two largest accounts ( together $729 million ) are funded largely from excise taxes and import duties , and the majority of the spending grants funds to the states under fixed formulas .

one account , which uses receipts supplemented with annual appropriations , is a compensation account .

another is used exclusively for land acquisition .

the other six accounts fund agency activities .

the fs has 23 trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority .

of these , 13 had average annual budget authority exceeding $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 .

most are funded from agency receipts for the sale or use of lands and resources .

one exception is the largest account — the 25% payments to states , which is currently ( and temporarily ) funded in large part from the general treasury .

another is the reforestation trust fund , which is funded from tariffs on imported wood products .

the third exception is licensee fees for the use of smokey bear and woodsy owl .

average annual budget authority for the 23 accounts for fy2005-fy2009 totaled $764 million , accounting for 22% of non - fire fs funding .

three of the accounts ( $375 million ) are compensation programs ; the other 20 ( $390 million , plus a portion of the largest compensation account ) fund fs activities .

several of the fs accounts have existed for many years , with five predating world war ii ; the earliest was created in 1908 .

