the rulers of the former soviet union proclaimed the high quality of their socialized healthcare system .

during this period , health information was closely guarded and some official health statistics were viewed by outside experts as highly suspect .

soviet data showed numbers of hospital beds and doctors per capita as among the highest in the world and life spans comparable to those in other developed countries .

as became more apparent after the soviet collapse at the end of 1991 , such data were often incomplete or falsified and covered up substantial and growing health problems .

the newly independent eurasian states of the former soviet union faced problems sustaining the huge , expensive , and ineffective healthcare systems they inherited .

health conditions seemed to deteriorate during the 1990s , as measured by life expectancy at birth , infant and maternal mortality , drug addiction , rates of infectious disease , and other measures .

efforts to turn around this state of affairs accelerated in the 2000s , but in many respects these states still face some health challenges common to developing countries .

these challenges , according to many observers , continue to hinder economic and democratic development in the states .

the eurasian states and international organizations are the sources of data used in this report .

in some cases , international organizations have provided estimates when the data supplied by the eurasian state have not complied with the data definitions of the world health organization .

besides healthcare quality and access , factors affecting health touched on but not analyzed in detail in this report include poverty rates , conflict , living and working conditions , and the environment .

u.s. health assistance to eurasia began even before the collapse of the soviet union with a public - private medical aid program to distribute pharmaceuticals and medical supplies to the soviet republics .

later , the george h.w .

bush and clinton administrations led international efforts to address needs in eurasia , including health needs to some degree .

the 1992 freedom support act ( p.l .

102-511 ) , the major authorization for aid to eurasia , included the provision of medicine and medical supplies and equipment and other aid to create quality healthcare and family planning services as among the priorities of u.s. assistance .

in the early 1990s , however , u.s. and western donors lacked a clear picture of health conditions in the eurasian states — largely because of the mostly sanguine picture painted by soviet health officials — and some donors tended to assume that a short - term aid infusion would put eurasian health systems "back on their feet" in a short time .

it later became clear that the eurasian states faced massive health problems that would be hard to ameliorate .

as related by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , "the assumption underlying usaid assistance programs to europe and eurasia at the beginning of the 1990s was that democratic reform and free - market economic growth would sustain and improve social sector conditions , including health. .

however , the complexities and pre - existing inadequacies of healthcare in the region belied this assumption , according to usaid .

as part of the legacy of the former soviet union , the eurasian states inherited a large centralized and state - owned healthcare apparatus that provided good care for some medical conditions but relied on outdated practices to treat other illnesses .

the health of soviet citizens lagged behind that of u.s. and other western populations in terms of access to many new medical procedures and medicines and even in terms of prosaic measures such as the number of hospitals with plumbing and heat .

the healthcare system emphasized a large number of specialized medical facilities with large staffs and prolonged hospitalizations , rather than primary and preventive care , including regular check - ups .

the healthcare system was isolated from changing world standards of treatment of diseases such as tb , it followed secretive practices that prevented the operation of a competent disease surveillance system , and it suffered from a lack of medical supplies and equipment outside of the major medical centers .

the emphasis on specialized and hospital care meant that primary care and early diagnosis were starved of funds .

after the eurasian states gained independence , the new international borders separated many medical industries from their customers in other countries and required the re - negotiation of business relations that are still not wholly satisfactory .

despite this shared legacy , the eurasian states emerged from the soviet collapse with varying health situations .

some of the eurasian states had better healthcare facilities and healthier populations than others .

many observers have viewed central asia's population as having suffered the most from inadequate healthcare during the soviet period .

the western eurasian states had older populations than the central asian states at the time of the soviet collapse , reflecting differences in fertility and mortality .

environmental catastrophe affected health in several regions , including the chernobyl area ( radiation fallout in ukraine and belarus ) , chelyabinsk area ( radiation contamination in russia and kazakhstan ) , semipalatinsk ( radiation from nuclear weapons testing in kazakhstan ) and the aral sea area ( desertification in kazakhstan and uzbekistan ) .

the eurasian states also differed in their rates of economic decline during the 1990s .

the extent to which decreases occurred in related areas varied as well , such as healthcare funding , the diets of the people , and living conditions , all of which affected morbidity and mortality .

conflicts in eurasia also damaged health , leading to casualties , injuries , orphans , and displaced persons who suffered physically and psychologically .

in the post - soviet era , demographers have been able to scrutinize previously suppressed health data and conduct analyses that suggest that some aspects of the health crisis in russia and other eurasian states can be traced back to the 1960s .

a major indicator of overall health , life expectancy , peaked in the 1960s and began a downward trend in russia and other republics of the former soviet union by the late 1960s .

this downward trend has been linked by research to an increase in alcoholism , violence , tobacco use , and poor diets .

another peak occurred in the mid - 1980s , mostly attributed to government restrictions on alcohol consumption .

most observers agree that in the early years after the soviet union collapsed , there were major declines in health in virtually all eurasian states in terms of such measures as infant mortality , alcoholism , and cardiovascular disease .

the central asian states suffered the greatest declines in eurasia in life expectancy , increased morbidity , deterioration of conditions in hospitals and other health facilities , and failures to control and prevent infectious diseases .

in the late 2000s , health conditions have improved in some respects , but by many measures — including life expectancy , under - 5 and maternal mortality , tb rates , hiv / aids rates , and alcoholism ( in the western nis ) , the eurasian countries continue to lag behind most developed countries .

according to one usaid report that ranked eastern european and eurasian states in terms of various health factors , all the eurasian states except belarus ranked among the bottom one - half of the 28 countries considered .

the most vulnerable countries were kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , russia , tajikistan , and turkmenistan .

such poor health conditions , usaid warned , "diminish society's productive capacity , deteriorates the strength of civil society , and tarnishes people's perceptions of the benefits of democracy and free - market economies .

poor health is , therefore , not only a threat in its own right ; it is a threat to economic and democratic progress. .

health challenges in all the eurasian states loom larger because of the very low percentages of gross domestic product ( gdp ) they have devoted to healthcare .

table 3 shows gdp per capita in the eurasian states and the percent going to health .

health spending levels are low in the eurasian states in comparison to the 8.5% on average spent in the organization for economic cooperation and development countries ( oecd ; composed mostly of european countries and the united states ) , except for georgia , where the percentage of spending virtually matches the oecd percentage .

soon after he came to power in russia in 2000 , then - president putin began dedicating more budgetary resources to address health problems .

a national health project , one of four national priority projects , was launched in 2005 as the centerpiece of his effort to improve healthcare .

pay for doctors and nurses was boosted , new equipment for medical centers was provided , and the number of ambulances was increased .

with the injection of added funds from the national priority health program , healthcare spending in russia in 2006 finally rose above the level of such spending during the soviet period .

in late 2007 , president putin issued a decree to implement a concept for a demographic policy for the russian federation up to 2025 that called for an increase in life expectancy to 75 years of age and increases in childbirth and immigration .

through these means , it is hoped that russia's population will stabilize at 142-143 million by 2015 and will increase to 145 million by 2025 .

these hopes may be unrealistic , since even russia's state statistical agency forecasts that the population will decline to less than 136 million by 2025 .

the concept may be relying on an unlikely surge in non - ethnic russian immigration , which many ethnic russians oppose .

in late 2008 , a russian government commission released an associated healthcare development concept to 2020 that called for improving the quality of medical care ; educating people to adopt healthy lifestyles ; reversing the decline of the population ; and increasing life expectancy .

to achieve these goals , the concept called for increasing the provision of medicines ; reducing out - of - pocket expenses for medical care ; boosting the qualifications of healthcare personnel and creating a system of incentives to ensure high - quality work ; and providing exercise and sports facilities and taking other measures to facilitate healthy lifestyles .

summing up the 2009 results of the national health project , deputy prime minister alexander zhukov announced in early 2010 that the size of the population for the first time in fifteen years grew slightly ; that life expectancy increased by 1.2 years to over 69 years for both sexes ; that mortality rates for most diseases decreased ; that the number of deaths caused by alcohol poisoning fell by 32% ; that a pilot program had resulted in fewer road deaths ; and that healthcare for infants had improved .

at a government meeting in mid - april 2010 , prime minister putin stated that he had "dramatically increased" healthcare spending from 225.4 billion rubles in 2000 to 1.5 trillion rubles in 2009 .

he stressed , however , that healthcare problems still existed , as indicated by the low level of public satisfaction with healthcare , regional disparities in the funding and availability of healthcare , inefficient spending on unnecessary hospitals , out - of - pocket expenses for necessary procedures , and inadequate outpatient and preventative care .

in his state of the government address to the legislature on april 20 , 2010 , putin announced that he was boosting funds for the national health project .

faltering healthcare in central asia has been reflected in decreasing life spans , high infant and maternal mortality rates , and increases in cardiovascular / circulatory , parasitic , infectious , and respiratory diseases .

while the spread of tb and hepatitis in central asia is most worrisome , the u.n. office coordinating u.n. interagency and international aid efforts on hiv / aids ( the joint united nations program on hiv / aids , or unaids ) has pointed to rising hiv prevalence ( the number of people living with hiv ) in kazakhstan and elsewhere in central asia as a global concern .

poor sanitation and increasing drug abuse , tobacco and alcohol use , malnutrition , diet deficiencies , and tainted blood supplies contribute to declining health .

healthcare reforms have focused on making the healthcare system more efficient by closing excess hospitals and on obtaining more funding through taxes and payroll deductions .

the latter efforts have faltered , resulting in a heavy reliance on user fees for service .

kyrgyzstan has made the most progress in healthcare reform ( though its fragile economy places them at risk ) , and tajikistan and turkmenistan the least .

the health consequences of poor quality healthcare seriously constrain economic development in the region , according to many observers .

 table 1 and table 2 show the amount of health aid to the eurasian states provided or proposed for fy1992-fy2011 ( data for fy1992-fy2008 include all funding sources and agency spending , while data for fy2009-fy2011 include "function 150" foreign assistance funding ) .

u.s. assistance budgeted for fy1992-fy2010 for health was less than 5% of total aid to eurasia of about $35.3 billion ( excluding the value of privately donated cargoes ) , indicating the relatively low priority of such aid .

u.s. government health aid to eurasia has been far less than private donations of medical goods and expertise , which were worth about $4.2 billion during fy1992-fy2010 .

the biggest change in appropriations for healthcare over the period fy1992-fy2011 appears to be associated with the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , which led to greater recognition of the national security implications of world health problems .

before 9 / 11 , health aid held fairly steady at about 3% or less of eurasian funding from fy1998 through fy2001 , and amounted to an average of about $39 million per fiscal year .

for fy2002 and thereafter , funding tripled as a percentage , to about 9% , and amounted to an average of about $66 million per fiscal year .

although levels of funding appear linked to the events of september 11 , 2001 , programmatic emphases have changed over various u.s .

administrations .

the former clinton administration asked congress in 1997 to begin supporting a new "partnership for freedom" initiative as part of boosted eurasian assistance that would emphasize grass - roots economic and social reforms , including health .

additional aid was sought for hospital and health facility partnerships , programs to combat infectious diseases , and efforts to bolster clean water supplies , childhood survival , and maternal health .

the request for a large boost in eurasian aid was not supported by congress , but many of the programmatic emphases , including health aid , were endorsed by congress .

building on the "partnership for freedom" initiative , usaid increasingly emphasized social needs in eurasia .

usaid came to argue that economic reforms in the eurasian states had not always contributed to the growth of middle classes , and also helped create "a new class of chronically poor," who lost the meager state benefits they received under communism .

while democratization and economic reforms remained u.s. objectives , usaid stressed that without adequate healthcare and other social services , populations in the eurasian states would lose faith in the reform process .

usaid stated that it would increasingly take social issues into account in designing and implementing programs , so that "the broadest possible spectrum of [eurasian] citizens ... have the opportunity to enjoy the benefits of reform. .

in 2005 , usaid's bureau for europe and eurasia launched a health sector strategy: 2005-2010 and beyond that called for u.s. health assistance to be used "to improve the health of [europe and eurasian] populations in order to support a successful transition to democracy and free - market economies. .

the strategy "builds upon the region's current epidemiological and economic realities and usaid's experience and successes to date .

it preserves a focus on hiv / aids , tuberculosis and reproductive health , while explicitly recognizing the enormous deleterious effect that non - communicable disease is having on the region. .

usaid has long stressed the restructuring of post - soviet healthcare systems in order to improve measures of health in eurasia .

programs to "strengthen" healthcare systems deal with public - private partnerships ; finance , policy , management , and organization ( including devolution and decentralization and provider payment systems ) ; procurement ( including rational drug use ) ; primary care , family medicine , and public health ; quality improvement ; information systems ; human resources development ; privatization , and ngo development .

usaid's quality public health and primary health care in central asia ( "zdrav - reform," "zdrav plus," and "zdrav plus ii" ) began in 1994 ( involving four of the five regional states ; tajikistan joined in 2005 ) , and by the end of 2009 , $30 million had been allocated to the program to restructure the health care systems of the states to bolster the government's stewardship ( policies , laws , and institutions ) of healthcare , financing , and delivery , particularly of primary care .

usaid has leveraged the program through partnership with the world bank and the asian development bank , and has reported that the program "has helped central asian countries make tremendous advances in structuring their health systems to operate efficiently and to respond to the health care needs of their populations. .

among other programs , beginning in 2005 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria — a governmental public / private partnership organization that receives the largest share of funding from the united states — has permitted countries to apply for funds for health systems strengthening purposes as well as for disease - specific components .

among eurasian states , only georgia has applied for such funds , but its proposal was not funded .

private donations of medical goods and expertise include those provided through the health partnerships program , implemented by the american international health alliance ( aiha ; a public - private organization that leverages government and private funding to foster cooperation between u.s. hospitals and healthcare providers and eurasian medical facilities and experts for aid efforts focusing on educational activities and professional exchanges ) .

private donations that do not use u.s. subsidized transport are not included in this total .

dozens of primary , urgent , or other healthcare partnerships launched by aiha are active in all twelve eurasian states .

operation provide hope , an interagency program launched in 1992 , and usaid's ocean freight program provide u.s. funded transport services for private donations of medical goods .

the value of health - related donated cargoes has declined somewhat over the years , from a high of $372 million in fy1993 to $150 million in fy2008 .

when the value of the privately donated cargoes that are transported with government support are added , u.s. public and private health - related assistance amounts to about $4.9 billion in total aid to eurasia in fy1992-fy2008 ( see text box ) .

besides usaid health - related programs , the department of state coordinates efforts by the department of health of human services and other agencies to redirect former soviet biological warfare scientists to peaceful research , with a focus on healthcare ( such as drug and vaccine development for the control of tuberculosis , hepatitis , hiv / aids and other infectious diseases ) .

in addition , some activities of the moscow and kiev science and technology centers , funded by the state department , deal with biomedical research by eurasian scientists .

with major u.s. backing , a civilian research and development foundation ngo was set up in 1995 , including a biomedical and behavioral sciences program that carries out collaborative medical research , funded by the u.s. state , defense , and commerce departments , nih , and others .

programs involving retraining for scientists from russia , ukraine , and from central asia who previously worked on biological and chemical warfare have increased in keeping with post - 9 / 11 u.s. security emphases .

among other eurasian health programs , the peace corps has carried out preventive health education in armenia , kazakhstan , and moldova , and community health development activities in turkmenistan and uzbekistan .

peace corps programs in kazakhstan , moldova , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan stress education on preventing hiv / aids , and in kazakhstan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan emphasize maternal and child health .

the defense department has donated military hospitals under the excess defense articles program and has provided follow - on equipment packages and training to virtually all of the eurasian states during fy1992-fy2008 .

the obama administration boosted health aid as a percentage of assistance to eurasia in fy2010 and fy2011 ( see table 2 ) .

in fy2010 , the administration increased health assistance by about $10 million , mainly to tajikistan , ukraine , and uzbekistan , while continuing to support relatively high health funding in russia .

in boosting health aid to tajikistan and uzbekistan , the administration emphasized that they are on the "front lines" of counter - terrorism efforts in afghanistan , and in the case of ukraine , that its integration with the west is a priority .

the administration averred that in tajikistan , "support to strengthen border security , counter - narcotics efforts , democratic reforms , health , education , and economic growth is key to improving tajikistan's role as a bulwark against regional threats such as terrorism and drugs," and warned that "tajikistan's needs in health and education are so severe that they jeopardize progress in other priority objectives. .

the administration stressed that "ukraine has one of the world's fastest rates of increase in pre - epidemic hiv and tb infection .

assistance programs to arrest the spread of hiv / aids will also help prevent mother - to - child hiv / aids transmission , address the spread of multi - drug resistant tb strains , and stem the potential long - term disruption hiv / aids poses to ukraine's economic growth. .

the administration stated that bilateral relations with uzbekistan appeared to be improving and that the united states would engage the uzbek people directly through health assistance .

for fy2011 , usaid has called for health assistance to continue to all the eurasian states to address needs that still place them within the category of "developing countries" in terms of some communicable and non - communicable diseases .

there is considerable debate about u.s. health assistance to eurasia .

many of the arguments focus on the merits of maintaining health assistance , the application of health assistance , and the extent to which the recipient countries demonstrate a commitment to improving health .

those who endorse continued or expanded u.s. health aid to the eurasian states argue that disease outbreaks in eurasia , whether the result of nature or bio - terrorism , are among those that might spread to u.s. shores .

particularly since 9 / 11 , they emphasize the significance to homeland security of disease prevention and surveillance beyond u.s. shores .

other observers argue that infectious disease rates are not as high in eurasia as in other developing countries , and do not threaten u.s. interests as severely .

a number of analysts concerned about the possible impact of infectious diseases on security are particularly troubled by the vulnerability of u.s. defense personnel involved in exchanges , exercises , training , or transit in eurasia .

u.s. security interests may be served by bolstering the health of eurasia's military forces and civilian populations .

declining health in the military and security forces can harm their ability to combat terrorism and drug trafficking , to ensure the safety and security of weapons of mass destruction , and otherwise to defend the territorial integrity of the states .

if the military forces are less capable of carrying out these missions , then u.s. border , customs , and security aid ( recently boosted by the administration and congress ) , may be less effective than anticipated , according to this argument .

u.s. health aid has been considered by several eurasian military establishments as a major benefit of military - to - military cooperation , according to u.s. defense officials .

critics counter that the u.s. military is always concerned about protecting personnel from disease , and that eurasian military personnel are no more dangerous than the personnel of other countries with large health problems .

many observers stress that u.s. interests in economic and political reforms in eurasia may be undermined by health problems in the countries .

adverse health trends in russia may be a drag on economic reforms , foster civil unrest , encourage a countervailing political authoritarianism , and perhaps lead to a more internationally belligerent , nuclear - armed russia , they argue .

even small increases in health aid may pay big dividends in discouraging such developments in russia , some observers argue .

however , as table 3 indicates , governments of the eurasian states are spending a very small percentage of their budgets on health .

without greater commitments by the states to healthcare , u.s. and international assistance may not have a lasting impact on healthcare .

in addition , the states must address the societal roots of health problems such as alcohol and drug abuse , and homicides and suicides .

the united states faces competing priorities for its aid dollars and limits on its ability to fund healthcare reforms in eurasia .

observers who urge greater emphasis on u.s. health aid to eurasia argue that small increases in such aid may pay big dividends in lowering disease rates and ameliorating social discontent in the eurasian states .

some call for much larger commitments to meet pressing health needs in eurasia , perhaps by shifting aid from democratization and economic reform programs .

many urge caution in taking on new eurasian health aid commitments unilaterally .

the states face interrelated and costly healthcare , public health infrastructure , and environmental problems — such as deteriorating hospitals , failing water and sanitary systems , radiation hazards in kazakhstan's semipalatinsk nuclear testing site , and pollution around the aral sea — that demand large - scale , sustained , and in many cases , multinational attention .

congress and the executive branch have clashed for several years over how much aid to provide for eurasia .

annual u.s. health aid to the eurasian states rose somewhat after 9 / 11 .

one possible way to address the need for more health assistance in the region would be to increase the percent of foreign aid devoted to health or to establish congressional guidelines for the amount of aid to be provided for health assistance to eurasia .

either of these changes would require further shifts in u.s. policy , which for a long time focused on democratization and economic reforms and arms control in eurasia .

also , there may be a need to consider longer - term health aid commitments , particularly if u.s. assistance is targeted more to healthcare institution - building and reform efforts that aim to bolster the ability of the eurasian states to meet their own needs .

in recent years , freedom support act authorized health assistance has been supplemented by funding from other accounts , seemingly reflecting a greater recognition of specific health needs in eurasia .

the regional states have received $84.2 million from the child survival and health programs fund ( csh ) account since fy2001 and $13.5 million from the global hiv / aids initiative since fy2005 .

in addition , russia and ukraine received $2.2 million in economic support funds devoted to healthcare improvements in fy2004 .

other analysts urge congress to alter the distribution of aid among the eurasian states .

between fy1992 and fy2008 , the largest aid amounts have gone to armenia , kazakhstan , russia , ukraine and uzbekistan .

much less health assistance has been provided to azerbaijan , belarus , moldova , and turkmenistan .

some experts maintain that this distribution of aid is not clearly matched to the health status of the states .

instead , a number of considerations seem to influence decision - making on the distribution of aid besides targeting it to the most needy eurasian states , including the degree to which aid should be targeted to the closest or most strategic u.s. friends or to the most democratic and market - oriented states .

such determinations are complicated by the added desirability of targeting u.s. aid to eurasian states where governments are receptive , honest , and efficient at carrying out healthcare reforms , although these conditions are scarcely met in any of the eurasian states .

in russia and other eurasian states , many critics charge , the governments are highly corrupt , inefficient , and not focused on health budgets , policies , and stewardship .

in such conditions , u.s. and international medical assistance to the eurasian states risks being undermined or redirected for political purposes .

in some cases , eurasian governments have blocked medical as well as other humanitarian aid to civilians for political and military purposes ( such as in chechnya ) , using it as a weapon to bring populations and separatist movements into line .

to help circumvent problems with governments , some observers have argued that u.s. health aid should focus more on high - quality indigenous health - related ngos in eurasia , to ensure that aid is used properly and to strengthen long - term self - help capabilities , while others caution that in most of eurasia , such local ngos are still hard to find .

among possibly clashing u.s. aid objectives , u.s. health aid shifted to disaster assistance or to idps and refugees in an eurasian state may shortchange health aid support for the rest of a country's population .

this problem was avoided in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict by providing supplemental funding for georgia and directing that already allocated aid could not be reprogrammed without notification .

usaid family planning programs in eurasia must comply with policy promoting maternal health and the provision of modern contraception methods that counteract the inordinately high rates of abortion throughout the region .

usaid has argued that while most eurasian states have made at least some progress in health sector reform in recent years , a few have witnessed worsening health conditions since the early 1990s , and it will take several more years before they are ready to have such aid phased out .

in a 2007 report analyzing the health situation in europe and eurasia , usaid judged turkmenistan , tajikistan , kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , and russia as the countries where health status was the poorest and where democratization and the transition to free markets appeared to be most vulnerable to setbacks because of health problems .

although public expenditures on health had increased in eurasia over the years , they were still low relative to needs and contributed to a low supply of medicines , low quality of services , and low salaries for health workers , according to usaid .

s.res .

499 ( feingold ) .

a resolution supporting the goals and ideals of world malaria day , and reaffirming united states leadership and support for efforts to combat malaria as a critical component of the president's global health initiative .

introduced on april 22 , 2010 .

submitted in the senate , considered , and agreed to without amendment and with a preamble by unanimous consent on april 22 , 2010 .

h.r .

5121 ( clark ) .

the global sexual and reproductive health act of 2010 .

to promote the sexual and reproductive health of individuals and couples in developing countries , and for other purposes .

introduced on april 22 , 2010 .

referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

h.r .

4933 ( lee ) .

the global health act of 2010 .

to establish a strategy to coordinate all health - related united states foreign assistance , to assist developing countries in improving delivery of health services , and to establish an initiative to assist developing countries in strengthening their indigenous health workforces , and for other purposes .

introduced on march 24 , 2010 .

referred to the committee on foreign affairs and the committee on financial services .

s. 3135 ( durbin ) .

the global health care cooperation act .

to enhance global healthcare cooperation , and for other purposes .

introduced on march 17 , 2010 .

referred to the committee on the judiciary .

s.res .

454 ( brown ) .

a resolution supporting the goals of world tuberculosis day to raise awareness about tuberculosis .

introduced on march 15 , 2010 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

s. 1966 ( dodd ) .

the global child survival act of 2009 .

to provide assistance to improve the health of newborns , children , and mothers in developing countries , and for other purposes .

introduced on october 28 , 2009 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

h.r .

3560 ( sires ) / s. 1591 ( murray ) .

the 21 st century global health technology act .

to amend the foreign assistance act of 1961 , to establish the health technology program in the united states agency for international development to research and develop technologies to improve global health , and for other purposes .

the senate version was introduced on august 6 , 2009 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

the house version was introduced on september 14 , 2009 .

referred to the committee on foreign affairs .

h.r .

1878 ( christopher smith ) .

the global autism assistance act of 2009 .

to establish a health and education grant program related to autism spectrum disorders , and for other purposes .

introduced on april 2 , 2009 .

referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

h.con.res .

103 ( payne ) .

supporting the goals and ideals of malaria awareness day .

introduced on april 21 , 2009 .

referred to the committee on foreign relations .

h.r .

1410 ( mccollum ) .

the newborn , child , and mother survival act of 2009 .

to provide assistance to improve the health of newborns , children , and mothers in developing countries , and for other purposes .

introduced on march 10 , 2009 .

referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

