the president signed the department of transportation and related agenciesact , 2000 ( p.l .

106-69 ) , hereafter referred to as the fy2000 act , on october 9,1999 .

the act provided $50.2 billion for the department of transportation ( dot ) .however , the fy2000 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

106-113 ) , mandatesa government wide rescission equal to 0.38% of discretionary budget authorityprovided ( or obligation limits imposed ) for all government departments.approximately $179 million will be cut from the dot funding levels provided for in p.l .

106-69 .

the largest reductions are faced by the federal highwayadministration ( - $105.3 million ) , the airport improvement program ( - $54.4 million ) ,the federal transit administration ( - $17.6 million ) , and the coast guard ( - $1.6million ) .

even accounting for the rescission , the final funding level represents nearlya 6% increase over the appropriations level of the fy1999 act .

transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget .

itis also considered part of the discretionary budget .

funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources .

the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds .

the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds .

the transportation trust funds include: the highway trust fund , thetransit account of the highway trust fund , the airport and airway trust fund , and theinland waterways' trust fund .

all of these accounts derive their respective fundingfrom specific excise and other taxes .

together , highway and transit funding constitutes the largest component of dot appropriations , and can account for 60% to 70% of total federal transportationspending in any given year .

most highway , and the majority of transit , programs arefunded with contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund .

this isvery significant from a budgeting standpoint .

contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate .

under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation .

appropriations are required to makeoutlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the oppositesituation .

that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under their controlalready exists and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs is also inplace .

prior to the fy1999 appropriations act changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had been achieved in the appropriations process bycombining changes in budget / contract authority and placing limitations onobligations .

the principal function of the limitation on obligations is to controloutlays in a manner that corresponds to congressional budget agreements .

the authority to set a limitation on obligations for contract authority programs gave appropriators considerable leeway in allocating funds between the variousfederal transportation activities in function 400 , which includes agencies such as thecoast guard and the federal aviation administration .

in addition , the inclusion ofthe highway and transit programs and their trust fund generated revenue streams inthe discretionary budget provided appropriators with additional flexibility as part ofthe annual process by which available funds were allocated amongst the 13 standingappropriations subcommittees in the house and the senate .

the debate over fy2000 dot appropriations included the major issues of: ( 1 ) allocating funds among competing dot programs and ( 2 ) seeking a compromisebetween the concept of a unified budget versus specifically earmarked , "off budget"activities .

competition for funds stems from various transportation interests andfrom the modal administrations themselves .

monies have been allocated for adiverse array of purposes , for example , to pay for the expenses of the u.s. coastguard , to improve safety throughout the various modes of transportation , and to helpfinance various infrastructure needs .

in the dot and related agenciesappropriations act , monies are also provided to support the national transportationsafety board ( ntsb ) , the surface transportation board ( stb ) , and several othertransportation - related independent agencies .

 ( 1 ) the perennial question of priorities surrounds the appropriations process .

throughout its budget request , the dot continues to emphasize several prioritiesincluding: safety , infrastructure , innovative financing , environmental enhancement,technology , and national security .

much of the appropriations process must take place within the framework created by the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) , signed intolaw on june 9 , 1998 ( p.l .

105-178 , h.r .

2400 ) .

the act authorizedappropriations for key surface transportation programs through fiscal year 2003 .

thegeneral sense of congress appears to be that , although transportation trust funds arenot sacrosanct , proceeds from the federal fuels taxes must be targeted toward thecapital and recurring needs of the vast u.s. highway and transit network and notviewed as a source of general revenue .

although attempts to move highway andtransit programs off budget prior to the 106th congress were unsuccessful , congressdid insert language within tea - 21 to protect specific funding by creating firewallsaround selected programs .

the firewalls effectively created minimum funding levelsfor the selected programs .

however , their creation has caused a congressional debatebetween the authorizers and appropriators over who should exercise ultimateauthority for spending levels .

firewalls established by authorizing committeesguarantee minimum funding for selected programs , but in the process , are seen bysome as reducing the funding that might have been allocated to other ( unprotected ) programs .

thus , unprotected programs must compete for finite amounts , generallycapped by the budget resolution .

a similar initiative is underway for airtransportation through h.r .

1000 , although it drops the firewallprovision while retaining off - budget provisions .

tea - 21 also contained a provision ( section 1105 , revenue aligned budget authority - - raba ) that authorizes dot to redistribute trust funds , in excess ofprojected receipts , to the various states for title 23 highway programs .

accordingto raba , the additional revenues are to be allocated to the states using the formulasspelled out in the law .

however , the fy2000 dot request proposed redirection ofthese funds from highway programs to other dot initiatives , predominantlyenvironmental activities associated with the congestion mitigation and air quality ( cmaq ) program and transit .

in the end , the fy2000 dot appropriations act ( p.l.106-69 ) disallowed the administration's proposed redirection of raba funds .

crs issue brief ib10026 .

airport improvement program , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib10032 .

transportation issues in the 106th congress , coordinatedby glen moore .

crs issue brief ib10030 .

federal railroad safety program and reauthorization issues , by [author name scrubbed] and anthony j. solury .

crs report 98-749 ( pdf ) .

the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) and the federal budget , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30096 .

airport improvement program reauthorization legislation in the 106th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20176 .

surface transportation board reauthorization and the 106th congress , by stephen thompson .

crs report rs20177 .

airport and airway trust fund issues in the 106th congress ,by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-593 .

airport improvement program: airport finance issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30068 .

automobile air bags: current issues associated with new technology , by [author name scrubbed] and john r. justus .

crs report 98-890 .

federal traffic safety provisions in the transportation equity act for the 21st century: analysis and oversight issues , by [author name scrubbed] andanthony j. solury .

crs report 98-63 .

transportation trust funds: budgetary treatment , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-646 .

transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) : an overview of environmental protection provisions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30246 ( pdf ) .

coast guard: analysis of the fy2000 budget , by martin lee .

department of transportation , chief financial officer http: / / ostpxweb.dot.gov / budget / house appropriations committee http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations national highway traffic safety administration ( budget & planning ) http: / / www.nhtsa.dot.gov / nhtsa / whatis / planning / perf - plans / gpra - 96.pln.html office of management and budget http: / / www.access.gpo.gov / omb / omb003.html senate appropriations committee http: / / www.senate.gov / committees / committee_detail.cfm ? committee_id=40 .

