the countries of armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia are generally considered as comprising the south caucasus region , which borders russia , turkey , and iran .

this isthmus between the black and caspian seas is an age - old north - south and east - west trade and transport crossroads .

the region has been invaded many times , quashing periods of self - rule .

these invasions and other contacts have resulted in many and diverse historical , cultural , ethnic , religious , and linguistic links with neighboring peoples .

russian and soviet tutelage over the region lasted nearly unbroken from the early nineteenth century until the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 , deeply affecting economic and social development , borders , and nationality relations .

soviet control , in particular , resulted in the isolation of the crossroads region from the rest of the world .

after gaining independence , all the states spiraled into economic depression and conflicts began or intensified that threatened their existence , though in recent years the states have appeared more stable .

the regional states remain weak in comparison to neighboring powers in terms of populations , economies , armed forces , and other capabilities .

this report discusses the internal and external security concerns of the south caucasus states and u.s. interests and policy toward the region .

the ambitions of neighboring powers , particularly russia , have appeared to pose the greatest threat to the stability and sovereignty of the south caucasus states .

it is also possible that internal security problems are greater threats .

the states are less able to ameliorate external threats because of internal weaknesses such as political and economic instability , ethnic and regional conflicts , and crime and corruption .

u.s. security ties with the south caucasus states increased in the latter part of the 1990s , as a result of russia's military threat to georgia , regional instability surrounding russia's conflicts in its breakaway chechnya region , and a u.s. focus on the transport of caspian regional energy resources to western markets .

according to assistant secretary of state philip gordon , u.s. policy toward armenia aims to assist it to "strengthen its security and prosperity by settling [its] conflict with azerbaijan over nk and by encouraging turkey and armenia to normalize their relations. .

he averred that "azerbaijan is an important partner of the united states on regional security ( especially counterterrorism ) and on helping our european allies diversify their supplies of natural gas... .

the united states has helped generate new progress toward a settlement of the nk conflict [by] facilitating ... meetings between presidents sargisyan and aliyev. .

some observers have raised concerns that u.s. policy toward the rapprochement of armenia and turkey has complicated u.s. relations with azerbaijan .

assistant secretary of defense alexander vershbow has stated that u.s. policy toward georgia rests on continued support for its territorial integrity , independence and sovereignty and rejects "any notion of spheres of influence in the region.... we stand by the principle that sovereign states have the right to ... choose their own partnerships and alliances... .

most importantly , we will continue to stand by and deepen our support to georgia and its people .

this support does not come blindly however , and we will calibrate our assistance to respect the needs of the georgian people , to strengthen regional security , and to support democratic and economic reforms in georgia. .

the united states provided some security assistance to the region prior to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , particularly to georgia .

this aid and the establishment of military - to - military ties facilitated u.s. anti - terrorism cooperation with these states in the wake of september 11 , 2001 .

the united states obtained quick pledges from the three states to support u.s. and coalition efforts in afghanistan , including overflight rights and information sharing and azerbaijan's and georgia's offers of airbases .

the state department has highlighted u.s. support for azerbaijan's and georgia's efforts to halt the use of their territories as conduits by international mujahidin for financial and logistic support for chechen and other caucasian terrorists .

the united states has placed growing strategic significance on energy supplies from the caspian region .

in the late 1990s , the clinton administration backed the building of east - west oil and gas pipelines not controlled by iran or russia .

the bush administration's may 2001 national energy repor t and 2003 and 2006 national security strategy of the u.s.a .

stated that u.s. energy security and global prosperity would be strengthened by expanding the numbers of suppliers , including those in the caspian region .

the obama administration has endorsed these long - time goals , including support for a "southern corridor" for the transit of oil and gas — a route stretching from central asia through the south caucasus region and turkey to europe — to supplement existing transit routes through russia and to avoid route through iran .

most in congress have supported u.s. assistance to bolster independence , security , and reforms in the south caucasus , but questions have remained about the suitability , scope , emphasis , and effectiveness of u.s. interest and involvement in the region .

attention has included several hearings and legislation , the latter including regular earmarks of aid for armenia , rebuilding aid for georgia after its 2008 conflict with russia , humanitarian aid for nagorno karabakh ( nk ; a breakaway region of azerbaijan mostly populated by ethnic armenians ) , and sense of congress provisions on u.s. policy toward the south caucasus .

congressional concern in the early 1990s over the armenian - azerbaijan conflict contributed in 1992 to the enactment of an aid prohibition for the government of azerbaijan until the president determined that azerbaijan had made "demonstrable steps to cease all blockades and other offensive uses of force against armenia and nagorno karabakh. .

after september 11 , 2001 , congress provided a presidential waiver of this provision in order to facilitate azerbaijan's assistance for the war on terrorism , but emphasized its continuing attention to the peaceful resolution of the nk conflict .

beginning with fy1998 appropriations , congress created a south caucasus funding category to encourage conflict resolution , provide for reconstruction assistance , and facilitate regional economic integration .

in fy1998-fy2001 , congress specified funding for a border and customs security program for georgia , and some of this aid was used by georgia to fortify its northern borders with russia and chechnya .

congress passed the security assistance act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-280 ) that authorized aid in fy2001-fy2002 for the south caucasus states and some others to carry out provisions of the 1999 silk road strategy act ( sec .

596 of h.r .

3422 , incorporated by cross - reference in h.r .

3194 ; p.l .

106-113 ) to strengthen national control of borders and to promote independence and territorial sovereignty .

the united states committed millions of dollars to facilitate the closure of russian military bases in georgia and $1 billion after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict to help georgia recover from the conflict .

congress was at the forefront in calling for greater administration attention to energy issues in the caspian region as part of a broad engagement policy .

this interest included a 1997 congressionally requested report on administration energy policy .

this interest was prominently reflected in the silk road strategy act ( see also below , " u.s. policy and issues . " ) .

congressional concerns about rising russian military and economic coercion against georgia were reflected in legislation criticizing russian actions and supporting georgia's nato aspirations .

in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , congress condemned russia's invasion and provided boosted aid for georgia's rebuilding .

the south caucasus region has been the most unstable in the former soviet union in terms of the number , intensity , and length of its ethnic and civil conflicts .

other internal security problems include crime , corruption , terrorism , proliferation , and narcotics trafficking .

there are few apparent bases for regional cooperation in resolving security problems .

the ruling nationalities in the three states are culturally rather insular and harbor various grievances against each other .

this is particularly the case between armenia and azerbaijan , where discord has led to the virtually complete displacement of ethnic armenians from azerbaijan and vice versa .

ethnic relations between azerbaijanis and georgians , on the other hand , have been less contentious .

the main languages in the three states are mutually unintelligible .

few of the region's borders coincide with ethnic populations .

secessionism by territorially - based ethnic minorities has been of primary security concern in georgia and azerbaijan .

armenia and azerbaijan have viewed nk's status as a major security concern .

nk has failed to gain international recognition of its independence , and abkhazia and south ossetia have been recognized only by russia and a few other countries .

nk receives major economic sustenance from armenia and diaspora armenians , and abkhazia and south ossetia from russia .

in congressional testimony in march 2008 , gen. brantz craddock , then - commander of the u.s. european command , stated that "the caucasus' geostrategic location makes the region an important area for the united states and its allies .

caucasus nations actively support iraqi freedom and isaf .

they provide alternative hydrocarbon sources from the caspian sea and alternative routes of access to central asian hydrocarbon reserves .

it is an important region for european energy diversification. .

he stressed that to counteract the harm to regional stability posed by corruption , ethnic conflicts , and russian meddling , "the caucasus require sustained and coordinated interagency efforts. .

former assistant secretary of state elizabeth jones stated in 2003 that , thanks to u.s. security assistance , "as each day passes , the countries of central asia and the caucasus are becoming better equipped , better trained and better coordinated with one another to deal with transnational threats. .

she also stated that such u.s. security assistance was "integrated" with programs to enhance human rights and political and economic reforms .

conflict resolution is part of u.s. policy to enhance stability in the region .

among the early foreign policy acts of the obama administration , u.s. secretary of state clinton supported the signing of the armenia - turkey protocols in october 2009 .

in yearly appropriations for foreign operations , congress has called on the administration to pursue conflict mitigation in the region .

in some respects , u.s. policy has tended to view the south caucasian countries ( and those of central asia ) as part of the caspian sea - black sea region , to include the black sea littoral states in the west and afghanistan in the east .

this view is partly the result of the air transit of u.s. and nato forces and supplies based in europe across these countries to the afghan military theater .

also , u.s. policy has tended to focus on westward oil and gas transit routes from caspian regional states .

on the other hand , the u.s. state department in 2005 implemented a persistent congressional call to re - assign responsibility for the central asian states to the bureau for south asian affairs , leaving responsibility for the south caucasus to the bureau for european and eurasian affairs .

u.s. military operational planning also separated these regions .

in 1999 , the central asian states were reassigned to uscentcom's area of responsibility , covering horn of africa countries and many middle eastern and south asian states , leaving the south caucasus states ( and the caspian sea ) in useucom's area of responsibility , covering europe .

as reflected in the congressional budget justification for foreign operations ( for fy2007 , fy2008 , fy2009 , fy2010 , and fy2011 ) : u.s. national interests in armenia have included cooperation in the war on terrorism and combating arms and other illicit trafficking .

a durable and peaceful resolution of the armenia - azerbaijan conflict acceptable to both parties is key to u.s. interests that include stability in the south caucasus , regional economic cooperation that ends armenia's isolation , and improved armenian - turkish relations .

armenia's shift away from a war footing would also further u.s. interests in armenia's economic development and improved standards of living .

u.s. national interests in azerbaijan have included cooperation in the war on terrorism , the advancement of u.s. energy security , and progress in democratic and economic reforms , which enhance internal stability .

such stability will reduce tendencies for azerbaijani conflict with iran and armenia .

azerbaijan's creation of a transparent and corruption - free market economy is deemed essential to its role as a vital link in the trans - caspian energy corridor , and it has the "potential to play a significant role in the diversification of american and global energy supplies. .

azerbaijan's conflict with armenia over azerbaijan's nagorno karabakh area , and its tensions with iran upset stability in the critical south caucasus region .

"georgia plays a key role in furthering u.s. interests" and has been a "premier partner" in the global war on terrorism by providing troops for military operations in iraq and afghanistan and other support .

georgia is becoming "a key conduit through which caspian basin energy resources will flow to the west , facilitating diversification of energy sources for the united states and europe. .

the u.s. government will continue to encourage democratization , promote integration with nato , support law enforcement and institutions that uphold the rule of law , support stable economic growth , and support "the sustainable resolution of conflicts with the separatist regions based on georgia's territorial integrity .

the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership offers a framework for meeting these goals" ( see below ) .

in the wake of september 11 , 2001 , u.s. policy priorities shifted toward global anti - terrorist efforts .

in the south caucasus , the united states obtained quick pledges from the three states to support u.s. and coalition efforts in afghanistan , including overflight rights and azerbaijan's and georgia's offers of airbase and other support .

the state department's country reports on global terrorism has highlighted u.s. support for azerbaijan's and georgia's efforts to halt the use of their territories as conduits by international mujahidin and chechen guerrillas for financial and logistic support for chechen and other caucasian terrorists .

then - president shevardnadze immediately condemned the "scum" who attacked the united states on september 11 , 2001 , and one week later offered georgian "airspace and territory" for use by u.s. troops .

during his u.s. visit with president bush in october 2001 , he reiterated georgia's "full cooperation and solidarity" with the u.s. and coalition actions in afghanistan , and the full use of georgia's airspace and airbases .

he also reportedly asked for u.s. training assistance for georgia's security forces to help them reassert control in the pankisi gorge .

on february 11 , 2002 , the u.s. embassy in georgia declared that the united states was ready to help georgia combat several dozen al qaeda and other terrorists who had fled to the caucasus from afghanistan .

some had relocated to georgia's pankisi gorge area bordering chechnya , where they maintained links with chechen terrorists .

on february 27 , 2002 , then - president bush announced that the united states would provide equipment and training to help georgia rout al qaeda influences .

the next day , the u.s. defense department announced plans for a "georgia train and equip program" ( gtep ) , as part of the global war on terrorism ( see also below " u.s. peace and security assistance " ) .

russia initially reacted critically to the u.s. announcement of the gtep , but then - president vladimir putin on march 1 , 2002 , stated that he had received assurances from then - president shevardnadze that the united states was not seeking permanent bases .

he stressed that "we support this fight [in the pankisi gorge] no matter who takes part in it," although he called for russia's participation .

then - national security advisor condoleezza rice on may 11 , 2002 , stated that russia was a "stalwart asset and friend" in viewing the gtep as "helpful to russian interests. .

georgia contributed about 50 troops for peacekeeping in afghanistan during afghan elections in late 2004-early 2005 .

in early 2007 , president saakashvili announced that georgia intended to eventually send 200-400 troops to support nato in afghanistan .

reportedly , before the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , the united states had urged georgia not to end its military support for coalition actions in iraq upon sending its troops to afghanistan .

in november 2009 , the first georgian troops left for training in germany prior to deployment to afghanistan .

georgia plans a total deployment of 730 troops .

the day after the terrorist attacks on the united states , azerbaijan's then - president heydar aliyev averred that azerbaijan was a "strategic partner" of the united states and would join the united states in operations against terrorism .

azerbaijan granted blanket overflight rights and intelligence support and offered the use of its bases .

after the commencement of air operations in afghanistan on october 6 , 2001 , heydar aliyev endorsed coalition actions in a phone conversation with then - secretary powell on october 9 and with president bush on october 30 , 2001 .

nk armenians and u.s. diplomats have censured statements by azerbaijani officials calling for international "counter - terrorism" actions against nk .

azerbaijan in november 2002 deployed 30 troops to assist the u.s. - led coalition in afghanistan .

azerbaijan's cooperation with nato allegedly may have cooled in recent months .

the country allegedly has declined to boost the number of its troops ( 90 ) currently serving in afghanistan .

it reportedly joined turkmenistan in denying overflights for awacs aircraft bound for afghanistan .

immediately after september 11 , 2001 , armenia's president kocharyan offered condolences and armenia's department for emergencies proffered rescue aid .

on september 19 , armenian defense minister serzh sarkisyan stated that armenia would contribute to u.s. - led counter - terrorism efforts , and kocharyan the next day offered armenia's support for international counter - terrorism efforts during a meeting with the u.s .

ambassador to armenia .

on september 27 , the presidential press service reported that this support included military overflight rights , and other reports mentioned intelligence sharing .

while supporting diplomatic efforts to convince the taliban to extradite those responsible for the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , after the start of coalition actions in afghanistan on october 6 , armenia expressed support for the "consistent and decisive" military actions to safeguard the "global community" from international terrorism .

armenia explained that this support was consistent with its foreign policy of complementarity , which calls for good relations with both russia , the united states , and middle eastern countries such as iran in order to buttress the country's independence , gain support for nk armenians , and protect the interests of armenians living in the middle east and elsewhere .

in january 2010 , armenia sent 40 troops for four weeks of training in germany before their deployment in mid - february to afghanistan to serve under the command of the german - led provincial reconstruction team in kunduz , where the troops will assist in airbase security .

in the u.s. congress , the events of september 11 , 2001 , altered attitudes toward sec.907 , causing the members to permit the lifting of aid sanctions on azerbaijan to facilitate regional cooperation on anti - terrorism , conflict resolution , and energy development .

permanent presidential waiver authority was added to the senate version of foreign operations appropriations for fy2002 ( h.r .

2506 ) and retained by the conference managers .

the president may use the waiver authority if he certifies to the appropriations committees that it supports u.s. counter - terrorism efforts , supports the operational readiness of the armed forces , is important for azerbaijan's border security , and will not harm peace talks between armenia and azerbaijan or be used for offensive purposes against armenia .

the waiver may be renewed annually on or after december 31 , 2002 , and sixty days after the exercise of the waiver authority , the president must send a report to congress specifying the nature of aid to be provided to azerbaijan , the status of the military balance between armenia and azerbaijan and the effects of u.s. aid on that balance , and the status of peace talks between armenia and azerbaijan and the effects of u.s. aid on those talks .

days after being signed into law ( p.l .

107-115 ) , then - president bush on january 25 , 2002 , exercised the waiver .

the most recent waiver was exercised in march 2008 .

the bush administration maintained that the waiver was necessary to support u.s. counter - terrorism and the operational readiness of u.s .

forces and coalition partners .

it also stressed that the waiver permitted u.s. border security aid for azerbaijan and did not hamper efforts to settle the nk conflict .

azerbaijan and georgia are among the countries that openly pledged to support the u.s. - led operation iraqi freedom .

both offered to make their airfields available and to assist the united states in re - building iraq .

azerbaijan's foreign minister on march 14 , 2003 , indicated azerbaijan's preference for a peaceful solution , but stated that azerbaijan would support u.s. action in iraq .

azerbaijan has raised concerns about the welfare of some 300-900,000 turkic speakers in iraq .

in august 2003 , both azerbaijan ( 150 troops ) and georgia ( 69 troops ) dispatched forces to iraq .

u.s. officials reportedly asked azerbaijan and georgia in april 2004 to bolster their troop contributions in the face of spain's troop pullout .

georgia boosted its deployment to 850 troops in 2005 , at that time matching the contributions by australia and ukraine .

azerbaijan's troops helped u.s. marines guard the haditha dam .

georgia's troops guarded military and other facilities , helped patrol around the town of ba'qubah , and also helped protect u.n. and coalition offices in baghdad's "green zone. .

in march 2007 , president saakashvili announced that georgia intended to boost its troop deployment from 850 to up to 2,000 , which made georgia the second - largest non - u.s. contributor ( after the united kingdom ) .

the bulk of the 2,000 troops pulled out in august 2008 at georgia's request in connection with the russia - georgia conflict , and the rest pulled out by the end of november 2008 .

azerbaijan's troops also pulled out in november 2008 .

armenia initially did not support military intervention in iraq , citing its concerns about the safety of 15,000 ethnic armenians residing in iraq and 200,000 in the middle east , concerns about turkish expansionism into kurdish areas of iraq , and affinities with the views of france , germany , and russia .

however , in september 2004 , the presidents of poland and armenia agreed that armenian troops could serve with the polish contingent in iraq to carry out humanitarian work .

the armenian legislature approved the planned deployment , and 46 personnel left for iraq in january 2005 .

armenia's troops pulled out of iraq in late 2008 .

azerbaijan and georgia reportedly suffered some economic losses associated with the active phase of the iraq conflict .

btc pipeline construction was reportedly temporarily delayed because of material delivery problems , and azerbaijan reported that its support for the united states led several islamic banks and investors to curtail operations or negotiations .

some azerbaijanis objected to support for coalition actions in an islamic country .

in the wake of the russia - georgia conflict , vice president cheney visited georgia and azerbaijan in early september 2008 .

in georgia , he stated that "[president mikheil saakashvili] and his democratically elected government can count on the continued support and assistance of the united states. .

he pledged u.s. aid to help georgians "to overcome an invasion of your sovereign territory , and an illegitimate , unilateral attempt to change your country's borders by force.... we will help [you] to heal this nation's wounds , to rebuild this economy , and to ensure georgia's democracy , independence , and further integration with the west. .

in azerbaijan , he stated that "the united states has deep and abiding interests in [azerbaijan's] well being and security. .

he averred that the united states is "committed to achieving a negotiated solution to the nk conflict , a solution that starts with the principle of territorial integrity , and takes into account other international principles .

achieving a solution is more important now than ever before ; that outcome will enhance peace and stability in the region , and azerbaijan's security , as well. .

he praised azerbaijan's cooperation with western countries in the energy sphere and thanked azerbaijan for its contribution to the global war against terrorism .

he also voiced u.s. support for "the people of azerbaijan in their efforts , often in the face of great challenges , to strengthen democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human rights , and to build a prosperous , modern , independent country. .

on january 9 , 2009 , secretary of state rice and visiting georgian foreign minister grigol vashadze signed a u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership .

similar to the u.s. - ukraine charter signed in december 2008 and the u.s. - baltic charter signed in 1998 with estonia , latvia , and lithuania , the accord states that the countries plan to "strengthen our relationship across the economic , energy , diplomatic , scientific , cultural and security fields. .

in the security realm , the charter affirms that "a strong , independent , sovereign and democratic georgia , capable of responsible self - defense , contributes to the security and prosperity not only of all georgians , but of a europe whole , free and at peace. .

the two sides "declare that their shared goal is the full integration of georgia into european and transatlantic political , economic , security , and defense institutions," and that "the united states and georgia intend to expand the scope of their ongoing defense and security cooperation programs to defeat [threats to global peace and stability] and to promote peace and stability. .

such cooperation will "increase georgian capabilities and ... strengthen georgia's candidacy for nato membership. .

the accord highlights ties through the nato - georgia commission .

in the economic realm , the two countries "intend to pursue an enhanced bilateral investment treaty , to expand georgian access to the general system of preferences , and to explore the possibility of a free - trade agreement. .

energy security goals include "increasing georgia's energy production , enhanc[ing] energy efficiency , and increas[ing] the physical security of energy transit through georgia to european markets .

we intend to ... develop a new southern corridor to help georgia and the rest of europe diversify their supplies of natural gas by securing imports from azerbaijan and central asia. .

in the realm of democratization , the two countries "pledge cooperation to bolster independent media , freedom of expression , and access to objective news and information," and to further strengthen the rule of law .

the united states pledged to train judges , prosecutors , defense lawyers , and police officers .

before the signing , vashadze hailed the accord as a "stepping stone which will bring georgia to euro - atlantic structures , to membership within nato , and to [the] family of western and civilized nations. .

deputy assistant secretary bryza stressed that the charter does not provide security guarantees to georgia .

he also stated that u.s. - georgian defense cooperation programs were still being developed .

vashadze later claimed that the u.s. support in the charter for georgia's territorial integrity would help convince russia eventually to rescind its recognition of the independence of abkhazia and south ossetia .

according to some observers , the charter aimed to reaffirm the united states' high strategic interest in georgia's fate , after it had appeared that the united states ( and the west ) in recent months had acquiesced to increased russian dominance in the south caucasus .

the united states has provided some security assistance to the region and bolstered such aid after september 11 , 2001 .

cumulative budgeted funding for fy1992-fy2008 for peace and security programs ( including law enforcement ) was $188 million for armenia , $240 million for azerbaijan , and $542 million for georgia ( see table 1 and table 2 ) .

the total funding of $1.13 billion for this region for peace and security programs amounted to about 24% of cumulative budgeted funding for all south caucasus programs and about 10% of the security assistance provided to all twelve soviet successor states .

if such aid had been distributed equally to all twelve countries , the south caucasus would have received 25% .

the relative dearth of such aid distributed to the south caucasus mainly reflects the historical u.s. emphasis on global threat reduction in russia , ukraine , and kazakhstan and an emphasis on humanitarian , democratic , and economic assistance to the south caucasus states .

also , until waived , sec .

907 had prohibited much u.s. security aid to azerbaijan , and by u.s. policy , similar aid had not been provided to azerbaijan's fellow combatant armenia .

the waiver permitted an increase in u.s. peace and security aid to armenia from a budgeted $5.96 million in fy2001 to an estimated $11.53 million in fy2002 , and to azerbaijan from $3.23 million to $11.33 million .

a u.s. - financed center for de - mining opened in armenia in march 2002 .

similarly , the state department announced in july 2002 that 25 u.s. special operations troops were assisting u.s. nongovernmental organizations in training troops in azerbaijan in de - mining .

in april 2002 , president bush issued presidential determination 2002-15 , making armenia , azerbaijan , and tajikistan eligible to receive u.s. arms exports and services in order to "strengthen the security of the united states. .

a u.s. - azerbaijan security dialogue working group has met nearly yearly since 1996 to discuss mutual security concerns .

according to deputy foreign minister araz azimov , a march 2006 meeting discussed anti - terrorism , non - proliferation , and energy security cooperation , azerbaijan's relations with nato and the osce , the settlement of the nk conflict , and the military situation in the caspian region .

in february 2007 , assistant secretary of defense peter rodman visited azerbaijan and met with aliyev and other top officials .

reportedly , discussions were held on energy security , cooperation with nato , and anti - terrorism assistance , among other issues , and were termed part of an "expanded dialogue" in the wake of president aliyev's april 2006 u.s. visit .

marking a u.s. emphasis on encouraging the diversity of energy supplies in europe , then - secretary of state rice and foreign minister elmar mamedyarov signed a memorandum of understanding in march 2007 on convening annual meetings to discuss energy security .

in july 2007 , the u.s. - azerbaijan security dialogue working group met and discussed "security cooperation , energy cooperation , and promoting democracy through political and economic reform," with emphasis on "counterterrorism cooperation , maritime and border security programs , nonproliferation concerns , missile defense , critical energy infrastructure protection , azerbaijan's relations with nato and related security sector reforms , and azerbaijan's current chairmanship of .. .

guam. .

in november 2009 , assistant secretary of state andrew j. shapiro met in washington , d.c. with azerbaijani deputy foreign minister araz azimov for the 11 th u.s. - azerbaijan security dialogue .

according to azimov , the sides discussed bilateral defense cooperation , nagorno - karabakh negotiations , azerbaijan - nato cooperation , contributing to afghan stabilization efforts , caspian sea security , and the future of russia's gabala radar site in azerbaijan .

he stated that azerbaijan had proposed a long list of cooperative initiatives , and that working groups would convene to discuss the initiatives .

georgia became eligible for security - related international military education and training ( imet ) and foreign military financing ( fmf ) programs in fy1997 .

in 1999 , the united states provided grant aid of ten uh - 1h unarmed combat helicopters , six of which were operational , while the others were for spare parts .

in fy1999 , useucom launched a u.s. - georgian peacetime military engagement program after the south caucasus states were included in useucom's area of responsibility .

the georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) grew out of a request made by former georgian president eduard shevardnadze during his u.s. meeting with then - president bush in october 2001 for help to resist russia's request that it be allowed to pursue or attack chechen rebels in georgia , to combat terrorists who were hiding in georgia's pankisi gorge area , and otherwise to keep terrorists from entering georgia .

some of these terrorists allegedly had fled u.s. - led coalition operations in afghanistan , so the u.s. administration initially linked gtep to oef .

other reported u.s. aims included enhancing military reform by helping georgia set up a national command center and bolstering georgia's ability to guard its energy pipelines and ensure internal stability .

the $64 million georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) began in april - may 2002 .

useucom coordinated training in light infantry airmobile , mechanized , and mountain tactics , and medical and logistical methods by personnel from u.s. special operations command europe and from u.s. marine forces europe , which took over training in late 2002 .

four battalions of over 2,000 troops , a 270-member mechanized armor company , about 200 military , security , and border officers , and a small number of interior ( police ) ministry troops and border guards were trained .

equipment provided included small arms , communications and medical gear , uniforms , and construction materials for base refurbishment .

the program formally ended in april 2004 .

u.s. officials deemed gtep a model for programs planned for other countries and praised its contribution to georgia's deployment of a 550-member infantry battalion to iraq in march 2005 , which boosted the number of its troops there from about 300 to about 850 .

other gtep - trained troops have been deployed to afghanistan and kosovo .

in 2004 , useucom developed a follow - on program to gtep termed the georgian sustainment and stability operations program ( ssop ) , for reasons that included helping georgia sustain increased troop deployments to iraq .

funded at $60 million , the 16-month program began in january 2005 to bolster military reforms and to train four battalions of 2,000 troops .

the majority of training took place near tbilisi at the krtsanisi training area , where $6.5 million of ssop funds were used to build barracks , classrooms , a dining hall , and other infrastructure .

by the end of march 2006 , the 21 st , 22 nd , and 23 rd battalions had finished seventeen weeks of training and had been rotated to iraq .

other training and equipping involved the reconnaissance , engineer , and signal companies of the 1 st brigade ; the military staffs and the logistics battalions of the 1 st and 2 nd brigades ; the general staff command and control elements , and the operational headquarters staff .

in july 2006 , following president saakashvili's u.s. visit , the united states announced that the ssop would be extended another year and funded at $30 million , including $6.5 million in section 1206 funds to help georgia with equipment and operations in iraq .

the 2006 national security concept of georgia stated that the country's defense capabilities "have significantly increased as a result of [u.s.] assistance programs" and that troops trained under gtep and ssop "constitute the core of the georgian army. .

gtep and ssop provided training to a major portion of georgia's armed forces .

some observers claimed that the successes of the programs included the encouragement of democratic values in the armed forces .

ssop was again extended in fy2008 and funded at $71 million , including $11.5 million in section 1206 funds for special forces training and equipment .

prior to the russia - georgia conflict , the u.s. was providing initial military training to georgia's 4 th brigade for its eventual deployment to iraq in winter 2008 .

u.s. training for troops for deployment to afghanistan was launched in late august 2009 using $24 million in coalition readiness support program ( crsp ) funds , and included an october 2009 bilateral training exercise termed "immediate response. .

the first 173 georgian troops left for training in germany for four weeks and were deployed in afghanistan in december 2009 , where they serve under french command .

over 700 more georgian troops will be deployed with u.s. marines to afghanistan's helmand province .

georgian and international media provided some information on possible problems associated with gtep and ssop .

russia's relations with the united states appeared strained at times by concerns by some russian officials about u.s. military training in what they considered a traditional sphere of russian influence .

then - president putin , however , acknowledged the useful role played by u.s. - trained georgian troops in counter - terrorism efforts in the pankisi gorge .

sensitive to russian concerns , u.s. and georgian officials gave assurances to russia in 2002 that u.s. military trainers would not enter the pankisi gorge to assist gtep - trained and other georgian troops to eliminate alleged terrorists based there .

in contrast to putin's earlier stance , russia formally protested to the united states in mid - 2004 about the alleged involvement of some u.s. - trained troops in georgia's actions in its breakaway south ossetia region .

some problems were reported in finalizing applicants for the first phase of ssop training in early 2005 , particularly in recruiting some technically - skilled personnel , which allegedly caused some delay in beginning the program .

one georgian report alleged that there was a lack of discipline in some u.s. - trained units .

according to another georgian report , ssop training and associated construction of facilities at the krtsanisi training center did not meet expectations .

some georgian legislators and others alleged that many troops trained under gtep did not re - enlist when their service contracts ended in 2005 , resulting in a loss of expertise among active duty personnel .

they also questioned whether some military officials were resisting ssop and other u.s. and nato - backed military reforms .

some georgian observers have cautioned that georgia's relatively large - scale involvement in ssop and deployments to iraq and afghanistan divert georgia from other vital national security concerns , but most georgian officials view these efforts as boosting the professionalism of the armed forces and moving georgia toward nato membership .

u.s. analyst paul saunders urged the obama administration not to support the deployment of georgian troops to afghanistan , since saakashvili might still not understand that "the united states has no military commitment of any kind to georgia , and especially no commitment to the armed return of south ossetia and abkhazia to his control. .

besides ssop , useucom initiatives in the region have included the south caucasus clearinghouse and the caspian regional maritime security cooperation program .

the clearinghouse aims to facilitate cooperation by sharing data on security assistance among both donor and recipient countries .

gen. bantz john craddock , then - commander of useucom , testified in march 2008 that the caspian regional maritime security cooperation program aims to "coordinate and complement u.s. government security cooperation activities in azerbaijan and kazakhstan .

u.s .

naval forces europe continues to promote maritime safety and security and maritime domain awareness in the caspian sea through routine engagement with azerbaijan .

these efforts are targeted to create an organic ability within azerbaijan to 'observe , evaluate , and respond' to events in their maritime domain. .

 ( this program appears to combine elements of the former caspian guard and hydrocarbons programs. ) .

in fy2008 , $1.7 million in section 1206 funds were supplied for naval counter - terrorism training for azerbaijan .

the united states acknowledged in late 2005 that it had supplied two maritime surveillance radars to azerbaijan to help detect and direct interdiction of illicit weapons of mass destruction and other trafficking in the caspian sea .

in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict that severely damaged georgia's military capabilities , gen. craddock visited georgia on august 21 to survey the destruction of infrastructure and military assets .

according to assistant secretary of defense vershbow , eucom carried out a "comprehensive multi - month assessment of georgia's armed forces. .

in october 2008 , the defense department also held yearly bilateral defense consultations with georgia .

vershbow testified that as a result of these assessments , "many previously unrecognized or neglected deficiencies in the various required capacities of the georgian armed forces and ministry of defense [came to light] .

in practically all areas , defense institutions , strategies , doctrine , and professional military education were found to be seriously lacking. .

in march 2009 , gen. james cartwright , the vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , visited georgia to further assess its defense needs .

he stated that "the united states remains committed to the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership and to provide training and other assistance to the georgian military in support of their reform efforts and continued independence. .

he pledged added training that would be "focused on the defense of georgia , on its self and internal defense," and equipment transfers that would be based on "what equipment needs to be upgraded and then what new types of equipment that are necessary for their homeland defense. .

assistant secretary vershbow similarly testified in august 2009 that "we are focusing on building defense institutions , assisting defense sector reform , and building the strategic and educational foundations that will facilitate necessary training , education , and rational force structure design and procurement .

we are assisting georgia to move along the path to having modern , western - oriented , nato - interoperable armed forces capable of territorial defense and coalition contributions. .

he stressed , however , that "the united states has not 'rearmed' georgia as some have claimed .

there has been no lethal military assistance to georgia since the august [2008] conflict .

no part of the $1 billion u.s. assistance package went to the ministry of defense. .

in addition , no fmf , imet , section 1206 , or section 1207 assistance has been provided .

some in congress and elsewhere have criticized this dearth of lethal security assistance to bolster georgia's territorial defense capabilities .

the united states has gained greater support in the region for combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) by emphasizing how this goal enhances the security interests of the states .

the united states has been the largest aid donor for such efforts .

the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , and state ( dos ) have been the main agencies providing training and equipment to help prevent nuclear smuggling and other proliferation threats in the south caucasus states .

dos funds the export control and related border security program ( exbs ) , which improves export control capabilities in the soviet successor states to prevent proliferation of wmd and related components .

the commerce department , doe , customs and border protection service , and coast guard help implement exbs .

doe's second line of defense program places radiation detection systems at ports of entry .

dod's proliferation prevention program ( ppp ; launched in fy2003 ) was designed to upgrade the abilities of non - russian soviet successor states to deter and interdict smuggling of wmd and related materials .

ppp coordinates with these and other dod programs , including the international counter - proliferation program ( icp ; launched in fy1997 ) that conducts activities with the fbi and the customs and border protection service .

an icp was launched in armenia in fy1999 , which included wmd detection and interdiction training .

also in fy1999 , dos provided $1.9 million for armenia and azerbaijan to expand the tracker automated licensing system to help them track exports of proliferation concern .

exbs aid helped armenia establish an interagency export - control coordinating commission and has provided training and equipment .

through fy2005 , doe and other agencies have provided more than $55 million to enhance the safety and security of armenia's metzamor nuclear reactor .

beginning in fy1999 , an icp in azerbaijan has provided training courses on crime scene investigation , criminal investigation , radiation detection and response , and other courses relevant to wmd counter - proliferation .

in january 2004 , the united states and azerbaijan signed an agreement implementing a five - year ppp in azerbaijan to enhance the country's ability to detect and interdict wmd on vessels transiting the caspian sea .

the $68 million was used to provide and improve maritime radar surveillance equipment and procedures , repair and upgrade boats , provide wmd detection and other equipment for boarding crews , and construct or upgrade command and control , maintenance , and logistics facilities to expand the patrol areas of the border service - coast guard .

in november 2006 , dod completed construction of a boat basin for the border service - coast guard to extend their range of patrols .

a follow - on fy2009-fy2013 ppp is projected to cost $33 million .

this project aims to "develop a comprehensive capability for wmd surveillance and interdiction on azerbaijan's caspian sea border. .

plans include the installation of an upgraded maritime surveillance radar on chilov island for use by the navy and the state border service - coast guard , ongoing repairs and upgrades for some naval vessels , the transfer of wmd detection equipment , and training on boarding for state border service - coast guard personnel .

the united states and georgia signed a ctr umbrella agreement in 1997 ( and extended in 2002 ) for proliferation prevention and the promotion of defense and military contacts to encourage demilitarization , defense reform , proliferation prevention , and regional stability and cooperation .

in 1998 , the two sides signed an export control systems implementing agreement ( extended in 2002 ) .

at georgia's behest , the united states used emergency ctr funds to remove 8.8 lbs .

of highly enriched uranium and 1.8 lbs of spent fuel from an institute of physics research reactor near tbilisi in april 1998 .

the united states had earlier provided security assistance to safeguard the material prior to removal , after two criminal attacks on the reactor facility .

in 1998-1999 , dod provided two ctr - funded patrol boats to enhance export controls .

some ctr funding reportedly was used to support the ssop .

ctr funding was used to remove and destroy dual - use equipment at the soviet - built biokombinat animal vaccine production plant near tbilisi , georgia .

the plant's conversion into a feed mill was completed in mid - 2007 .

the united states provided $469 million in cumulative dod , dos , and doe aid over the period fy1992-fy2008 ( if exbs aid is included , the total would be $652 million ) to help georgia prevent the proliferation of wmd ( see table 2 ) .

there is rising u.s. concern that drugs transiting the south caucasus may eventually reach the united states in major quantities , since latin american and other international organized groups have become involved in the wider regional drug trade .

despite efforts to eliminate them , terrorist groups still in the region may be using drug trafficking to help finance their operations , so counter - drug activities may support counter - terrorism .

u.s. policy also recognizes the problems of rising crime , corruption , and instability posed by illegal narcotics production , use , and trafficking in the region .

these problems are increasingly emphasized by regional governments that urge the united states to take the lead in combating rising drug trafficking from afghanistan .

dissatisfaction with u.s. actions in this area eventually could harm u.s. relations with the governments .

among u.s. efforts , the fbi , department of justice , u.s. customs service , the drug enforcement administration , and the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs have provided training in counter - narcotics to police , customs , and border control personnel in the region .

the waiver of sec.907 of the freedom support act has permitted u.s. government - to - government aid for counter - narcotics programs in azerbaijan since 2002 .

significant u.s. assistance to azerbaijan was reported for fy2006 , including the provision of trucks for customs contraband teams , an assessment of security along the iranian border for the border guards , the contribution of fencing and construction materials to rebuild watchtowers along the iranian border , a useucom assessment of the capabilities of the border guard's air wing , and the equipping of a maritime base near astara .

a u.s. - supplied short - range radar near astara was upgraded to monitor and patrol the southern caspian sea and maritime boundaries .

in 2007 , four patrol and fast response boats were delivered to the base , and customs personnel were given added training and search equipment .

during 2009 , however , inl - funded law enforcement assistance programs were canceled after the azerbaijani government failed to cooperate with the required vetting process covering human rights , and as a result , the justice department's international criminal investigative training assistance program funding could not go forward to train law enforcement or military personnel .

other state department and u.s. coast guard training programs continued to be implemented to enhance border controls .

u.s. firms are the largest cumulative investors in azerbaijan , investing about $7.1 billion through 2008 , or about one - third of all foreign investment .

the u.s. commerce department warned in 2009 that corruption impedes the ability of many companies to do business and even has driven some major western firms to leave azerbaijan , particularly those involved in the non - energy sentor .

businesses indicate that some regulatory and tax officials and some contract dispute arbitrators may be corrupt .

in an effort to improve the investment climate , azerbaijan's tax ministry set up an expedited business registration process that reportedly has reduced the "time , cost , and number of procedures to start up a business. .

nonetheless , some officials at the ministry of justice reportedly still demand bribes to register businesses , so that "azerbaijan remains a challenging market in which to do business .

foreign direct investment in georgia has increased since its "rose revolution," mainly involving investment by bp in oil and gas pipeline infrastructure .

many medium and small investors allegedly remain wary .

the u.s. embassy in georgia reports conditions similar to those in azerbaijan , warning that many u.s. and foreign firms have suffered from official corruption .

the embassy also warns that there are a few criminalized sectors of the economy , such as gasoline and cigarette distribution , that foreign investors should avoid .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in georgia fell off sharply after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , from about $605 million in 2008 ( mostly before the conflict ) , to $226 million in the first half of 2009 .

u.s. government facilities worldwide were on a heightened state of alert after september 11 , 2001 , and u.s. embassies were subject to temporary closure for security reasons .

in march 2003 , u.s. embassies in the region issued warden's messages warning that u.s. citizens and interests worldwide were at risk of terrorist attacks .

there were some anti - u.s. demonstrations in early 2003 in the region related to the iraq conflict , but the state department reported no significant violence against u.s. interests .

in georgia , the state department has advised u.s citizens to avoid travel to abkhazia and south ossetia because of gunfire and crime and the extremely limited u.s. diplomatic access to these breakaway regions .

the state department also has warned americans that travel to areas near abkhazia's and south ossetia's borders with the rest of georgia is ill - advised , as well as to the pankisi gorge and to other border areas near russia's chechnya and dagestan regions .

despite georgia's efforts to combat corruption and increase the caliber of law enforcement personnel , crime continues to be a "very serious problem" in tbilisi .

the u.s. embassy in tbilisi warns that high rates of poverty have contributed to an increase in crimes against americans and other foreigners who are viewed as wealthy and are therefore targeted for economic - and property - based crimes .

most of the crimes against americans involve residential break - ins , car - jackings , car theft , petty theft , and armed robbery .

however , the rate of violent crime against foreigners also is increasing .

the state department warns that the level of crime in tbilisi is higher than in many european and u.s. cities .

during then - president bush's visit to georgia on may 10 , 2005 , a hand grenade was thrown toward a podium containing presidents bush and saakashvili .

it failed to explode .

a suspect possibly linked to former ajarian politician aslan abashidze was sentenced for the crime .

a more secure u.s. embassy building opened in tbilisi in december 2005 .

during the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , u.s. embassy dependents and peace corps volunteers were evacuated to armenia .

the u.s. embassy also restricted travel outside of tbilisi by staff and family members .

several u.s. investors in armenia have reported being victims of financial scams and of being involved in disputes over property ownership .

the state department reports that these latter investors "have had to seek legal recourse through a long , and in the majority of cases , unsuccessful court proceeding. .

the state department has assessed crime against foreigners as relatively rare in armenia , mainly involving break - ins and theft .

there are some instances of violent assaults and robberies , but the general level of violent crime is less in yerevan than in most u.s. cities .

there is "a considerably large organized crime network" in armenia , but organized crime violence usually is not aimed against foreigners .

u.s. citizens are unlikely to be the targets of political violence , according to the state and commerce departments .

there have been instances where young men with dual citizenship have been conscripted into the armed forces upon visiting armenia .

the u.s. embassy has designated a section of highway near nk as off limits to u.s. government travelers because of the danger of ceasefire violations .

a more secure u.s. embassy building opened in yerevan in may 2005 .

in azerbaijan , the state department reports that "there have been no acts of political violence against u.s. businesses or assets , nor against any foreign - owned entity .

the risk of political violence affecting foreign investors remains minimal. .

however , azerbaijani authorities have reported an increase in islamic extremism and terrorist plots against western interests in the country .

members of the indigenous terrorist group jayshullah were convicted in 2001 for planning an attack against the us embassy and other terrorism .

in july 2005 , the azerbaijani government arrested a group on charges of planning terrorist training to attack the u.s. , israeli , and russian embassies .

in late october 2007 , the azerbaijani national security ministry warned the u.s. embassy and other western interests that a terrorist group was planning attacks , and the embassy limited its operations for two days while the ministry continued to investigate and make arrests .

u.s. citizens traveling to azerbaijan are advised that the occupied areas around nk are dangerous because of ceasefire violations and the presence of minefields and that travel into nk is not possible from azerbaijan .

u.s. travelers were warned in july 2006 to be on guard against violent acts and possible terrorist attacks against americans in the face of israeli military actions in lebanon .

the warden's report for january 2007 warned u.s. citizens that petty crime such as pick - pocketing and taxi shakedowns ( charging onerous fares ) remained prevalent and that police harassment occurred throughout the country .

the state department warned in early 2009 that the trend was away from such petty crime and toward violent attacks against foreigners , several of which have resulted in injuries .

it also warned americans of armenian ancestry traveling to azerbaijan that the azerbaijani government has "claimed that it is unable to guarantee their safety. .

while a consensus appears to exist among most u.s. policymakers on the desirability of fostering democratization , the creation of free markets , trade and investment , integration with the west , and responsible security policies in the south caucasus states , others urge different emphases or levels of u.s. involvement .

some consider the united states as being the "indispensable power," leading the way in fostering peace , stability , security , and development in the region .

critics assert that the united states has historically had few interests in this region , and argue that developments there are largely marginal to u.s. interests .

in any event , they argue , eu expansion is bringing the south caucasus into closer proximity to europe , making the region a higher priority interest of europe than of the united states .

they advocate limited u.s. involvement to ensure general u.s. goals of ameliorating strife and instability , fostering democratization and regional cooperation , and improving human rights and the quality of life .

one view holds that greater u.s. assistance for the region to bring stability could have a positive effect on north caucasian areas of russia and on turkey , as well as on european security .

they urge greater u.s. aid and conflict resolution efforts to contain warfare , crime , smuggling , terrorism , and islamic extremism and bolster independence of the states .

more u.s. ties with the region might serve to "contain" or modify iranian influences .

some also argue that improved u.s. ties with azerbaijan would benefit u.s. relations with other islamic countries , particularly turkey and the central asian states .

many add that u.s. encouragement of caspian region oil and natural gas development and pipelines to the west that do not traverse russia or iran would expand world supplies , making the west somewhat less vulnerable to supply cutoffs in the middle east or russia .

the administration also has pursued close ties with armenia and georgia because of their professions of democratic principles , concerns by armenian - americans and others over armenia's fate , and appreciation among u.s. policymakers for georgia's pro - western policies .

they also point to the prompt cooperation offered to the united states by armenia , azerbaijan , and georgia in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001 , and their military support for stabilization efforts in iraq and afghanistan .

other observers argue that u.s. aid for humanitarian and counter - proliferation purposes should continue in the region , but other aid should be curtailed , particularly since these states continue to fall short of u.s. goals for democratization , human rights , and peace settlements .

great caution is in order in adopting policies and actions that will heavily involve the united states in a region beset by ethnic and civil conflicts , according to this view .

some observers question whether u.s. interests are threatened by alleged al qaeda or other international terrorists in the region .

they also question whether the united states should play the lead role in advocating diverse routes for the export of oil and gas from the caspian region .

many in congress and elsewhere object to any substantial u.s. assistance to azerbaijan until the country moves toward peace with armenia and nk .

the united states has advocated that neighboring states respect the sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity of the south caucasian states , and resolve border and other disputes peacefully .

the u.s. policy of engagement with both russia and the south caucasus states has suffered substantially in the wake of russia's august 2008 invasion of georgia .

some observers who view russia as taking disproportionate actions in georgia urge stronger western sanctions against russia , while eu and obama administration policymakers have appeared to stress continued cooperation with russia on arms control , non - proliferation , anti - terrorism , and other important shared security interests .

at the same time , these policymakers have demanded that russia reverse its recognition of the independence of abkhazia and south ossetia and its basing of troops in these regions .

some observers advocate a major role for turkey to counter undue influence by iran and russia , including by calling for closer eu - turkish cooperation .

caspian regional oil exports from azerbaijan , kazakhstan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan ( excluding russia ) might have constituted about 3% of world oil exports and gas exports might have constituted about 8% , according to 2007-2008 data in t he world factbook .

 ( azerbaijan's oil exports were about 0.8% of world oil exports and gas exports were about 0.6% of world gas exports. ) .

oil and gas exports from these countries are projected to increase in coming years , making these countries of incremental significance as world suppliers , according to this view .

the may and november 2002 u.s. - russia summit statements on energy cooperation appeared to mark a u.s. policy of cooperation with russia in the development of caspian oil resources .

however , the united states backed the construction of the btc oil pipeline and the scp for gas in part as hedges against a possibly uncooperative russia .

successive u.s .

administrations have argued that the economic benefits gained by the region by developing its energy resources would be accompanied by contractual and other rule of law developments , which could foster regional stability and conflict resolution .

in january 2010 , richard morningstar , the state department's special envoy for eurasian energy , stressed that the three main goals of the administration's eurasian energy strategy are to encourage the development of oil and gas resources in the caspian region ; to support energy security in europe by advocating the development of multiple sources of energy supplies and multiple routes to market ; and to assist the caspian countries in expanding their export routes .

he averred that the united states plays "a supporting , not leading , role" in implementing these goals by "listen[ing] , identify[ing] common interests and priorities and play[ing] a facilitating role where we can. .

such efforts include the creation of a ministerial - level consultative u.s. - eu energy council and an energy working group within the u.s. - russia bi - national presidential commission .

to diversify supply routes to europe , the administration supports the completion of the turkey - greece - italy ( tgi ) gas pipeline , the building of the nabucco gas pipeline , and kazakhstan's expansion of oil shipments through the south caucasus .

he urged that turkey and azerbaijan agree on the transit of the latter's gas to europe and that turkmenistan and iraq ( but not iran ) also agree to supply gas through "south corridor" pipelines .

the united states also calls for european energy integration and the development of other sources of supply for europe , such as gas from north africa and lng from qatar and nigeria .

he stated that the administration's focus on diversified sources and routes means that it is not opposed to russia's pipeline projects , such as nord stream or south stream — since europe must decide which pipeline routes best serve their interests — or russia's decision to expand the capacity of the caspian pipeline consortium's oil pipeline .

critics of u.s. policy raise concerns about regional stability , ownership of caspian sea fields , and the comparative size of regional reserves .

they question whether the oil and gas and other natural resources in these new states are vital to u.s. security .

some observers also reject the argument that energy and pipeline development may boost economic development — rather than merely the wealth of regional elites — and thereby foster the settlement of ethnic and civil conflicts in the region .

instead , they urge greater attention to conflict resolution and broader - based economic and democratic reforms that would better serve the people of the region .

observers who urge greater emphasis on u.s. security assistance to the south caucasus states argue that such aid serves crucial u.s. interests .

without greater assistance , these states may not consolidate their independence .

the states remain vulnerable to international terrorist groups and to coercion from neighboring countries .

these observers emphasize that u.s. customs and border training and equipment and other nonproliferation aid prevent wmd technologies , materials , and personnel from falling prey to terrorist states or groups and from being smuggled through the region .

they also argue that the states may not be able to adequately safeguard their energy pipelines from terrorists or criminals .

they urge greater u.s. military - to - military assistance , including for military institution - building , basic soldier life support , and military education and training programs that bolster human rights .

such aid , in this view , will foster the creation of a professional , western - style military that is better able to resist external security threats , and will foster democratic civil - military relations that reduces the chance of military coups .

greater u.s. support for pfp training — involving cooperation among regional militaries — could spur these states to work together .

these observers also argue that as iran increases its military capabilities , including missiles and possibly nuclear weapons , the south caucasus states may necessarily seek closer countervailing ties with the united states .

alternatively , the region might feel pressured to seek greater accommodation with iran , including by distancing itself from the united states .

georgia's integration into western institutions , including nato , bolsters security in the black sea - caspian sea regions .

critics question whether the region is a vital u.s. interest necessitating enhanced u.s. security commitments and aid .

they warn that the stepped - up u.s. security training and arms transfers has added to arms races in the region and tensions with other outside powers .

they argue that the united states should primarily seek to encourage conflict resolution and regional cooperation in demilitarization .

they oppose providing formal security guarantees or establishing military bases in the region , and endorse making it plain that any u.s. security assistance provided implies no defense "umbrella. .

in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , these contrasting arguments were at the forefront of debate over future u.s. military - to - military assistance to georgia .

advocates of boosted u.s. security assistance to georgia argued that the u.s. military training provided to georgian troops was designed for counter - terrorism , including to support coalition actions in iraq , rather than for conventional military operations .

they suggested that more robust u.s. security assistance — along with assistance that would have been in the works if nato had offered a map to georgia in april 2008 — might have deterred russia from its disproportionate military actions in georgia .

some critics of this view asserted that u.s. and nato assistance to georgia's military emboldened the country's leadership to launch an action in south ossetia , whether or not the action was provoked by russia .

they also pointed to russian president medvedev's opposition to a nato map for georgia as destabilizing and a threat to russia , and his assertion that he would have ordered russian troops to invade georgia even if georgia had been granted a map .

the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership , signed in january 2009 , appears to support the former viewpoint by stating that "our two countries share a vital interest in a strong , independent , sovereign , unified , and democratic georgia.... we plan to undertake a program of enhanced security cooperation intended to increase georgian capabilities and to strengthen georgia's candidacy for nato membership... .

the united states and georgia intend to expand the scope of their ongoing defense and security cooperation programs to defeat [threats to global peace and stability] and to promote peace and stability .

a defense and security cooperation partnership between the united states and georgia is of benefit to both nations and the region.... the united states supports the efforts of georgia to provide for its legitimate security and defense needs. .

at the same time , u.s. authorities appear to be carefully assessing how best to carry out these provisions of the charter .

some observers argue that the major security problems faced by the south caucasus states are largely the result of inadequate or fragile democratization .

the illegitimacy of the governments in the eyes of significant numbers of citizens endangers civil and ethnic peace and sustainable development and invites foreign meddling , in this view .

some observers recommend greater u.s. and western attention to bolstering social programs so that public demands that are unleashed by liberalization do not destabilize fragile democratic institutions .

after the "rose revolution" in georgia and a relatively free and fair presidential election in early 2004 , political instability increased in 2007 , resulting in president saakashvili's resignation in order to hold a snap presidential election ( which he won ) .

his stated intention in holding the snap election was to restore stability by pledging a more open and responsive political system that would better address quality of life concerns .

however , progress in democratization has been slow and political instability still appears to be a substantial problem in 2010 .

the united states has provided most assistance for democratization to armenia , and somewhat less for georgia .

u.s. aid for democratization in azerbaijan was explicitly permitted by congress in fy1998 and thereafter .

armenia's may 2007 legislative elections "demonstrated improvement and were conducted largely in accordance with ... international standards for democratic elections," according to the conclusions made by observers from the osce , coe , and the eu .

however , these observers still raised some concerns over pro - government party domination of electoral commissions , the low number of candidates in constituency races , and inaccurate campaign finance disclosures .

election observers from the osce , coe , and the eu stated that armenia's february 2008 presidential election "mostly met osce commitments ... in the pre - election period and during voting hours," but that "serious challenges to some commitments did emerge , especially after election day .

this displayed an insufficient regard for standards essential to democratic elections and devalued the overall election process .

in particular , the vote count demonstrated deficiencies of accountability and transparency...." in the case of azerbaijan , osce monitors reported large - scale irregularities during the 2005 legislative election , particularly in vote - counting , but the u.s. administration viewed the race as indicating the azerbaijani government's commitment to democratization .

election observers from the osce , coe , and the eu stated that azerbaijan's october 2008 presidential election "marked considerable progress toward meeting osce and council of europe commitments and other international standards but did not meet all ... the principles of a meaningful and pluralistic democratic election. .

the observers commended a peaceful voting process that was "well organized and efficient," but were critical of a "lack of robust competition and of vibrant political discourse facilitated by media. .

critics of u.s. democratization aid have suggested that the administration's stress on gradual and peaceful political change in the south caucasus connotes u.s. support for the current ruling elites .

they contend that u.s. support may unwittingly assist these elites in staying in power , making peaceful democratic transitions from these entrenched groups to others more problematic , and encouraging the countervailing rise of extremist parties and groups as alternative channels of dissent .

these critics urge greater adherence to the policy that "aid follows reform," so that u.s. assistance is reduced to regimes that fail to democratize and continue to violate human rights .

russia according to many observers , russia — the former colonial power — is the most serious potential threat to the security and independence of the south caucasian states .

russia has appeared to place a greater strategic importance on maintaining influence in the south caucasus region than in much of central asia ( except kazakhstan ) .

its early determination to remain closely involved in the region included its pressure on azerbaijan and georgia in 1993 to get them to join the cis and sign the collective security treaty , and on georgia to acquiesce to russian military bases on its soil .

the elevation of vladimir putin to russia's presidency marked a more coordinated and activist russian stance toward the region .

then - acting president putin approved a "national security concept" in january 2000 that termed foreign efforts to "weaken" russia's "position" in the south caucasus , or to thwart "integrative processes" in the cis , as security threats .

it also called for protecting russia's economic interests in routes for energy flows from the caspian and elsewhere .

a new military doctrine approved by putin also stressed these threats , including warnings that nato might intervene in conflicts in the cis , such as the nk or abkhaz conflicts , as it did in the kosovo region of yugoslavia .

during medvedev's presidency , a new national security strategy promulgated in may 2009 and a new military doctrine released in february 2010 stated that the main national security threats facing russia included nato's "plans to advance the alliance's military infrastructure to russia's borders and attempts to impart global functions to it. .

the military doctrine also stressed that one of the tasks of the armed forces is to protect russian citizens outside of russia .

according to some observers , russia's 1999-2005 chechnya campaign and 2008 invasion and effective occupation of parts of georgia appear to demonstrate the determination of the putin / medvedev leadership to grasp for regional influence over the south caucasus .

other observers argue that such russian intentions , however , may in fact be unattainable because of russia's strategic weakness .

during his presidency , putin launched new regional initiatives , including an agreement in july 2000 to hold regular biannual "caucasus four" summits focusing on deepening russia's influence through dispute mediation and security cooperation ( only a few ever were held ) .

another agreement in september 2000 between russia , iran , and india called for creating a north - south international transport corridor ( nstc ) .

according to russian media , major reasons for pursuing a russian - oriented nstc included counteracting the regional development of routes bypassing russia , such as the btc oil pipeline and scp , and the russian strategic concept's call for protecting russia's interests in the caspian region .

in may 2002 , an inter - ministerial agreement was signed between russia , iran , and india inaugurating the nstc with termini at bombay and st. petersburg .

shipments along the route began in july 2004 , and at a meeting in late 2004 , representatives from russia , kazakhstan , india , iran , azerbaijan and oman discussed measures to expedite shipping .

the opening of the btc pipeline and the scp , however , have been a blow to russia's rationales for the nstc .

armenia has been concerned about proposals to build regional railroads that would bypass the country , which it argues will further isolate it from transport routes .

accords were signed in 2004-2005 between the state - controlled russian railways company and azerbaijani and iranian railway officials to form a consortium to build a 250-mile railway from azerbaijan's town of astara to iran's towns of resht and kazvin .

this proposed railway would link with others to the north and south , permitting land - based transport of cargo from europe to the persian gulf , and would supplement existing transport by ferry from russian and iranian caspian sea ports .

a memorandum of understanding was signed in march 2010 by the iran - russia joint transportation working group to form a joint company to fund the building the railway .

iran also is planning to build a railway to armenia .

the presidents of turkey , azerbaijan , and georgia signed a declaration of intent in may 2005 to build a railway linking kars in turkey to baku in azerbaijan .

financing of the railway was agreed upon by the parties in january 2007 and construction began in late 2007 .

building continued in early 2010 .

armenia objected that this project bypasses armenia ( an existing but unused railway links armenia to kars ) .

successive u.s .

administrations hoped that russia would progress in democratization and could play a stabilizing role in the south caucasus , but these hopes largely lapsed in recent years as russia became more authoritarian .

congressional concerns over russia's motives in the eurasian states have been reflected in provisions in every foreign operations appropriations act since fy1994 prohibiting aid to any eurasian state that violates the territorial integrity or national sovereignty of another ( a presidential waiver is included ; the waiver has been used to provide aid to armenia ) .

russia has appeared to place the greatest strategic importance on exercising influence in the military - strategic sphere , less on influence in the economic sphere , and a minimum on influence in the domestic political sphere , except for obtaining assurances on the treatment of ethnic russians .

russia has tried to stop terrorism , ethnic "undesirables," drugs , weapons , and other contraband from entering its borders , and to contain or manipulate separatist ideologies in the north and south caucasus .

russia has averred that these concerns have caused it to maintain military bases in armenia and georgia and a relatively large caspian flotilla .

the states variously have responded to putin's policies .

armenia has been interested in close security ties with russia — given that it is almost surrounded by islamic states that support azerbaijan's sovereignty over nk — and it views russia as a traditional protector against the turks .

azerbaijan has been concerned about russia's ties with armenia .

georgia long pressed for the closure of all russian military bases in the country and the removal of russian "peacekeepers" ( or their inclusion in a larger international force ) in abkhazia and south ossetia , but failed in august 2008 to advance this goal .

several developments since georgia's late 2003 "rose revolution" appeared to mark russia's declining influence in the south caucasus .

these included nato's increased ties with all the states of the region , the completion of the btc oil pipeline and the scp for gas , russia's agreement to close its remaining military bases in georgia , and decisions by azerbaijan and georgia to end or reduce their russian gas imports .

these developments appeared to be strengthening the region's pro - western and pro - u.s. orientation .

russia's invasion of georgia in august 2008 , its recognition of the independence of abkhazia and south ossetia , and its establishment of military bases in these regions mark a substantial reassertion of russian influence in the south caucasus , according to some observers .

military - strategic interests russia's armed presence in armenia and georgia — including military base personnel , "peacekeepers," and border troops — was significant during most of the 1990s , but temporarily declined in recent years in georgia .

the first step by russia in maintaining a military presence in the region was the signing of the cis collective security treaty by armenia , russia , and others in 1992 , which calls for mutual defense consultations .

russia prevailed on georgia and azerbaijan to join the cis and also sign the treaty , but they withdrew from the treaty in early 1999 .

russia secured permission for two military bases in armenia and four in georgia , and russian forces help guard the armenian - turkish border .

in 1993 , azerbaijan was the first eurasian state to pressure russia to withdraw its troops , except at the gabala radar site in northern azerbaijan .

 ( giving up on closing the site , in january 2002 azerbaijan signed a 10-year lease with russia to permit up to 1,500 personnel to man the radar. ) .

in 1999 , georgia assumed full control over guarding its land and sea borders , except for some liaison officers .

at the november 1999 osce summit , the south caucasus states joined 27 others in agreeing to adapt the conventional armed forces in europe ( cfe ) treaty .

the treaty adaptation process gave georgia a forum to push for a reduced russian military presence in georgia , and when fully implemented also will provide for a reduced russian military presence in the north caucasus .

to comply with new weapons limits under the treaty , russia agreed to reduce weaponry at its bases in georgia , to close its bases at gudauta and vaziani by july 2001 , and to complete negotiations during 2000 on the status of the other two bases at batumi and akhalkalaki .

the treaty remained unratified by nato signatories until russia satisfied these and other conditions .

russia moved some weaponry from the bases in georgia to bases in armenia , raising objections from azerbaijan .

on july 1 , 2001 , georgia reported that the vaziani base and airfield had been turned over by russia to georgia .

the russian government reported in june 2002 that it had closed its gudauta base , but announced that 320 troops would remain to guard facilities and support "peacekeepers" who would relax at the base .

at its december 2002 ministerial meeting , the osce hailed the gudauta closure — over georgia's objections that the base was not under its control — and appeared unwilling to press russia on terminating the other bases .

at the meeting , the united states voiced "hope" that russia would make progress in meeting its cfe commitments .

a more determined stance was taken by the osce in subsequent fora .

russia asserted that it needed $300 million to $1 billion and three to ten years to close the other two bases .

russian defense minister sergey ivanov stated in june 2005 that about 2,500 russian troops were at the bases .

putting pressure on russia to abide by its commitments , the georgian legislature in march 2005 passed a resolution calling for russia to come to an agreement by mid - may on closing the bases by january 2006 or face various restrictions on base operations .

this pressure , and perhaps a may 2005 u.s. presidential visit , spurred russia to come to an agreement with georgia announced on may 30 , 2005 , setting 2008 as the deadline for closing the bases .

paving the way for this agreement , president putin on may 23 , 2005 , stated that georgia had the sovereign right to request the base closures and that his military general staff had assured him that the cold war - era bases were not of strategic importance to russia .

on june 27 , 2007 , russia formally handed over the akhalkalaki base to georgia's control .

on november 21 , 2007 , the russian foreign ministry proclaimed that the batumi base had been closed and that russia had "fully" accomplished its obligations to georgia on the withdrawal of military facilities .

georgia continued to protest that the gudauta base retained some russian forces and equipment and had not been handed over to georgia's control .

it also continued to call for either the removal of russian "peacekeepers" from abkhazia and south ossetia or their incorporation into a larger international peacekeeping force .

russia's military force withdrawals from georgia temporarily made its presence in armenia more significant in terms of regional influence .

armenia has argued that the russian bases provide for regional stability by protecting it from attack .

the total number of russian troops in armenia has been estimated at about 3,500 .

russia has supplied many weapons to armenia — including s - 300 missiles , mig - 29 fighters , and some of the equipment relocated from georgia as part of the base - closure process — which azerbaijan views as destabilizing .

in addition to this military influence in the region , russia has about 90,000 troops in the north caucasus area that it can use to intimidate the region .

other russian forces along the region's borders include the black sea fleet and the caspian flotilla .

the latter has been expanded in recent years while the former faced dwindling funding until 2003 .

armenia is the base for a regional air defense system .

russian military forces from the north caucasus and the black sea fleet invaded georgia in august 2008 .

after the conflict , russia substantially enlarged its military presence in the south caucasus with its establishment of military bases in abkhazia and south ossetia , each reportedly containing about 3,500 troops .

russia long has attempted to develop closer security ties with azerbaijan to counter u.s. influence .

russia has been concerned about possible u.s. plans to seek a greater security presence and has feared that u.s. assistance would permit azerbaijan to bolster its caspian sea navy , challenging russian naval predominance .

in february 2003 , a framework agreement on azerbaijan - russia military cooperation accord was signed , opening the possibility of russian military training and arms sales to azerbaijani forces .

however , such cooperation has appeared minor , perhaps because azerbaijan's aim in signing the agreement was to persuade the united states to offer more security assistance .

among other russia - azerbaijan security cooperation , in may 2005 , the interior ( police ) ministers of the two countries signed an accord to cooperate on anti - terrorism and announced that cooperation in 2004 had resulted in the extradition of dozens of suspected criminals by both sides .

in march 2006 , visiting then - president putin called for enhanced bilateral economic and security cooperation , but aliyev reportedly would not agree to support the creation of a russia - led caspian sea naval security alliance or commit to greater azerbaijani use of russian oil export pipelines .

after late 2006 , azerbaijani - russian relations appeared to worsen over demands by russia's gazprom for substantial gas price hikes , which led azerbaijan to cease importing from gazprom .

azerbaijan's relations with russia appeared to greatly improve in 2009-2010 with the beginning of gas sales from azerbaijan to russia in the face of azeri disputes with turkey over gas prices and transit fees and questioning by azerbaijan about the western commitment to the nabucco gas pipeline ( see below ) .

after september 11 , 2001 , russia stepped up its claims that georgia's pankisi gorge harbored chechen terrorists with links to bin laden , who used the gorge as a staging ground for attacks into chechnya .

some russian officials in 2002 initially condemned u.s. plans to provide military training and equipment to georgia to help it deal with terrorism in the gorge and elsewhere the united states in turn expressed "unequivocal opposition" to some russian assertions of a right to military intervention within georgia to combat terrorism .

georgia launched a policing effort in the gorge and agreed with russia to some coordinated border patrols in late 2002 that somewhat reduced tensions over this issue .

in february 2004 , saakashvili reportedly pledged during a moscow visit to combat "wahabbis" ( referring to islamic extremists ) in georgia , including chechen terrorists hiding in the pankisi gorge and international terrorists that russia alleged had transited georgia to fight in chechnya .

russian officials appeared somewhat satisfied in recent years that georgia had controlled terrorism in the gorge .

since the 2008 russia - georgia conflict , however , russian authorities again have raised heightened concerns about alleged terrorist bases in the gorge that threaten the north caucasus .

georgia has termed such concerns baseless .

caspian energy resources in recent years , russian energy firms have played more prominent roles in the caspian sea region .

as part of such efforts , russia's policymakers during much of the 1990s insisted that the legal status of the caspian sea be determined before resources could be exploited .

russia changed its stance by agreeing on seabed delineation with kazakhstan ( 1998 and 2002 ) and azerbaijan ( 2002 ) , prompting objections from iran and turkmenistan .

before september 11 , 2001 , putin criticized western private investment in energy development in the caspian region , and appointed a special energy emissary to lobby the region to encourage energy ties with russia .

after september 11 , 2001 , however , he appeared to ease his criticism of a growing u.s. presence .

at the may 2002 u.s. - russia summit , the two presidents issued a joint statement endorsing multiple pipeline routes , implying russia's non - opposition to plans to build the btc oil pipeline and an associated gas pipeline .

in march 2004 , however , a russian official stated that putin wanted to ensure that the greatest volume of caspian energy continued to flow through russian pipelines .

a u.s. - russia strategic framework declaration , issued in april 2008 , reaffirmed the goal of enhancing the "diversity of energy supplies through economically viable routes and means of transport. .

in the south caucasus region , russian energy firms have moved aggressively to purchase or otherwise gain influence over energy development and distribution .

in armenia , russia reportedly lobbied to limit the capacity of the iran - armenia gas pipeline ( the first phase of which opened in march 2007 ) and a consortium controlled by gazprom succeeded in becoming the operator .

in january 2010 , azerbaijan agreed to permit gazprom to import up to 35.3 billion cubic feet of gas per year in 2010 and 70.6 billion cubic feet in 2011 .

gazprom stated that it was ready to purchase as much gas in the future as azerbaijan was willing to sell , perhaps a bid to become the predominant customer for azerbaijani gas .

some observers suggest that russia's growing military presence in georgia's breakaway abkhazia and south ossetia , as well as russia's continuing poor relations with georgia , could make georgia less attractive to investors as a transit route for new east - west oil and gas pipelines .

the protection of ethnic russians as a percentage of the population , there are fewer ethnic russians in the south caucasus states than in most other eurasian states .

according to the most recent censuses in the three countries , ethnic russians constituted less than 4% of the region's population .

russia has voiced concerns about the safety of ethnic russians in azerbaijan and georgia .

a related russian interest has involved former soviet citizens who want to claim russian citizenship or protection .

in june 2002 , a new russian citizenship law had facilitated granting citizenship and passports to most abkhazians and south ossetians by the time of the 2008 russia - georgia conflict , so that russia could claim that its military incursion was aimed at protecting its citizenry .

many observers argue that this justification for the incursion proves that the issue of protecting the human rights of ethnic russians and pro - russian groups is a front for russia's military - strategic and economic interests .

pro - russian fellow - travelers and agents in place are used to boost russian influence and to oppose u.s. interests .

turkey successive u.s .

administrations have generally viewed turkey as able to foster pro - western policies and to discourage iranian interference in the south caucasus states .

according to these policymakers and others , turkey can play an important role in the region , and provide a model of a non - authoritarian , non - theocratic islamic state .

critics of an over - reliance on turkey's role in the region point to the turkish tilt toward azerbaijan in the nk conflict and turkey's less than full support for u.s. - led coalition actions in iraq in march - april 2003 in cautioning that the united states and nato might be drawn by their ties with turkey into policy imbroglios .

some in turkey have envisaged azerbaijan and central asia as part of a pan - turanic ( turkic peoples ) bloc .

turkey seeks good relations with azerbaijan and georgia and some contacts with armenia , while trying to limit russian and iranian influence .

while turkey has gained some influence in the region , it has been constrained by its own economic problems , poor relations with armenia , and countervailing russian influence .

armenia is a member of the black sea economic cooperation zone , initiated by turkey , and the two states have established consular relations .

roadblocks to better armenian - turkish relations include turkey's rejection of armenians' claims that turkey perpetuated a genocide against them in 1915 and its support for azerbaijan in the nk conflict .

turkey's 2008 proposal of a "caucasus stability and cooperation platform" ( members are envisaged as including the south caucasus states , turkey , and russia ) aims for the discussion and amelioration of regional problems and the development of cooperation .

turkey's increased influence in azerbaijan has included azerbaijan's adoption of a latin alphabet and the construction of the btc oil and associated gas pipelines .

however , relations were harmed in 2009-2010 as the sides argued over the price turkey would pay for azerbaijani gas .

azerbaijan also has objected to turkey's offer to open its border with armenia ( see above ) , and has insisted that turkey continue to make such a move contingent upon the settlement of the nk conflict .

turkey has appeared to assuage this concern by reiterating its support for azerbaijan in the nk conflict and linking the opening of the border to progress in settling the nk conflict .

the azerbaijani - turkish dispute over the gas price reportedly was resolved in late february 2010 .

georgia has an ongoing interest in ties with the approximately one million georgians residing in turkey and the approximately 50,000 residing in iran , and has signed friendship treaties with both states .

turkey and russia are georgia's primary trade partners .

russia has been able to establish military bases in armenia and georgia to buoy up its regional influence .

turkey views the russian bases in armenia and georgia as potential security threats .

however , turkey and russia have improved their ties in recent months , particularly in energy cooperation , which could make turkey less interested in supporting the building of more pipelines transiting the south caucasus .

iran many in iran initially viewed the breakup of the soviet union as creating a "new middle east" centered on iran , and including afghanistan , armenia , azerbaijan , the central asian states , pakistan , and turkey , but poor relations with afghanistan's taliban group and others caused this idea to fade .

iran's interests in the south caucasus have appeared moderate and not focused on dominating the region through subversion .

azerbaijani officials at times have alleged that elements in iran have fostered islamic fundamentalism or sponsored terrorism , and georgian officials have reported islamic missionary activities in areas of georgia with islamic populations , including kvemo kartli ( in which about one - half of the population is ethnic azerbaijani ) and kakheti ( in which about one - tenth of the population is ethnic azerbaijani or kist ) .

iran's interests in the south caucasus include building economic ties and discouraging western powers such as turkey and the united states from gaining influence and from working to end regional instability that might threaten its own territorial integrity .

iran and russia cooperated during most of the 1990s in trying to block western energy development in the caspian by demanding that the legal status of resources first be determined .

russia has broken with iran on this stance by signing bilateral and trilateral border agreements with azerbaijan and kazakhstan .

in the wake of growing international criticism of its nuclear programs in recent years , iran has intensified its attempts to involve itself in south caucasus economic and security issues , to dissuade the states from bolstering security ties with the united states , including by signing agreements to host u.s. military assets , which iran fears the united states would use to attack it .

high - level iranians have visited each regional state , have hosted high - level return visits , and have met with regional leaders in international forums to make their case .

a major proportion of the world's azerbaijanis ( estimates range from 6-12 million ) , and about 200,000 armenians reside in iran .

ethnic azerbaijanis are iran's largest ethnic minority , constituting almost one - third of its population .

iran has limited trans - azerbaijani contacts to discourage the spread of ethnic consciousness among its "southern azerbaijanis," and has heavily criticized politicians in azerbaijan who advocate separatism in iran .

the example of the assertion of kurdish ethnic rights in post - saddam iraq in 2003 has galvanized some azerbaijanis who propagandize for greater rights for "southern azerbaijanis. .

alternatively , azerbaijani elites fear iranian - supported islamic fundamentalism and question the degree of iran's support for an independent azerbaijan .

iran has growing trade ties with armenia and georgia , but its trade with azerbaijan has declined .

iran has argued for some time that azerbaijan would most benefit financially by cooperating in building energy pipelines to iran .

islamic shiite fundamentalists in iran have urged iran's government to forego its official policy of neutrality in the nk conflict and embrace solidarity with shiites in azerbaijan .

a major thaw in azerbaijani - iranian relations took place in 2004-2005 with an exchange of visits by the heads of government .

iran's then - president mohammad khatami visited azerbaijan in august 2004 , during which the two presidents agreed to open an azerbaijani consulate in tabriz .

in january 2005 , ilkham aliyev visited iran .

however , on major issues such as border delineation in the caspian sea and iran's objections to azerbaijani security ties with the united states , the two sides did not come to agreement .

in march 2005 , iranian air began weekly flights from tabriz to baku .

some observers suggested that iran's increased acrimony with the united states may have been a spur to its improved relations with azerbaijan , in order either to encourage azerbaijan to be a mediator or to urge it not to permit u.s. basing .

since 2006 , many in azerbaijan increasingly have been concerned about iran's arrests of ethnic azerbaijani civil rights advocates and alleged separatists , including abbas lisani .

azerbaijani - iranian relations were roiled at the end of 2007 by the conviction in azerbaijan of fifteen individuals on charges of collaborating with the islamic revolution guards corps to plan a coup and carry out terror operations .

after the azerbaijani national security ministry released details of the case , the iranian foreign ministry denied any iranian involvement and termed the case a scheme by israel and the united states to harm azerbaijani - iranian relations .

u.s. policy aims at containing iran's threats to u.s. interests in the region ( see crs report rl32048 , iran: u.s .

concerns and policy responses , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

some critics argue that if the south caucasus states are discouraged from dealing with iran , particularly in building pipelines through iran , they would face greater pressure to accommodate russian interests .

others among non - bordering states , the united states and european states are the most influential in the south caucasus in terms of aid , trade , exchanges , and other ties .

u.s. and european goals in the region are broadly compatible , involving integrating it into the west and preventing an anti - western orientation , opening it to trade and transport , obtaining energy resources , and helping it become peaceful , stable , and democratic .

major programs have been pursued by the european union , nato's partnership for peace , osce , european bank for reconstruction and development , and european - based non - governmental organizations .

u.s. and eu policies toward the region have sometimes differed , primarily on the greater willingness of the eu to cooperate with russia and iran in regional projects .

u.s. and european energy firms also have vied to develop caspian region resources .

in 2004 , eu foreign ministers invited the south caucasus states and others to participate in a "european neighborhood policy" of enhanced aid , trade , and political ties .

in 2009 , a subset of participants in the "european neighborhood policy" — the south caucasus states , belarus , moldova , and ukraine — were singled out to take part in an "eastern partnership" program to enhance their ties with and aid from the eu .

to carry out the program , 600 million euros were allocated for the period 2010-2013 .

the south caucasus region has developed some economic and political ties with other black sea and caspian sea littoral states , besides those discussed above , particularly with ukraine , romania , kazakhstan , and turkmenistan .

various central asian states have common interests with azerbaijan , including some linguistic and religious ties and concerns about some common bordering powers ( iran and russia ) .

both the south caucasus and central asia face terrorist threats and drug trafficking from afghanistan .

energy producers kazakhstan and turkmenistan are using or considering trans - caspian transport as a means to get their oil and gas to western markets .

as central asia's trade and transport links to the south caucasus become more significant , it will become more dependent on stability in the region .

