for nearly a decade , the former yugoslav republic of macedonia managed to escape the kindof brutal ethnic conflict in croatia , bosnia , and kosovo that accompanied the breakup of the formeryugoslavia in the 1990s .

the international community gave high priority to preventing the spreadof ethnic conflict to macedonia , since it was feared that war in macedonia could quickly involvesome or all of macedonia's neighboring countries and lead to a broader balkan war .

macedonia washeld up as a model , albeit an imperfect one , of inter - ethnic coexistence and democratic rule , withactive participation of the albanian community in political institutions , despite persistent discordin inter - ethnic relations .

the swift emergence in early 2001 of a militant ethnic albanian guerrillamovement in western macedonia therefore caught many observers by surprise .

by march 2001 , violent conflict between the rebels and macedonian security forces had spread to several areas around the city of tetovo , prompting the macedonian government to embark on amajor military campaign to quell the insurgency in western macedonia .

with strong internationalbacking , the government opened all - party talks on inter - ethnic issues in april .

a national unitygovernment comprised of all major political parties was created in may .

clashes between rebel andgovernment forces continued in some areas of the country , as marathon talks among all coalitionparties on political reforms remained deadlocked .

negotiations finally reached agreement on keyreform issues in early august .

the political parties signed a framework agreement on august 13,paving the way for the deployment of a small nato force to begin disarming the rebel forces .

operation essential harvest , comprising 4,500 european forces , began collecting rebel weapons onaugust 27 and completed its mission within a month .

a much smaller task force has remained inmacedonia to provide security for international civilian monitors overseeing the process ofimplementing inter - ethnic reforms .

implementation of the framework agreement has progressedslowly , but has moved forward in recent months .

several factors may have accounted for the emergence in early 2001 of the rebel insurgency in macedonia .

one may have been the increasing radicalism of disparate ethnic albanian militantgroups operating in kosovo , serbia , and macedonia , and linked to organized crime and regionalsmuggling rings .

the unresolved status of kosovo and limited progress in realizing kosovarself - government since the end of the kosovar war in mid - 1999 may have fueled ethnic albanianradicalism .

 ( 1 ) in addition , the international embraceof the post - milosevic yugoslav and serbianleadership after the fall of milosevic in late 2000 may have discouraged some ethnic albanians'hopes for kosovar independence , to which the international community has not agreed .

some ethnicalbanian rebels in macedonia ( as well as in serbia ) may have sought to provoke a heavy - handedresponse by the serb or macedonian forces , in order to elicit western sympathy and support .

another contributing factor to the macedonian conflict was the continued activism of members ofthe kosovo liberation army ( kla ) , who were supposed to have disbanded and given up theirweapons to the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) after the end of the 1999 conflict in kosovo .

instead , many former kla members regrouped in the demilitarized buffer zone around kosovo andtransferred arms and personnel to macedonia .

a border agreement between macedonia and thefederal republic of yugoslavia ( fry ) in february 2001 , intended to tighten border controls , mayhave also triggered clashes between macedonian border police and ethnic albanian smugglers .

finally , underlying inter - ethnic tensions and poor economic conditions ( especially among ethnicalbanians ) in macedonia provided fertile ground for a drawn - out conflict .

macedonia is one of six former republics of the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia .

 ( 2 ) under yugoslav leader josip broz tito , macedonians were granted the status of constituent nation,language , and culture equal to that of the other yugoslav republics .

following the example ofslovenia , croatia , and bosnia - herzegovina , macedonia declared its independence in late 1991 afterholding a national referendum on the issue .

under the provisional name "the former yugoslavrepublic of macedonia," macedonia became a member of the united nations in may 1992 .

itsubsequently joined several other international organizations under this provisional name .

macedonia has a unicameral parliament , the 120-seat national assembly ( sobranje ) , and a popularly elected president .

from 1991 to 1999 , socialist leader kiro gligorov served as president .

gligorov took credit for macedonia's success in achieving international recognition and forpreventing the country from being drawn into other yugoslav conflicts .

in the last parliamentary elections held in october and november 1998 , the macedonian electorate voted out the long - standing former communist leadership in favor of a coalition headedby the nationalist internal macedonian revolutionary organization - democratic party formacedonian national unity ( vmro - dpmne ) , led by ljubco georgievski .

the coalition includedthe democratic alternative ( da ) party led by vasil tupurkovski , and the democratic party ofalbanians ( dpa ) led by arben xhaferi .

 ( 3 ) coalitiontensions , especially between the da andvmro - dpmne , persisted ( though the tensions were unrelated to inter - ethnic issues ) .

thegovernment underwent several cabinet reshuffles and steadily lost popularity .

in the 1999presidential elections , boris trajkovski of the governing vrmo - dpmne party narrowly defeatedtito petkovski of gligorov's social democratic party ( sdsm ) , primarily on the strength of theethnic albanian vote .

some voting irregularities were reported in the presidential vote as well as inlate 2000 municipal elections .

in november 2000 , the democratic alternative party withdrew from the coalition in an apparent effort to bring down the government and join ranks with the opposition .

however , the georgievskigovernment quickly replaced the da with the small liberal party and managed to remain in power,despite low popularity ratings and numerous political scandals .

the opposition , meanwhile , was notable to unify as a governing alternative to the vmro - dpmne - led coalition .

in may 2001 , at theurging of the international community , an all - party coalition replaced the previous government ona temporary basis until early elections could be organized .

the next elections will likely be held inseptember 2002 .

formerly the poorest republic in the yugoslav federation , macedonia continues to face economic difficulties stemming from internal reforms , external challenges , and more recently,internal ethnic conflict .

macedonia's economy was hit hard by u.n. sanctions against the federalrepublic of yugoslavia ( fry ) from 1992 to 1996 , by a unilateral greek trade embargo from 1994to 1995 , and by the kosovo conflict in 1999 .

gdp growth , extremely modest in the second half ofthe last decade , reached nearly 5% in 2000 .

the 2001 insurgency , however , drove up militaryspending , expanded the budget deficit , and contracted economic activity , trade , and investment .

asa result , gdp declined nearly 4.6% in 2001 .

unemployment estimates range from one - third toone - half of the work force .

corruption is considered endemic .

 ( 4 ) in april 2001 , macedonia becamethe first southeast european country to conclude a stabilization and association agreement with theeuropean union .

however , the eu repeatedly postponed a planned donors' conference formacedonia because of macedonia's lack of progress in implementing political reforms .

theconference was finally held in march 2002 , during which donor countries pledged over $500 millionin financial and developmental assistance .

macedonia's military , the army of the republic of macedonia ( arm ) , has been undergoing a major restructuring and reform process .

macedonia participates in nato's partnership for peace ( pfp ) program and is among the "vilnius" group of ten countries seeking to join nato .

the armyof the republic of macedonia comprises about 16,000 active duty soldiers , 60,000 reserves , and10,000 paramilitary police .

it is organized into two infantry brigades and one border guard brigade .

the arm includes a small marine wing and an army air force with a limited number of aircraft andhelicopters .

 ( 5 ) since early 2001 , ukraine and bulgariahave served as macedonia's primary armssuppliers .

in addition to the state security structures , other armed groups gained prominence duringthe 2001 conflict , including the ethnic albanian national liberation army and albanian nationalarmy .

several macedonian paramilitary groups also emerged , with some reportedly in close contactwith the regular army and police .

 ( 6 ) .

notwithstanding the achievement of reaching agreement on the framework peace document,its swift implementation was considered key to preventing a resumption of violent conflict .

resistance by both sides in the conflict delayed implementation of various aspects of the accords .

western leaders and mediators feared that extremist elements on both sides might encourage amilitary solution over political reforms .

eu envoy alain le roy has encouraged macedonia'spolitical leaders to move beyond the 2001 conflict and focus on the country's substantial economicand development challenges .

on the macedonian side , the more nationalist political leaders initially accused the west of supporting the albanian rebel cause and resisted pressure by the international community to moveforward in implementing the framework agreement .

prime minister georgievski , considered to beamong the most hardline and nationalist slav macedonian politicians , referred to the peaceagreement as "shameful" because it came while the rebels still occupied macedonian territory.georgievski also criticized the number of weapons that nato agreed to collect , calling thedisarmament terms "humiliating. .

 ( 18 ) on thealbanian side , the nla's exclusion from the politicaltalks was thought to undermine the rebels' commitment to disarm .

nevertheless , nla leadersswiftly agreed to the terms of the agreement , although most observers believe that the rebels continueto have access to arms .

the emergence of another , more hardline , albanian rebel group , theself - styled albanian national army , pointed to growing divisions among the albanian forces .

recurring incidents of violence , meanwhile , periodically threatened to derail further progress inimplementing peace .

given this environment , the timetable for parliamentary action was considered ambitious .

the macedonian parliament opened debate on the ohrid framework agreement on august 31 , butspeaker stojan andov blocked further discussion over the following weekend in protest ofunsuccessful attempts by macedonian refugees to return to their homes .

on september 4 , primeminister georgievski harshly criticized the agreement , but nevertheless urged the parliament to passit in order to gain international support .

after lengthy debates , parliament gave initial endorsementto the framework plan on september 6 by a vote of 91 out of 112 members present .

the landmarkvote launched the next phase of implementation - parliamentary consideration of individualamendments to the constitution and other laws enhancing minority rights .

however , numerouscontentious issues contributed to substantial delays in the parliamentary process .

first , some members of parliament pressed for the consideration of a public referendum , in order to put the framework agreement's reforms before public opinion .

western leaders criticizedthe referendum initiative , fearing that it would sink the peace process and encourage the albanianrebels to revert to violence .

nato secretary - general lord robertson , visiting skopje on september14 , called the referendum proposal a "peace wrecking amendment," and said that it was time for themacedonian parliament to fulfill their part of the peace deal .

in the course of several missions tomacedonia , eu foreign policy chief solana and nato secretary general robertson pressedmacedonia's political leaders to revive the stalled parliamentary process of considering the peaceagreement's amendments .

in late october , the macedonian side insisted on re - opening the wordingof the constitution to include mention of the "macedonian people" instead of just macedonia'scitizens , as called for in the framework agreement .

finally on november 16 , the macedonianparliament adopted the constitutional changes outlined in the framework agreement , voting on eachone individually and then the amended constitution as a whole .

another stumbling block in the peace process was the issue of granting amnesty to former ethnic albanian rebels .

in august , president trajkovski pledged to grant an amnesty to theinsurgents , although this aspect was not formally included in the framework agreement .

on october9 , the government issued a proclamation endorsing the president's pledge on amnesty , but themeasure was considered to be unclear as to who would be covered by the amnesty .

many politicians,including prime minister georgievski , opposed any moves to pardon those they considered to be"terrorists. .

in early 2002 , international mediators reportedly leaned hard on the macedonian leadership , warning hardliners against provoking a new crisis and conditioning the offer of internationalfinancial assistance on further progress in implementing the framework agreement .

 ( 19 ) macedonia'sfour main parties agreed to move forward on the adoption of priority laws in order to facilitate theholding of an international donors' conference and to prepare for early elections .

after extensive debate and international mediation , parliament passed ( with the necessary two - thirds majority ) a law on local self - government on january 24 , 2002 .

the law provides for thedevolution of power from the central government to local authorities in the areas of budgeting,planning , education , public services , culture and welfare .

ethnic albanians dropped their demandto include the right of municipalities to merge with one another , which the macedonian parties fearedcould lead to the country's partition .

on march 7 , 2002 , on the eve of an international donors'conference for macedonia , parliament passed an amnesty law that would pardon persons detainedor under investigation for crimes for high treason , armed rebellion , mutiny , and conspiracy againstthe state .

the law is expected to eliminate charges against several thousand ethnic albanians .

theamnesty does not apply to war crimes that could come under un indictment .

former nla leaderswelcomed the law for removing a major barrier to the peace process .

outside of the parliamentary process , international monitors have organized and overseen the phased reintroduction of ethnically - mixed police patrols into former rebel strongholds in anapproximately 150-km region .

the first phase of the confidence - building plan was launched indecember 2001 .

by march 2002 , police units had re - entered 63 of 120 villages .

the united states has long maintained that stability in the former yugoslav republic ofmacedonia is important for balkan stability and u.s. interests .

the united states recognized thefyrom in early 1994 and established full diplomatic relations following the september 1995bilateral agreement that established normalized relations between greece and macedonia .

theclinton administration appointed a special envoy to help resolve the greek - macedonian dispute .

a u.s. military contingent served in the small u.n. preventive deployment mission in macedoniafrom 1993 until early 1999 , when the u.n. mission's mandate expired .

through bilateral economic and military aid programs and support for multilateral development programs , the united states has supported macedonia's efforts to restructure and stabilize itseconomy , strengthen democratic institutions , and integrate into european structures .

during a visitto macedonia in june 1999 , president clinton expressed thanks to the macedonian government forits response to the kosovo conflict and support of the nato mission on its territory .

in fy 2001,the united states provided over $180 million in support for east european democracy ( seed ) actfunds , and several millions more in humanitarian aid and security assistance .

in fy 2002 , the unitedstates is providing approximately $50 million in bilateral seed act assistance and $11 million inmilitary aid .

for fy 2003 , the administration has requested $50 million in seed act assistanceand $11 million in military aid .

on march 23 , 2001 , president bush issued a statement strongly condemning the violence by the albanian extremists and supporting the actions of the macedonian government .

bushencouraged the government to act with restraint and to work with elected albanian representativesto address legitimate concerns of the ethnic albanian community .

the administration agreed tosupply a unit of u.s .

predator unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) to skopje to assist nato in aerialreconnaissance , and to increase intelligence - sharing with the macedonian government .

in may,president trajkovski met with president bush , secretary powell , and defense secretary rumsfeldin washington .

among other things , president trajkovski reportedly requested that the unitedstates designate the nla a terrorist organization .

president bush announced a $10 million aidcommitment over four years to support the new multilingual university in tetovo .

on may 11 , thebush administration welcomed the formation of the wider government coalition in macedonia andurged it to accelerate progress in advancing inter - ethnic reforms .

during president bush's trip toeurope in june 2001 , the president consulted on macedonia with the nato allies , the europeanunion , and with russian president vladimir putin .

bush expressed strong support for the intensifiedpolitical process underway to achieve greater minority rights in macedonia .

president bushwelcomed the august 13 signing of the peace agreement and called on the parties to lay down theirweapons in order to implement the deal .

a white house statement said that "the cease - fire must berespected , the insurgents must disarm and disband , and macedonia's assembly must adopt thenecessary constitutional amendments and legislation. .

president trajkovski made another visit towashington in february 2002 .

about half of the border between kosovo and macedonia lies in the u.s. - led sector of kfor .

currently about 5,500 u.s. forces ( about 14% of the total ) serve in kfor .

in addition , the unitedstates maintains camp able sentry , a logistics unit in macedonia ( with about 500 u.s. armedforces ) supporting u.s. forces in kfor .

during the 2001 conflict , the united states augmentedsecurity at the u.s. embassy in skopje .

in june , the administration reportedly told its allies in natothat it did not want to contribute u.s. armed forces to a proposed nato disarmament mission inmacedonia , although it would not object to the creation of such a mission by other countries .

 ( 27 ) onjune 27 , president bush said that he would not rule out the possibility that u.s. armed forces mightbe sent to macedonia , and that no option was "off the table. .

administration officials said that theunited states would participate in the force in ways involving logistics , command and control,communications , and intelligence , largely utilizing u.s. military assets already on the ground in thebalkans .

 ( 28 ) in august , the pentagon specified thatu.s .

military personnel and facilities in kosovoand macedonia would provide medical , intelligence , and logistical support to the essential harvestmission , in addition to their duties as part of kfor .

 ( 29 ) no u.s. troops took part in the weaponscollection process , nor were additional u.s. armed forces sent to the region to assist the essentialharvest operation or reinforce the existing u.s. presence in the balkans .

in 2001 , president bush designated several ethnic albanian groups and their leaders "extremist" for their violent actions that threatened peace and stability in the former yugoslavia .

theadministration approved measures to isolate and sanction extremist forces in the balkans , includingmembers of the nla .

these included blocking the assets and property of the named extremistgroups and individuals , prohibiting u.s. payments to these groups and individuals , and barring theirentry into the united states .

 ( 30 ) following the september 11 terrorist attacks on the united states , former u.s. balkans envoy james pardew said that the united states would remain firmly committed to and focused on thepeace process in macedonia .

 ( 31 ) he said thatneither changes in u.s. policy toward macedonia nordelays in the timetable for the peace process should result from the terrorist assault on the unitedstates .

some analysts assert that the united states has a greater stake in stabilizing macedonia,given that a prolonged conflict could attract foreign islamic extremists to the region .

 ( 32 ) at the sametime , u.s. and other nato representatives have generally dismissed macedonian claims of linksbetween the ethnic albanian rebels and osama bin laden or other islamic extremist groups .

inmarch 2002 , macedonian police killed seven reportedly afghan and middle eastern men who theyclaimed were planning to attack the u.s. and other western embassies in skopje .

also in march , amacedonian official claimed that skopje had transferred four terrorism suspects to u.s. custody .

however , the government retracted the statement after the united states denied the claim of anyhandover .

in congress , the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on macedonia on june 13 , 2001 .

ambassador james pardew , senior advisor at the state department , outlined theadministration's strategy with regard to macedonia .

he said that the united states supportedpresident trajkovski's strategy for peace and the inter - ethnic dialogue on political reforms .

theunited states would also continue u.s. bilateral assistance to macedonia to promote inter - ethnicrelations and to enhance the capabilities of the macedonian security forces .

committee chairmansen .

biden expressed concern about the united states not taking on a leadership role in themacedonian conflict .

he cited the inability of past european efforts to resolve earlier conflicts inthe balkans .

at a march 2002 hearing before the house international relations subcommittee on europe , assistant secretary of state elizabeth jones said that the united states remained committed to an"in together , out together" policy with the european allies .

in the long term , she said that the u.s.strategy for the balkans was to deal with the region "normally," through trade and investment andwithout troops on the ground .

 ( 33 ) .

