the united states and south korea ( known formally as the republic of korea , or rok ) have been allies since the united states intervened on the korean peninsula in 1950 and fought to repel a north korean takeover of south korea .

over 33,000 u.s. troops were killed and over 100,000 were wounded during the three - year conflict .

in 1954 , a year after the parties to the conflict signed an armistice agreement , the united states and south korea signed a mutual defense treaty , which provides that if either party is attacked by a third country , the other party will act to meet the common danger .

the united states maintains about 34,000 troops in the rok to supplement the 650,000-strong south korean armed forces .

in recent years , strategic differences between washington and seoul — particularly over the optimal policies toward north korea — have caused some in the united states to question the benefits of the alliance .

beginning in the 1960s , rapid economic growth in south korea propelled it into the ranks of the world's largest industrialized countries .

for over a decade , south korea has been one of the united states' largest trading partners .

economic growth also has helped transform the rok into a mid - level regional power that can influence u.s. policy in northeast asia , particularly the united states' approach toward north korea .

given the disparities in size and economic dependence , it is not surprising that the united states typically sets the agenda of u.s. - rok trade talks .

since the 1997 financial crisis , these complaints have tended to be directed at regulations promulgated by "domestic" ministries , such as the ministry of health and welfare , the korean food and drug administration , and the ministry of environment , that traditionally have had little contact with foreign governments or firms .

one element of the u.s. strategy toward korea appears to be attempting to raise the pressure on these ministries by pushing for the korean cabinet to focus on the issue .

in general , u.s. exporters and trade negotiators identify the lack of transparency of korea's trading and regulatory systems as the most significant barriers to trade with korea , in almost every major product sector .

in 2004 , the transparency issue became a stand - alone item in the quarterly trade action agenda meetings .

many u.s. government officials also complain that seoul continues to use government regulations and standard - setting powers to discriminate against foreign firms in politically sensitive industries , such as automobiles and telecommunications .

another major cross - sectoral complaint is that restrictions in the korean labor market , such as mandatory severance pay , raise the cost of investing and doing business .

finally , the united states and other countries have pressed south korea to open further its agricultural market , which is among the most closed in the oecd .

below are brief descriptions of several major sector - specific disputes between the u.s. and south korea .

in cases where an issue is a significant subject of the korus fta talks , that fact is mentioned , but more detailed discussion is left to crs report rl33435 , the proposed south korea - u.s. free trade agreement .

s. 3830 ( stabenow ) .

the south korean fair trade act .

declared that the duty in effect on july 31 , 2006 , on cars and motor vehicles imported from south korea shall remain in effect until 15 days after the date the secretary of commerce certifies to congress that at least 20% of the total number of cars and motor vehicles sold in south korea each year are made in a country other than south korea .

introduced august 3 , 2006 ; referred to senate finance committee .

s. 377 ( lieberman ) .

the fair currency enforcement act of 2005 .

required the u.s. government to monitor and take action against specific countries , including south korea , that are "engaged most egregiously in currency manipulation. .

introduced february 15 , 2005 ; referred to senate finance committee .

h.r .

4304 ( moran ) .

designated the republic of korea as a program country under the visa waiver program .

introduced november 10 , 2005 ; referred to house judiciary subcommittee on immigration , border security , and claims .

no bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress .

