pensions for civilian federal employees are provided through two programs , the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) .

csrs was authorized by the civil service retirement act of 1920 ( p.l .

66-215 ) and fers was established by the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-335 ) .

under both csrs and fers , employees and their employing agencies make contributions to the civil service retirement and disability fund ( csrdf ) , from which pension benefits are paid to retirees and their surviving dependents .

retirement and disability benefits under fers are fully funded by employee and employer contributions and interest earned by the bonds in which the contributions are invested .

the cost of the retirement and disability benefits earned by employees covered by csrs , on the other hand , are not fully funded by agency and employee contributions and interest income .

the federal government therefore makes supplemental payments each year into the civil service trust fund on behalf of employees covered by csrs .

even with these additional payments into the trust fund , however , csrs pensions are not fully pre - funded .

prior to 1984 , federal employees did not pay social security payroll taxes and did not earn social security benefits .

the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) mandated social security coverage for civilian federal employees hired on or after january 1 , 1984 .

this change was made in part because the social security system needed additional cash contributions to remain solvent .

enrolling federal workers in both csrs and social security , however , would have resulted in duplication of some benefits and would have required employee contributions equal to more than 13% of workers' salaries .

consequently , congress directed the development of the fers , with social security as the cornerstone .

the fers is composed of three elements: ( 1 ) social security , ( 2 ) the fers basic retirement annuity and the fers supplement , and ( 3 ) the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) .

most permanent federal employees initially hired on or after january 1 , 1984 , are enrolled in the fers , as are employees who voluntarily switched from csrs to fers during "open seasons" held in 1987 and 1998 .

retirement plans are classified as either defined benefit ( db ) plans or defined contribution ( dc ) plans .

in a db plan , the retirement benefit typically is based on an employee's salary and years of service .

under federal law , a db plan must offer participants the option to take their benefit as a life annuity .

a dc plan—for example , a 401 ( k ) —is much like a savings account maintained by the employer on behalf of each participating employee .

the employer or the employee or both contribute to an account , which is invested in assets such as stocks and bonds .

in some dc plans , the amount of the employer contribution depends on how much the employee contributes from his or her pay .

when the worker retires , he or she receives the balance in the account , which is the sum of all the contributions that have been made plus interest , dividends , and capital gains ( or losses ) .

this is usually paid as a lump - sum , but the employee sometimes has the option to receive benefits as a series of fixed payments over a period of years or as an annuity .

an important difference between db plans and dc plans is that the employer bears the financial risk in a db plan , whereas the employee bears the financial risk in a dc plan .

in a db plan , the employer promises to provide retirement benefits equal to a certain dollar amount or a specific percentage of the employee's pay .

under federal law , employers in the private sector are required to pre - fund these benefits by setting aside money in a trust fund , which is typically invested in stocks , bonds , and other assets .

the employer is at risk for the full amount of retirement benefits its employees have earned .

if the assets held in the pension fund are worth less than the present value of the benefits that have been accrued under the plan , the employer is required by law to make up this deficit—called an unfunded liability—through additional contributions over a period of years .

in a dc plan , it is the employee who bears several types of risk , including the risk that markets will decline ( market risk ) , the risk that specific investments he or she chooses will fall in value ( investment risk ) , and the risk that the employee may outlive their retirement assets ( longevity risk ) .

if the contributions to the account are inadequate , or if the securities in which the account is invested lose value or increase in value too slowly , the employee risks having an income in retirement that is too small to maintain his or her desired standard of living .

if this situation occurs , the worker might find it necessary to delay retirement .

under both csrs and fers , retirement annuities are based on ( 1 ) the employee's years of service , ( 2 ) the average of the employee's highest three consecutive years of salary , and ( 3 ) the benefit accrual rate .

workers covered by csrs accrue benefits equal to 1.5% of pay for their first five years of service , 1.75% for the next five years , and 2.0% of pay for each year of service beyond the 10 th year .

under csrs , an employee with 30 years of service will have earned an annuity equal to 56.25% of the average of his or her highest three consecutive years of pay .

employees enrolled in fers accrue benefits equal to 1.0% of pay for each year of service .

if they have worked for the federal government for 20 or more years and retire at age 62 or older , the accrual rate under fers is 1.1% for each year of service .

with 30 years of service , an employee enrolled in fers will have earned a pension equal to 30% of the average of his or her highest three consecutive years of pay , or 33% if the individual is 62 or older at retirement .

federal agencies pre - fund employee pensions by deferring some of their budget authority until it is needed to pay pensions to retired workers .

federal agencies defer this budget authority by transferring it to the csrdf .

the treasury credits the fund with the appropriate amount of budget authority in the form of special - issue bonds that earn interest equal to the average rate on the treasury's outstanding long - term debt .

the csrdf can redeem these bonds to pay pensions to retirees and survivors .

the csrdf is a record of the budget authority available to pay retirement and disability benefits to federal employees .

each year , the trust fund is credited by the treasury with contributions from current employees and their employing agencies , interest on the securities held by the fund , interest on previous service for which benefits have been accrued but for which budget authority has not yet been provided , and a transfer from the general revenues of the treasury .

only a small part of the income to the fund—mainly contributions from employees—is income to both the trust fund and to the government .

the remainder of these transactions are intragovernmental transfers in which budget authority is transferred from federal agencies to the trust fund .

intragovernmental transfers have no effect on the size of the government's annual budget deficit or surplus .

the csrdf is similar to the social security trust fund in that , by law , 100% of its assets are invested in special - issue u.s. treasury bonds or other bonds backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government .

when the trust fund needs cash to pay retirement benefits , it redeems the bonds and the treasury disburses an equivalent dollar value of payments to civil service annuitants .

because the bonds held by the trust fund are a claim on the u.s. treasury , they ultimately are paid for by the taxpayers .

according to the u.s. office of management and budget ( omb ) , balances in the trust fund are available for future benefit payments and other trust fund expenditures , but only in a bookkeeping sense .

the holdings of the trust funds are not assets of the government as a whole that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits .

instead , they are claims on the treasury .

from a cash perspective , when trust fund holdings are redeemed to authorize the payment of benefits , the department of the treasury finances the expenditure in the same way as any other federal expenditure—by using current receipts or by borrowing from the public .

the existence of large trust fund balances , therefore , does not , by itself , increase the government's ability to pay benefits .

put differently , these trust fund balances are assets of the program agencies and corresponding liabilities of the treasury , netting to zero for the government as a whole .

in fy2019 , the total receipts of the csrdf are estimated to be approximately $104.4 billion , and obligations from the fund are estimated to be about $88.4 billion .

only a small part of the revenues to the fund ( $4.9 billion ) in this year were cash receipts .

the remainder will consist of budget authority transferred from other federal agencies .

the cash receipts of the fund come primarily from the contributions of federal employees toward their future retirement benefits .

other cash income to the fund comes from payments made by the district of columbia on behalf of its employees covered by csrs or fers .

cash payments into the csrdf are income to both the u.s. government and to the trust fund .

these cash receipts reduce the government's budget deficit .

benefit payments to retirees and survivors are cash outlays of the federal government .

most of the payments into the csrdf—an estimated $124.8 billion in fy2018—are intragovernmental transfers .

these transactions are income to the fund , but they are not income to the u.s. government .

intragovernmental transactions rarely involve cash .

they do not affect the government's budget deficit or surplus because no money is received or spent by the government .

cash is rarely involved in intragovernmental transfers because individual government agencies , in general , have no cash to spend .

what congress appropriates to federal agencies each year is budget authority .

budget authority is legal permission for an agency to spend money from the accounts of the u.s. treasury .

the treasury takes in money from the public by collecting taxes and by borrowing , and in most cases it is only the treasury that disburses cash to the public .

it has been suggested from time to time that the csrdf should be taken "off budget," as has already been done with the financing of social security benefits ( but not social security administrative costs ) .

taking an account off budget means that its income and expenditures are not included in calculations of the government's annual budget surplus or deficit .

off - budget accounts are portrayed separately in the budget documents prepared by the office of management and budget and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

however , both omb and cbo also publish unified budget accounts that include social security and other programs that are off budget .

this is done because taking an account off budget does not end the activity or remove its effects from the u.s. economy .

whether social security—or civil service retirement—is on - budget or off - budget , it still collects revenues from the public , pays benefits to the public , and affects the nation's financial markets by influencing the amount of private capital that is absorbed by government borrowing .

taking the csrdf off - budget would not affect the government's revenues or outlays in the unified budget accounts , but it would affect the size of the budget deficit or surplus as portrayed in any budget documents that excluded the csrdf .

for example , employee contributions to csrs and fers that are now counted as revenue to the treasury would not be treated as revenue if they were paid to an off - budget csrdf .

the money that federal agencies now send to the trust fund in the form of intragovernmental transfers would instead be recorded as outlays , and would therefore increase the government's reported budget deficit or reduce the budget surplus in the year that the transfer occurs rather than in the future when benefits are paid .

the outlays made by the fund to pay civil service annuitants would not appear at all in the federal budget .

the net effect of these changes if the csrdf had been off - budget in fy2018 would have been an increase of about $17.6 billion in the government's reported budget deficit , even though the amount of money collected from the public and the amount of money paid to civil service annuitants would have been no different than under current law .

one purpose of the federal budget is to show whether the government's revenues and outlays are in balance or out of balance .

therefore , taking any account off - budget distorts the picture of the government's fiscal condition .

it is for this reason that financial analysts and economists focus almost exclusively on the unified budget totals when evaluating the effect of the federal budget on the nation's financial markets and the economy .

if "outlays" were to include amounts not actually paid from the treasury in the current year ( as would be the case if the csrdf were off - budget ) , then no revenue from the public would be needed in that year to pay for them .

in years of budget deficits , some of the deficit would require borrowing from the public , and some of it would not .

in years of modest budget surplus , there might appear to be a deficit because transfers to an off - budget account would be recorded as outlays , even though they do not involve payments from the treasury to the public .

for these reasons , taking the csrdf off - budget might lead to greater confusion about the size of the real budget deficit or surplus , as has been the case with the off - budget status of social security .

proposals to pre - fund csrs in the same manner as required under fers have grappled with the question of whether additional budget authority should be granted to federal agencies , or whether agencies should make higher contributions from their current budget authority .

many policymakers believe that greater pre - funding of csrs retirement annuities would lead to improved accounting of personnel costs among federal agencies .

however , csrs has been closed to new enrollment since 1984 , and the percentage of federal employees enrolled in csrs is declining rapidly as these workers retire .

at the beginning of fy2018 , about 4% of federal employees , including postal employees , were enrolled in csrs .

with the proportion of federal employees enrolled in csrs declining each year , the budgetary treatment of government contributions toward their retirement annuities is becoming a less pressing issue .

some observers have suggested that investing the csrdf entirely in u.s. treasury bonds does not represent true "pre - funding" of csrs and fers annuities because these bonds are merely a claim held by the government against its own future revenues .

they suggest that at least part of the trust fund's assets should be invested in private - sector stocks and bonds where they could earn a higher rate of return than is available from u.s. treasury securities ( albeit at greater risk ) .

in addition to issues of investment risk , however , this proposal would raise questions about how purchases of private - sector assets would be scored under current budget rules , and also whether it would be appropriate for federal trust funds to own the stocks and bonds of private - sector companies .

