this report provides background information on the types of water supply and wastewater treatment projects traditionally funded by the federal government and the several existing programs to assist communities with water supply and wastewater treatment .

for more than four decades , congress has authorized and refined several programs to help communities address water supply and wastewater problems .

the agencies that administer these programs differ in multiple ways .

for example , in terms of funding mechanisms , projects developed by the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) typically require direct , individual project authorizations from congress .

in contrast , standing program authorizations provide project funding for other agencies , including the department of agriculture ( usda ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the department of commerce , and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

the key practical difference is that with the individual project authorizations there is no predictable assistance , or even guarantee of funding after a project is authorized , because funding must be secured each year in the congressional appropriations process .

the programs , on the other hand , have set program criteria , are generally funded from year to year , and provide a process under which project sponsors compete for funding .

in terms of scope and mission , the primary responsibilities of usace are to maintain inland navigation , provide for flood and storm damage reduction , and restore aquatic ecosystems , while epa's mission relates to protecting public health and the environment .

further , the department of commerce and hud focus on community and economic development .

likewise , the specific programs discussed in this report — while all address water supply and wastewater treatment to some degree — differ in important respects .

some are national in scope ( those of usda , epa , and the department of commerce , for example ) , while others are regionally focused ( reclamation's programs and projects ) .

some focus primarily on urban areas ( hud ) , some on rural areas ( usda ) .

for each of the projects and programs discussed , this report describes purposes , financing mechanisms , eligibility requirements , recent funding , and statutory / regulatory authority .

the report does not address special projects and programs aimed specifically at assisting indian tribes , alaskan native villages , and c olonias , or other regional programs such as those associated with the appalachian region or u.s .

territories .

this report focuses on municipal and industrial ( m&i ) water and wastewater activities .

this report does not address projects and programs that involve irrigation , flood control , power supply , and recreation .

however , in some cases ( noted below ) , a federal program ( eg , reclamation ) may primarily support one or more of these other objectives while providing some support for m&i activities , even if only incidentally .

other federal authorities of usda's rural utilities service , reclamation , and usace may be available to assist with the provision of emergency water and wastewater needs , such as improving access to water supplies during a drought .

these authorities are not discussed in this report .

table 1 summarizes financial and other key elements of the projects and program activities discussed in this report .

as indicated in the table , federal funding for the programs and projects discussed in this report varies greatly .

collectively , congressional funding for these programs in recent years has been somewhat eroded by overall competition among the many programs that are supported by discretionary spending , despite the continuing pressure from stakeholders and others for increased funding .

while federal support for some traditional financing tools — project grants , formula grants , capitalization grants , direct and guaranteed loans — has declined , policymakers have begun to consider alternative financing approaches , such as trust funds , new types of federal loans , and options to encourage private sector investments in water infrastructure through public - private partnerships .

supporters of some of these newer ideas ( eg , the " water infrastructure finance and innovation act program " ) see them as options to supplement or complement , but not replace , traditional financing tools .

state and local contributions are the most significant source of total funds available to communities for drinking water and wastewater treatment improvements .

according to the congressional budget office , spending by state and local governments on drinking water and wastewater has increased much faster than spending by the federal government , especially since the mid - 1970s .

in 2017 , the state and local share of such projects ( both capital and operation and maintenance spending ) was 96% , while the federal share was 4% .

the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) is authorized to provide development assistance to areas experiencing substantial economic distress .

eda grants for community water and sewer projects are available through its public works and economic development facilities program ( pwed ) .

such assistance is also available under the agency's economic adjustment assistance program .

under the pwed program public works grants are awarded competitively to eligible applicants to revitalize , expand , and upgrade their physical infrastructure .

these investments in public works improvements must be linked to projects intended to enable communities to attract new industry , encourage business expansion and retention , diversify local economies , and generate or retain private sector jobs in eda - designated distressed regions .

grants may be used for a wide range of purposes but frequently have a sewer or water supply element .

the types of projects funded include industrial parks , expansion of port and harbor facilities , redevelopment of brownfields , and water and wastewater facilities primarily serving industry and commerce .

federal law requires that units of government retain ownership of eda - funded projects .

because eda grants must directly encourage employment generation , these grants generally are not available for rural residential sewer and water supply development .

the purpose of the program is to promote long - term economic development and assist in the construction of public works and development facilities needed to initiate and support the creation or retention of permanent private sector jobs in areas experiencing long - term economic deterioration and distress .

eda's public works program supports investments that will help distressed areas address their competitive disadvantages .

funded projects must be part of an eda - certified comprehensive economic development strategy ( ceds ) .

eda competitively awards public works grants directly to approved applicants .

generally , eda investment assistance may not exceed 50% of the project cost .

projects may receive an additional amount , not to exceed 30% , based on the relative needs of the region in which the project will be located , as determined by eda .

in the case of certain indian tribes , nonprofit organizations that have exhausted their effective borrowing capacity , or a state or political subdivision of a state that has exhausted its effective taxing and borrowing capacity , grants totaling 100% of a project's cost may be awarded .

credit may be given toward the nonfederal share for in - kind contributions , including contributions of space , equipment , and services .

no minimum or maximum project amount is specified in law .

public works grants may be made to states , cities , counties and other political subdivisions of states , an institution of higher education or a consortium of such institutions , and private or public not - for - profit organizations acting in cooperation with officials of a political subdivision of a state .

under this program , the term "state" includes the commonwealth of puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , guam , american samoa , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , the republic of the marshall islands , the federated states of micronesia , and the republic of palau .

for - profit , private sector entities do not qualify .

qualified projects must fill a pressing need of the area and must ( 1 ) be intended to improve the opportunities for the successful establishment of businesses , ( 2 ) assist in the creation of additional long - term private sector employment , and ( 3 ) benefit long - term unemployed or underemployed persons and low - income families .

projects must also be consistent with the area's ceds and have an adequate share of local funds .

in addition , eligible projects must be located in areas that meet at least one of the following criteria: low per - capita income , unemployment above the national average , or an actual or anticipated abrupt rise in unemployment .

for fy2017 , congress provided appropriations totaling $100 million for eda's public works grant program .

for fy2018 , the president's budget requested no funding for the public works program .

on march 23 , 2018 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 , p.l .

115-141 .

division b of the act appropriated $262.5 million for eda programs and additional $39 million for salaries and expenses .

of the amount appropriated for eda programs , $117.5 million is allocated for the public works program .

on february 15 , 2019 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2019 , p.l .

116-6 .

the act appropriated $265 million for eda programs , including $117 million for the public works program .

the act also appropriated an additional $39 million for eda salaries and expenses .

this is the same amount appropriated for fy2018 .

the administration's fy2020 budget requests no new funding for eda program activities but does request $30 million to cover the costs associated with closing down the agency .

the statutory authority for the public works program is the public works and economic development act of 1965 , as amended , p.l .

89-136 ( 42 u.s.c .

3121 et seq .

 ) .

regulations are codified at 13 c.f.r .

chapter iii , part 302 , 305 , 316 , and 317 .

eda , through its economic adjustment assistance ( eaa ) grant program , awards development assistance to areas experiencing long - term economic deterioration and distress or sudden and substantial economic dislocation .

this may include assisting communities / regions affected by natural disasters , natural resource depletion , mass layoffs , and other severe economic shocks that communities experience in restructuring and diversifying their regional economies .

funds have also been made available to aid communities experiencing chronic unemployment and underinvestment and communities impacted by military base realignments and closures ( brac ) .

eaa funds are competitively awarded to qualified applicants to assist them in developing and implementing a five - year ceds .

eaa may be used to fund four types of activities: 1. strategic planning activities that include the creation of short - term action plans intended to stabilize a distressed community and regionally oriented long - term development strategies ( ceds ) intended to assess and redirect the region's economic future ; 2. technical assistance , including feasibility studies ; 3. capitalization of revolving loan funds , which would allow qualifying businesses to borrow funds at favorable interest rates ; and 4. financing of physical infrastructure projects , including water and sewer facilities , industrial parks , and business incubators .

the purpose of the program is to promote long - term economic development in areas experiencing sudden economic dislocation or long - term economic distress .

eda's eaa program supports investments that will help distressed areas address their competitive disadvantages and rethink their economic futures .

in general , funds may be used to develop ceds , and funded projects must be part of eda - certified ceds .

eda competitively awards eaa grants directly to approved applicants .

generally , eaa investment assistance may not exceed 50% of the project cost .

projects may receive an additional amount , not to exceed 30% , based on the relative needs of the region in which the project will be located , as determined by eda .

in the case of certain indian tribes and nonprofit organizations that have exhausted their effective borrowing capacity , or a state or political subdivision of a state that has exhausted its effective taxing and borrowing capacity , grants totaling 100% may be awarded .

credit may be given toward the nonfederal share for in - kind contributions , including contributions of space , equipment , and services .

no minimum or maximum project amount is specified in law .

eaa grants may be made to states , cities , counties and other political subdivisions of states , institutions of higher education or consortia of such institutions , and private or public nonprofit organizations acting in cooperation with officials of political subdivisions of a state .

under this program , the term state includes the commonwealth of puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , guam , american samoa , the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , the republic of the marshall islands , the federated states of micronesia , and the republic of palau .

for - profit , private sector entities do not qualify .

qualified projects must fill a pressing need of the area and must ( 1 ) be intended to improve the opportunities for the successful establishment of businesses , ( 2 ) assist in the creation of additional long - term private sector employment , and ( 3 ) benefit long - term unemployed or underemployed persons and low - income families .

projects must also be consistent with the area's ceds and have an adequate share of local funds .

in addition , eligible projects must be located in areas that meet at least one of the following criteria: low per - capita income , unemployment above the national average , or an actual or anticipated abrupt rise in unemployment .

for fy2017 , congress provided appropriations totaling $35 million for eda's eaa grant program .

for fy2018 , the president's budget requested $0 for the eaa program .

on march 23 , 2018 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 , p.l .

115-141 , which included $262.5 million for eda programs and additional $39 million for salaries and expenses .

of the amount appropriated for eda programs , $37 million was allocated for the eaa program .

on february 15 , 2019 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2019 , p.l .

116-6 .

the act appropriated $265 million for eda programs , including $37 million for the eaa program .

for fy2020 , the administration seeks to terminate eda and its programs , citing changing national priorities , including prioritizing rebuilding the military and making critical investments in the nation's security .

the administration is requesting $30 million for salaries and expenses to cover the cost of shutting down the agency .

the statutory authority for the public works program is the public works and economic development act of 1965 , as amended , p.l .

89-136 ( 42 u.s.c .

3121 et seq .

 ) .

regulations are codified at 13 c.f.r .

chapter iii , part 302 , 305 , 316 , and 317 .

[this section was prepared by eugene boyd , analyst in federalism and economic development policy , government and finance division. .

