iran has sought russian assistance partly because of the limited alternatives and not necessarily because ofstrategic or ideological affinity between the twocountries .

iran's relationship with russia is tempered by a lingering fear of russian power and intentions .

overview of north korea - iran relations .

northkorea has tended to align itself with countries in themiddle east , such as iran , libya , and syria , that have opposed u.s. policy in the region or have hosted terroristorganizations .

pyongyang's motive,according to many observers , has been to serve its own interests by building alliances with countries that opposeu.s .

global influence .

north koreasupported the 1979 islamic revolution in iran , which overthrew a key u.s. ally , the shah , and it provided missiletechnology to iran to help it in its 1980-88war with iraq .

the united states backed iraq in that war .

in their statements and cooperation , iran and north koreaappear to try to reinforce each other'scriticism of the united states as a global hegemon bent on dominating developing nations .

iran uses that argumentto criticize the u.s. military presence inthe persian gulf monarchy states , and north korea likewise derides the u.s. military presence in south korea .

north korea also has sought to earn hardcurrency from sales of arms and technology to middle eastern countries .

over the past decade , north korea and iran have been further drawn together by u.s. references to both of them as "rogue states" and as targets of u.s.economic sanctions .

as noted above , both of them , along with iraq , were designated by president bush as part of"an axis of evil" in his january 29 , 2002state of the union message .

at the same time , north korea has deflected some scrutiny by emphasizing that it isnot a muslim nation and asserting that ithas no connections to islamic terrorist groups such as al qaeda or those backed by iran .

iran , by contrast , has beenidentified by the united states for over adecade as the most active state sponsor of terrorism because of its backing for islamic terrorist organizations suchas lebanese hizballah and hamas , apalestinian organization .

even though president bush described north korea as part of an axis of evil in early 2002 , later in the year the administration appeared to move moretoward the engagement policy with north korea that was followed during by the clinton administration .

thatpolicy is discussed in greater detail below , inthe context of the clinton administration's efforts to broaden its october 1994 framework agreement on nuclearissues to halting north korea's missiletesting and missile exports ( to iran and other countries ) as well .

at the end of 2002 , however , a sense of crisisdeveloped as north korea admitted toworking on a uranium enrichment route to a nuclear weapon , and later unfroze its plutonium program that had beensuspended under the october 1994framework agreement .

north korea expelled iaea inspectors monitoring that agreement in december 2002 .

the sense of crisis developed at the same time as there were revelations of two previously unknown nuclear sites in iran , as note above .

although theseparate iran and north korea revelations coincided in time , there was nothing to indicate that iran and north koreaare working together on nuclearweapons technology .

information on iranian efforts to acquire weapons and technology from other suppliers appears sketchy , andsuggests that iran is willing to deal with anumber of suppliers and middlemen to acquire needed technology .

most suppliers to iran possess former sovietbloc equipment and technology that canreplace , complement , or supplement the technology iran is acquiring from russia .

however , iran does not limit itsbuying to former soviet bloc states ; itcontinues to attempt , according to the most recent cia reports to congress , to approach entities in western europefor wmd and missile technology .

majorexamples of suppliers to iran , other than its three key supplier countries , include the following: poland sold iran 100 t - 72 tanks in 1994 , and subsequently pledged to the united states not to sell iran any additionaltanks .

in 1997 , the u.s. department of defense purchased 21 russian - made mig - 29's from moldova after reportedly receiving informationthat iran was seeking to buy the aircraft .

as noted above , in 1998 the u.s. administration successfully dissuaded ukraine from supplying key turbines for the bushehr nuclearreactor project .

in 1999 , a czech firm , zvvz milevesko , signed a contract to supply air conditioning technology for the bushehr reactor .

theadministration asked the czech government to ban that sale , and the czech government subsequently draftedlegislation preventing czech firms fromsupplying the plant .

in april 2000 , the lower house of the czech parliament rebuffed objections from the uppersenate in passing the law , which isexpected to be signed by president vaclav havel .

some past cia nonproliferation reports have said that indian firms had supplied iran's chemical weapons program , although the 2000,2001 , and 2002 nonproliferation reports do not mention india specifically as a supplier to iran .

however , the july9 , 2002 sanctions determination againstnine entities of china for alleged missile and chemical proliferation to iran , referenced above , also included anindividual apparently of indian origin - hansraj shiv .

the determination said shiv was "previously residing in india , and last believed to be in the middle east. .

the determination did indicate anyconnection between shiv and the government of india or impose sanctions on that government .

the may 9 , 2002 determination discussed above imposed sanctions not only on entities from china , but also on two entities frommoldova ( one firm , cuanta , s.a. and one individual , mikhail pavlovich vladov ) ; and two entities from armenia ( one firm , lizen open joint stockcompany , and one individual , armen sargsian ) .

that determination was issued in response to reports of chemicaland missile proliferation to iran .

thegovernments of moldova and armenia were not sanctioned , and the determination did not indicate knowledge ofthe sanctioned activity on the part of thosegovernments .

