the civil service retirement act of 1920 ( p.l .

66-215 ) established a pension system for federal employees in the executive branch of government .

coverage under the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) was extended to congress in january 1942 by p.l .

77-411 .

that law was repealed just two months later in response to adverse public opinion .

in 1946 , p.l .

79-601 again extended csrs coverage to congress , at the option of members , with higher contributions and greater benefits than those applicable to regular federal employees .

in its report on that legislation , the special committee on the organization of congress stated that a retirement plan for congress would contribute to independence of thought and action , [be] an inducement for retirement for those of retiring age or with other infirmities , [and] bring into the legislative service a larger number of younger members with fresh energy and new viewpoints concerning the economic , social , and political problems of the nation .

the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) required all federal employees hired in 1984 or later to participate in social security .

these amendments also required all members of congress to participate in social security as of january 1 , 1984 , regardless of when they first entered congress .

requiring federal workers to participate in both csrs and social security would have duplicated some benefits and would have resulted in employee payroll deductions for the two programs that would exceed 13% of pay .

after mandating social security coverage of new federal employees beginning in 1984 , congress directed the development of a new retirement plan for federal workers with social security coverage as its foundation .

the result of this effort was the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-335 ) .

the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) went into effect in 1987 , and employees first hired in 1984 or later were automatically enrolled in this plan .

employees who had been in the federal government before 1984 were given the option to remain in csrs — without social security coverage — or to switch to fers .

the options for members of congress differed from those available to other federal employees because the 1983 amendments required all members of congress to participate in social security .

members first elected in 1984 or later were given the option to enroll in fers as well as being covered by social security , or to be covered only by social security .

members who had been in congress before 1984 could elect to stay in csrs in addition to being covered by social security ; to elect coverage under an "offset plan" that integrates csrs and social security ; to elect coverage under fers in addition to being covered by social security ; or to be covered only by social security .

because of the uncertain tenure of congressional service , fers was originally designed , as csrs had been , to provide a larger benefit for each year of service to members of congress and congressional staff than to most other federal employees .

prior to p.l .

112-96 , all members of congress also became eligible for retirement annuities at an earlier age and with fewer years of service than most other federal employees .

however , all members of congress and congressional staff also paid a higher percentage of salary for their retirement benefits than do most other federal employees before p.l .

112-96 was enacted .

the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) made two significant changes to the retirement benefits of members of congress who are first covered by fers after december 31 , 2012 .

first , p.l .

112-96 decreased the fers benefit accrual rate ( used in the fers pension calculation ) for members first covered by fers ( or reelected with less than five years of fers service ) after december 31 , 2012 , to be the same as regular fers employees .

therefore , the larger benefit per year of service is no longer available to members ( or congressional employees ) first covered by fers after december 31 , 2012 .

second , p.l .

112-96 also increased the fers employee contributions by 1.8 percentage points for members of congress first covered by fers ( or reelected with less than five years of fers service ) after december 31 , 2012 .

therefore , members newly covered by fers in 2013 are required to contribute 3.1% of pay to fers .

subsequent to p.l .

112-96 , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) further increased the fers employee contributions by an additional 1.3 percentage points for all individuals , including members of congress , first covered by fers ( or rehired / reelected with less than five years of fers service ) after december 31 , 2013 .

therefore , under p.l .

113-67 , members of congress and other federal employees first covered by fers beginning in 2014 are required to contribute 4.4% of pay to fers .

thus , for individuals first covered by fers after december 31 , 2012 , there is no longer a larger employee contribution under fers required for members and congressional employees in comparison with regular fers employees ; all of these groups contribute 3.1% of pay toward their fers annuity if first covered in 2013 or 4.4% of pay if first covered by fers after 2013 .

members of congress first elected after december 31 , 2012 , however , remain eligible for retirement annuities under fers at earlier ages and with fewer years of service than most other federal employees .

there were 611 retired members of congress receiving federal pensions based fully or in part on their congressional service as of october 1 , 2016 .

of this number , 335 had retired under csrs and 276 had retired under fers .

members who had retired under csrs had completed , on average , 23.5 years of civilian federal service .

their average annual csrs annuity in 2016 was $74,028 .

those who had retired under fers had completed , on average , 15.8 years of civilian federal service .

their average retirement annuity in 2016 ( not including social security ) was $41,076 .

the average age of retired members of congress receiving retirement annuities in 2016 was 76 for those who had retired under csrs and 73 for those who had retired under fers .

members become vested in ( legally entitled to ) a pension benefit under csrs or fers after five years of service .

the age and service requirements for retirement eligibility are determined by the plan under which a member is covered at the time of retirement , regardless of whether he or she has previous service covered under a different plan .

depending on a member's age and years of service , a pension can be taken immediately upon retirement or only on a deferred basis .

likewise , the member's age and years of service , as well as the starting date of the annuity , will determine whether he or she is eligible for a full pension or a reduced pension .

pension benefits under both csrs and fers are computed according to ( 1 ) the retiree's average annual salary for the three consecutive years of highest pay ( known as "high - 3" average salary ) ; ( 2 ) the number of years of service completed under the pension plan ; and ( 3 ) the "accrual rate" at which benefits accumulate for each year of service .

the pension is the product of these factors , expressed as follows .

members who were participating in csrs when the fers plan went into effect could elect to leave csrs and join fers during a six - month "open season" in 1987 .

members who switched to fers are entitled to a csrs pension for the years before 1984 , provided that they had completed at least five years of service under csrs by december 31 , 1983 .

their service from january 1 , 1984 , onward is covered under fers .

when these members retire , their pension is computed using the csrs formula for the csrs - covered years and the fers formula for the years covered by fers .

the same high - 3 salary , which is generally the salary earned in the three years immediately preceding retirement , is used in both formulas .

the two pension amounts ( csrs and fers ) are then added together .

for members who switched from csrs to fers , fers rules govern the age and years of service for retirement eligibility .

for example , the pension for a representative or senator who retired in december 2014 at the end of the 113 th congress with a total of 32 years of service ( 5 years covered under csrs and 27 years covered under fers ) and a high - 3 salary of $174,000 would be .

members who were participating in csrs before january 1 , 1984 , and who chose not to switch to fers could elect either to have full coverage under both csrs and social security or to stay in csrs and have their csrs contributions and benefits reduced ( "offset" ) by the amount of social security taxes paid and social security benefits received .

new members who enter congress with at least five years of previous civilian federal employment that was covered under csrs also may join the csrs offset plan .

under this plan , a member pays 6.2% of salary up to the social security taxable maximum to social security and 1.8% of salary up to this earnings level to csrs .

when annual earnings reach the maximum amount taxable under social security , the member pays 8.0% of salary for the rest of the year to csrs .

during retirement , the individual's csrs pension is reduced by the amount of the social security benefit that is attributable to his or her federal service .

the reduction in the csrs annuity begins at the age of 62 , whether or not the retiree elects to receive social security at that time .

as an example of the csrs offset plan , assume that a representative or senator retired at the end of the 113 th congress with 31 years of congressional service .

according to the csrs benefit formula , this member's initial retirement annuity would be $134,850 .

however , if he or she were aged 62 or older , this amount would be reduced by an amount equal to the social security benefits earned from congressional service from january 1 , 1984 , through december 31 , 2014 .

for an individual retiring in december 2014 at the age of 65 with 31 years of congressional service covered by social security , the annual reduction would be approximately $25,900 .

the adequacy of pension plans is often evaluated by comparing the benefits paid at the time of retirement with pre - retirement earnings .

the initial annual pension is computed as a percentage of final annual pay to derive the "earnings replacement rate. .

this is the proportion of pre - retirement earnings replaced by the pension .

in both csrs and fers , pensions are based on the average of the highest three consecutive years of earnings , which are usually the final three years before retirement .

table 1 shows the percentage of high - 3 average pay replaced by a congressional pension for a member retiring with an immediate pension under csrs or fers at specified ages and years of service .

 ( fers benefits apply only to service after 1983 .

therefore , 2014 is the first year after which a member or other federal employee could potentially have completed 30 years of fers service .

additionally , fers benefits were designed to complement social security benefits ; therefore , fers annuities necessarily have lower replacement rates than csrs annuities. ) .

the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) is a retirement savings and investment program through which federal employees can save money to supplement their pension income .

the tsp is open to participants in both csrs and fers , but in consideration of the smaller pensions paid by fers , congress has authorized more generous incentives for workers covered by fers to save for retirement through the tsp .

in 2018 , fers participants may invest up to $18,500 in the tsp .

participants who are at least age 50 in 2018 can make an additional "catch - up" contribution of up to $6,000 .

the maximum annual contribution is indexed to inflation .

individuals enrolled in fers who invest in the tsp also receive a matching contribution from their employing agency on the first 5% of pay that they invest in the plan .

csrs participants also may invest up to the annual statutory maximum in the tsp , but they receive no employer matching contributions .

the government automatically deposits into the tsp an amount equal to 1.0% of basic pay on behalf of an employee enrolled in fers , regardless of whether the individual voluntarily invests additional sums .

members of congress and congressional staff become vested in this 1.0% "agency automatic contribution," plus any investment earnings on it after completing two years of service .

all participants in fers are immediately vested in their own contributions and in government matching contributions to the tsp , as well as any investment earnings on these contributions .

unless an individual chooses the roth tsp option , contributions to the tsp are made on a pretax basis ; contributions and investment earnings are not taxed until money is withdrawn from the plan .

under the roth tsp option , however , employee contributions are made with after - tax income and qualified distributions from the plan are then tax - free .

withdrawals from the tsp are subject to the federal income tax — except for qualified distributions from the roth tsp option — and withdrawals before the age of 59½ may be subject to a 10% tax penalty .

there is no penalty if the individual is aged 55 or older and is eligible for an immediate pension from csrs or fers ; if the withdrawals are in the form of a life annuity ; or if the withdrawals are taken in a series of "substantially equal periodic payments" on the basis of the individual's remaining life expectancy .

employees who leave federal employment can continue to defer taxes on their tsp account balances either by leaving the money in the tsp or by transferring all or part of these funds to an individual retirement account ( ira ) or other eligible retirement arrangement , such as a 401 ( k ) plan .

at retirement , participants may withdraw money from their tsp accounts in any of four ways .

they can receive the account balance in a single payment .

receive a series of monthly payments .

 ( payments may be for a fixed number of months or a fixed dollar amount .

monthly payments also can be based on an irs life expectancy table. ) .

purchase a life annuity .

elect a partial distribution as a lump sum and take the remainder as either a series of equal payments or as an annuity .

participants who have separated from federal service must make an election for withdrawing funds from the tsp no later than february 1 of the year following the year in which the later of two events occurs: ( 1 ) the individual turns 65 , ( 2 ) the individual reaches the 10 th anniversary of the first contribution to his or her account .

separated employees must begin withdrawals no later than april of the year after they reach the age of 70½ , at which time the tsp will begin to distribute funds to the participant automatically if he or she has not yet made a withdrawal election .

until an employee separates from the federal government , he or she can continue to contribute to the tsp , regardless of age .

until the legislative branch appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-83 ) , all members could opt to decline coverage under fers .

section 104 of p.l .

108-83 , however , amended the provisions of law applicable to coverage of members of the u.s. house of representatives under fers .

effective with passage of p.l .

108-83 , representatives ( including a delegate or resident commissioner to congress ) entering office on or after september 30 , 2003 , may not elect to be excluded from such coverage .

the changes under p.l .

108-83 did not affect senators .

therefore , all senators and those representatives serving as members prior to september 30 , 2003 , continue to be able to decline fers coverage .

the vesting requirement to become entitled to a pension benefit under csrs or fers is five years .

members who do not meet this five - year requirement — for instance , one - term members in the u.s. house of representatives — are not entitled to an annuity under csrs or fers .

it may be the case , however , that an individual with less than five years of service as a member may meet this vesting requirement as a result of combining previous federal service or additional federal service subsequent to service as a member .

to qualify for a retired worker social security benefit , an individual must accumulate at least 40 quarters of covered employment , or 10 years of social security - covered employment ( among other requirements ) .

these social security benefits are based on the average of a worker's highest 35 years of earnings .

a member of congress with limited service may qualify for social security benefits based on a lifetime earnings and employment history that includes more than congressional service .

finally , members of congress who participate in fers — even members with limited service — are immediately vested in their own contributions and in any government matching contributions to their tsp accounts , as well as any investment earnings on these contributions .

in addition , members of congress and congressional staff become vested in the 1.0% "agency automatic contribution" to their tsp accounts under fers , plus any investment earnings on it , after completing two years of service .

section 8312 of title 5 provides that a federal employee , including a member of congress , may not receive a retirement annuity for any period of federal service if that individual is convicted of certain offenses that were committed during the period of service when the annuity was earned .

in general , the crimes that would lead to forfeiture of a federal retirement annuity under this provision of law are limited to acts of treason or espionage .

section 401 of the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-81 , september 14 , 2007 ) amended 5 u.s.c .

section 8332 to exclude from creditable service toward a retirement annuity any service as a member of congress of an individual convicted of a felony involving 1. bribery of public officials and witnesses ; 2. acting as an agent of a foreign principal while a federal public official ; 3. fraud by wire , radio , or television , including as part of a scheme to deprive citizens of honest services ; 4. prohibited foreign trade practices by domestic concerns ; 5. engaging in monetary transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity ; 6. tampering with a witness , victim , or an informant ; 7. racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ; 8. conspiracy to commit an offense or to defraud the united states ; 9. perjury ; or 10. subornation of perjury .

the law directs the office of personnel management to issue regulations to specify the circumstances under which the spouse or children of such individual may be eligible for benefit payments under csrs or fers , taking into consideration ( 1 ) the financial needs of the spouse or children ; ( 2 ) whether the spouse or children participated in a specified offense of which such individual was convicted ; and ( 3 ) what measures , if any , may be necessary to ensure that the convicted individual does not benefit from any such payment .

section 15 ( a ) of the stock act ( p.l .

112-105 , april 4 , 2012 ) further amended 5 u.s.c .

section 8332 so that a member of congress would lose the credit for service as a member for the purposes of a retirement annuity if convicted of one of the numerous corruption offenses not only during time served as a member of congress , but also if convicted of any of such offenses while the president , the vice president , or as an elected official of a state or local government .

in addition , section 15 ( b ) of the stock act also adds other federal criminal laws relating generally to public corruption or elections , for which a final felony conviction would result in losing creditable service as a member of congress for federal pension purposes , including , among other offenses , 1. criminal offenses include conflicts of interest ; 2. conspiracy to make false claims ; 3. making false claims to the government ; 4. vote buying ; 5. illegal solicitation of political contributions from federal employees ; 6. soliciting political contributions in a federal building or office ; 7. theft , conversion , or embezzlement of government funds or property ; 8. false statements to the government ; 9. obstruction of proceedings before government agencies ; or 10. attempt to evade or defeat paying taxes .

