the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) provides subsidies to assist low - income families in obtaining child care so that parents can work or participate in education or training activities .

discretionary funding for this program is authorized by the ccdbg act , which is currently due for reauthorization .

mandatory funding for child care subsidies , authorized in section 418 of the social security act ( sometimes referred to as the "child care entitlement to states" ) , is also due for reauthorization .

in combination , these two funding streams are commonly referred to as the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) .

while this term is not found in statute , it can serve as a useful catch - all when discussing the complex financing structure underlying federal support directly targeted to child care subsidies .

for the purposes of this report , the term ccdbg will refer specifically to the discretionary funding stream , while the term ccdf will refer to the jointly administered funding streams .

the ccdf is administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and provides block grants to states , according to a formula , which are used to subsidize the child care expenses of working families with children under age 13 .

in addition to providing funding for child care services , funds are also used for activities intended to improve the overall quality and supply of child care for families in general .

the ccdf is the primary source of federal funding dedicated solely to child care subsidies for low - income working and welfare families .

the fy2014 funding level for the ccdf is nearly $5.3 billion , which includes about $2.4 billion in discretionary funds and $2.9 billion in mandatory funds .

the current structure of federal child care programs and funding is most easily understood by tracing its evolution from the system that existed prior to 1996 , when the welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) simultaneously repealed , created , and consolidated federal child care programs ( see figure 1 ) .

on september 15 , 2014 , the house approved the child care and development block grant act of 2014 ( s. 1086 , as amended ) by voice vote .

this is an amended version of the ccdbg reauthorization bill that was agreed to in the senate , by a vote of 96-2 , on march 13 , 2014 ( s. 1086 , s.rept .

113-138 ) .

the senate would need to approve the amended bill as is , in order for it to be presented to the president for signature .

both the house - and senate - passed versions of s. 1086 would reauthorize the ccdbg through fy2020 .

while the senate version would authorize appropriations at "such sums as may be necessary," the house version would authorize specific appropriations levels for each year , increasing from $2.360 billion in fy2015 to $2.759 billion in fy2020 .

both versions of the bill would significantly amend the ccdbg act , adding new requirements related to state health and safety standards , pre - licensure and annual unannounced on - site monitoring visits for certain child care providers , criminal background checks and professional development for child care providers , activities to improve the quality and availability of child care , continuity of care for participating children , and increased consumer education for parents and the public .

on may 20 , 2013 , hhs published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register .

the proposed rule would provide a comprehensive update of ccdf regulations , which were first published in 1998 .

the proposed rule calls for changes to current regulatory policy related to state health and safety standards , state monitoring practices , consumer education for parents , linking payment rates to quality of care , continuity of care , state contracts for direct services , and program integrity and accountability .

the public comment period on the nprm ended on august 23 , 2013 .

hhs is required to take all comments into consideration before publishing a final rule .

at the federal level , the ccdf is administered by the administration for children and families ( acf ) within hhs .

in october 2010 , hhs announced the creation of a new office of child care at acf with responsibility for administering the ccdf .

the office reports directly to the assistant secretary for children and families .

according to an acf press release , this reorganization was intended to "elevate child care issues within acf" and to "facilitate direct collaboration" with other key early childhood programs and agencies ( eg , head start ) .

in the press release , then - acting assistant secretary for children and families david a. hansell noted that early childhood development is a "key priority" for the obama administration .

hansell stated , "the creation of an office of child care will strengthen the quality of child care and maximize the program's effectiveness in achieving its dual goals of supporting employment for low - income families and promoting healthy development and school success for children. .

prior to the october 2010 reorganization , the ccdf was administered by the child care bureau as a subcomponent of the larger office of family assistance at acf , which administers the federal tanf program .

the child care bureau had been part of the office of family assistance since 2006 .

when moving the child care bureau into the office of family assistance in 2006 , an acf publication noted that this organizational decision reflected the "close coordination necessary" between child care programs and tanf .

previously , the child care bureau had been part of the administration for children , youth , and families ( acyf ) since 1995 .

federal law requires states to designate a lead agency to administer the ccdf .

the responsibilities of the lead agency are to administer federal funds , develop a state plan , and coordinate services with other federal , state , or local child care and early childhood development programs .

states have tremendous flexibility in the design and operation of their child care policies , but federal law establishes program goals and a set of requirements that states must meet in order to receive ccdf funds .

to receive federal funding for child care , states must submit an application and plan to hhs .

after an initial three - year plan , required by the original ccdbg act in 1990 , states are now required to submit plans that cover a two - year period .

state plans include detailed information on many components of ccdf program administration , including state decisions about child and family income eligibility criteria , state priorities in children served , sliding fee scales , provider payment rates , and specific quality improvement initiatives .

in addition , state plans must certify or assure that their programs will include certain elements related to parental choice , parental access , parental complaints , consumer education information , licensing and regulation , and health and safety requirements .

in 2011 , hhs issued a new state plan "preprint" ( i.e. , the form used by states to meet biennial application and plan requirements ) that included major changes in structure and content compared to prior years .

these changes have generally been maintained in subsequent preprints .

the preprints are now divided into three main sections: ( 1 ) administration ( eg , roles and responsibilities at the state level ) , ( 2 ) ccdf subsidy program administration ( eg , state rules governing the subsidy program , including eligibility criteria and payment rates ) , and ( 3 ) health and safety and quality improvement activities .

the changes initiated in 2011 also required states to conduct a detailed self - assessment and goal - setting process in four "component" areas: ( 1 ) licensing and health and safety standards , ( 2 ) early learning guidelines , ( 3 ) quality improvement activities , and ( 4 ) professional development systems and workforce initiatives .

as part of this process , states were required to identify goals in the four component areas and report on progress toward achieving these goals in an annual quality performance report ( qpr ) .

the first round of qprs ( on activities conducted in fy2012 ) were due to hhs on december 31 , 2012 .

fy2013 qprs were due in december 2013 .

discretionary ccdbg funds are subject to the annual appropriations process .

the 1996 amendments to the ccdbg act authorized funding through fy2002 at an annual authorization level of $1 billion .

actual appropriations have typically surpassed the authorized level , most recently reaching roughly $2.358 billion for fy2014 ( see table 1 ) .

in years since fy2002 , appropriations have been made without an authorization level .

meanwhile , the 1996 welfare reform law provided pre - appropriated mandatory ccdf funding to states from fy1997 to fy2002 .

the annual amounts of mandatory funding were $1.967 billion in fy1997 ; $2.067 billion in fy1998 ; $2.167 billion in fy1999 ; $2.367 in fy2000 ; $2.567 billion in fy2001 ; and $2.717 billion in fy2002 .

because these funds were directly appropriated by the welfare reform law , the mandatory ccdf funding does not generally go through the annual appropriations process .

mandatory ccdf funding was provided through fy2005 ( at the fy2002 rate of $2.717 billion annually ) via a series of extensions ; welfare reauthorization legislation was debated in each of these years , without reaching fruition .

finally , on february 8 , 2006 , a budget reconciliation bill ( s. 1932 , the deficit reduction act ) , which included mandatory child care funding provisions , was passed into law ( p.l .

109-171 ) .

the law pre - appropriated $2.917 billion annually for each of fy2006-fy2010 .

since fy2010 , mandatory funds have again been provided through a series of extensions , as discussed throughout this section .

the remainder of this section provides a detailed funding history for fy2013-fy2015 , a summary of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , and a brief overview of other notable ccdf funding issues from fy1997 forward .

table 1 shows the amounts provided in discretionary and mandatory funding for each of fy1997-fy2014 .

in addition to amounts provided to states specifically for ccdf , states may also transfer up to 30% of their tanf block grant allotment to the ccdf .

transferred funds must be spent according to the ccdbg act rules .

the net transfer from the fy2013 tanf allotment to the ccdf totaled nearly $1.4 billion ( representing roughly 8% of the fy2013 tanf allotment ) .

nothing precludes a state from using tanf funds for child care services without formally transferring them to the ccdf , in which case the ccdbg act rules do not necessarily apply .

hhs has reported that in fy2013 , states spent about $1.1 billion in federal tanf money on child care within the tanf program .

 ( in addition , states reported spending $2.5 billion in fy2013 on child care through state tanf and separate state program ( ssp ) moe funds. ) .

the secretary must coordinate child care activities within hhs , and , to the extent practicable , with similar activities in other federal agencies .

the secretary is also required to publish a list of child care standards every three years , and to provide technical assistance to states .

the secretary must monitor state compliance with the statute and state plans , and must establish procedures for receiving and assessing complaints against a state .

upon finding that a state is out of compliance with either the statute , regulation , or state plan , the secretary is authorized to require that the state reimburse the federal government for any misspent funds , or to withhold the amount from the state's ccdf allotment for the next fiscal year , or to take a combination of these steps .

states also must arrange for independent audits of their programs , and must repay the federal government for any funds that are found to have been misspent , or the secretary may offset these amounts against future payments due to the state .

in addition , states are now required to complete a case review every three years to check for improperly authorized payments .

this new mandate is tied to " state error rate reporting " requirements added to ccdf regulations in 2007 .

in september 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on fraud in five state child care assistance programs .

gao investigators posing as parents and child care providers successfully billed for $11,702 in child care assistance for fictitious children .

in addition , gao examined closed case studies of fraud and abuse and interviewed parents waitlisted for child care assistance .

gao concluded that the five states under investigation lacked controls over billing and child care assistance processes when dealing with unregulated providers , leaving the programs vulnerable to fraud and abuse .

however , gao also noted that these results cannot be generalized beyond the five states included in the investigation or beyond unregulated child care providers .

according to hhs administrative data , unregulated child care providers constituted roughly 19% of all providers receiving ccdf support in fy2010 .

in august 2010 , prior to the release of the gao report , hhs issued guidance regarding program integrity and financial accountability under ccdf .

the program instruction provided state lead agencies with recommendations and resources for strengthening program integrity .

it covered topics such as the verification and documentation of child and family eligibility , mechanisms for monitoring child care providers , and processes for recovering payments resulting from fraud .

the program instruction also highlighted state responsibilities in conducting case records reviews to detect and reduce errors associated with eligibility determination , pursuant to the new regulation on state error rate reporting issued by hhs in september 2007 .

in 2007 , hhs published a final rule ( effective october 1 , 2007 ) that revised existing ccdf regulations on state match requirements .

the purpose of the new rule was to increase state flexibility in making expenditures toward state ccdf match requirements .

to this end , the rule amended requirements related to the use of public pre - kindergarten and privately donated funds .

first , the final rule increased the amount of public pre - kindergarten expenditures that may be used as state match for ccdf .

previous regulations allowed that no more than 20% of a state's match requirement be fulfilled by public pre - kindergarten expenditures .

under the final rule , up to 30% of a state's ccdf match may come from public pre - kindergarten expenditures .

second , the rule amended requirements related to the use of privately donated funds .

prior to the new rule , ccdf regulations specified that privately donated funds would only qualify as state match for ccdf if they had been transferred to ( or were under the control of ) the state's lead agency or a single entity designated by the state to receive donated funds .

the new rule amended previous regulations to permit states to designate multiple public and / or private entities as eligible to receive donated funds .

however , the rule required that donated funds be certified by both ( 1 ) the state's lead agency for ccdf and ( 2 ) either the donor or the entity designated by the state to receive privately donated funds , as appropriate .

in addition , the final rule maintained previous requirements related to private donations , which specify that such funds ( 1 ) must be donated without any restriction that would require their use for a specific individual , organization , facility , or institution ; ( 2 ) may not revert to the donor's facility or use ; ( 3 ) may not be used to match other federal funds ; and ( 4 ) shall be subject to audit .

federal law specifies a set of data reporting requirements for states and territories administering ccdf programs .

states and territories must submit quarterly reports to hhs with disaggregated data on children and families receiving ccdf assistance ; aggregated data must be submitted to hhs annually .

federal law does not impose the same data reporting requirements on tribes and tribal organizations .

however , federal regulations do require participating tribal lead agencies to submit aggregated data to hhs on an annual basis .

separately , the law also requires the secretary of hhs to submit a report to congress once every two years .

this report is expected to contain a summary and analysis of the data submitted to hhs by lead agencies ( including tribal lead agencies ) , as well as recommendations for congress concerning efforts that should be undertaken to improve the access of the public to quality and affordable child care .

the most recently released report to congress is for both fy2006 and fy2007 .

select program data and statistics for states and territories are available for fy1998 through fy2010 ( preliminary ) on the hhs website .

federal law specifically requires states and territories to collect , on a monthly basis , the following information on each family unit receiving assistance: family income ; county of residence ; gender , race , and age of children receiving assistance ; whether the family includes only one parent ; sources of family income , separately identified and including amounts ; number of months the family has received benefits ; the type of child care received ; whether the child care provider was a relative ; the cost of child care ; and the average hours per week of care .

states and territories report these disaggregated data to hhs on a monthly or quarterly basis ( at grantee option ) , using the acf - 801 data collection form .

hhs recently revised the acf - 801 to incorporate new data elements on child care providers , including unique provider identification numbers , quality rating scores , accreditation status , applicability of state or local pre - kindergarten standards , and other state quality measures .

the revised data collection form was released for two rounds of public comments in 2011 , before being finalized in spring 2012 .

the new form became mandatory for all states and territories beginning in october 2013 .

separately , federal law requires states and territories to submit aggregated data to hhs every 12 months .

the law requires these aggregated data reports to include the number of child care providers that receive funding under this program , separately identified by type ; the monthly cost of child care services , and the portion that is subsidized by this program , identified by type of care ; the number of payments made by the state through vouchers , contracts , cash , and disregards under public benefit programs , identified by type of child care provided ; the manner in which consumer education information was provided and the number of parents to whom it was provided ; and the total unduplicated number of children and families served by the program .

states and territories submit these aggregated data to hhs annually on the acf - 800 form , which is due to hhs by december 31 st each year .

under the ccdbg act , religious providers may receive assistance on the same basis as nonsectarian providers .

however , religious providers may use funds for construction assistance , which is generally prohibited for other providers , to the extent such efforts are deemed necessary to bring facilities into compliance with health and safety requirements .

use of funds for religious activities , including sectarian worship or instruction , is generally prohibited under the ccdbg act .

however , this prohibition does not apply to funds received by child care providers in the form of child care certificates , if such sectarian child care services are freely chosen by the parent .

child care providers that receive ccdf funding may not discriminate in their admissions policy against a child on the basis of religion , with the exceptions of family child care providers ( i.e. , individuals who are the sole caregiver for children in a private home ) or providers who receive assistance through child care certificates .

however , sectarian providers may reserve unsubsidized slots for children whose families regularly participate in their organization's activities , unless 80% or more of their operating budget comes from federal or state funds , including child care certificates .

in their employment practices , child care providers receiving assistance under the act may not discriminate on the basis of religion if the employee's primary responsibility is working directly with children in the delivery of child care services .

however , in considering two or more qualified candidates , sectarian providers may select an individual who regularly participates in their organization's activities .

in addition , sectarian organizations may require employees to adhere to their religious tenets or teachings and to rules forbidding the use of drugs or alcohol , unless 80% or more of their operating budget comes from federal or state funds , including child care certificates .

the welfare reform law of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) included a section on services provided by charitable , religious or private organizations under the tanf program .

this provision also applies to child care services funded under tanf .

the provision , commonly referred to as "charitable choice," is intended to allow states to provide services through charitable and religious organizations , without impairing the religious character of these organizations or the religious freedom of individuals who participate in the programs .

the secretary is required by law to reserve between 1% and 2% of all child care funds ( both discretionary and mandatory ) , for payments to indian tribes and tribal organizations .

the secretary is required to allocate among other tribes and organizations any funds that an indian tribe or tribal organization does not use in a manner consistent with the statute .

indian tribes and tribal organizations are required to submit applications to receive these reserved funds .

applications must show that the organization seeking funds will coordinate with the lead agency in the state , that activities will benefit indian children on reservations , and that reports and audits will be prepared .

the secretary , in consultation with the tribes and tribal organizations , bears the responsibility for developing minimum child care standards that reflect tribal needs and available resources that will apply in lieu of licensing and regulatory requirements otherwise applicable under state or local law .

notably , while the ccdbg act generally prohibits use of funds for construction or renovation of facilities , the law does allow indian tribes and tribal organizations to submit a request to the secretary to use funds for these purposes .

the secretary may approve the request after a determination that adequate facilities are not otherwise available and that the lack of such facilities will inhibit the operation of child care programs in the future .

the secretary may not approve the request if it will reduce the level of child care services provided from the level provided by the tribe or organization in the previous year .

a growing number of states use ccdf quality funds to create or support quality rating and improvement systems ( qris ) .

these systems are designed to assess , report , and improve the quality of early childhood programs .

a qris can be used to rate providers against a set of measures selected to determine program quality .

data collected by a qris may be used to hold programs accountable for the quality of care they provide , to target technical assistance to programs in need of support , and to increase parental understanding of the quality of different child care programs .

these systems often use simple three - or four - star rating scales to denote program quality on specific measures , such as child / staff ratios and staff credentials .

while the key components ( and benchmarks ) of quality measured by qris can vary across states , five common elements of these systems include the following: standards: research - based indicators of quality in early childhood settings ( eg , health and safety requirements , staff qualifications , staff - child ratios ) .

standards are often linked to licensing and accreditation requirements .

accountability: regular inspections are usually completed by trained observers .

research - based assessments such as an environment rating scale ( ers ) and the classroom assessment scoring system ( class ) may be used .

program support: providers may receive training , mentoring , or other forms of technical and financial assistance to encourage providers to participate in the rating system and to help their programs achieve higher levels of quality .

parent education: systems typically use simple rating scales ( eg , three - or four - star scales or a point - based scale ) that are easily understood by parents seeking information on the quality of child care programs in their communities .

incentives: financial incentives may be used to encourage providers to achieve higher levels of quality .

these may include tiered subsidy reimbursement ( i.e. , paying a higher reimbursement rate to providers meeting higher standards of care ) , professional development grants to increase staff training and qualifications , and tax credits for parents who enroll children in rated programs .

