campaign finance regulation invokes two conflicting values implicit in the application of the first amendment's guarantee of free political speech and association .

on the one hand , political expression constitutes "core" first amendment activity , which the supreme court grants the greatest deference and protection in order to "assure [the] unfettered interchange of ideas for the bringing about of political and social changes desired by the people. .

on the other hand , according to the court in its landmark 1976 decision , buckley v. valeo , an absolutely free "political marketplace" is neither mandated by the first amendment , nor is it desirable , because when left uninhibited by reasonable regulation , corruptive pressures undermine the integrity of political institutions and undercut public confidence in republican governance .

in other words , although the court reveres the freedoms of speech and association , it has upheld infringements on these freedoms in order to further the governmental interests of protecting the electoral process from corruption or the appearance of corruption .

case law subsequent to buckley further illustrates that neither the freedom of speech and association nor the government's regulatory powers are absolute .

accordingly , supreme court campaign finance holdings embody the doctrinal tension between striking a reasonable balance between protecting the liberty interests in free speech and association , on the one hand , and upholding campaign finance regulation enacted with the intent to encourage political debate while protecting the election process from corruption , on the other .

the court appears to uphold first amendment infringements by campaign finance regulation only insofar as the regulation is deemed necessary to preserve the very system of representative democracy that unregulated first amendment freedoms purport to insure .

in buckley , the court reviewed the constitutionality of the federal election campaign act of 1971 ( feca ) , requiring political committees to disclose political contributions and expenditures , and limited to various degrees , the ability of natural persons and organizations to make political contributions and expenditures .

while first amendment freedoms and campaign finance regulation present conflicting means of preserving the integrity of the democratic political process , the court resolved this conflict in favor of first amendment interests and subjected any regulation burdening free speech and free association activities to "exacting scrutiny. .

under this standard of review , the court evaluates whether the state's interests in regulation are compelling , examines whether the regulation burdens and outweighs first amendment liberties , and inquires whether the regulation is narrowly tailored to further its interest .

if a regulation meets all three criteria , the court will uphold it .

this report discusses the critical holdings and rationales enunciated by the buckley court and then examines the court's extension of buckley in subsequent cases .

buckley 's extensions are evaluated in various regulatory contexts: contribution limits , expenditure limits , disclosure requirements , and political party spending and electioneering communication restrictions .

when discussing the court's rationale in each case , facts relevant to a regulator are highlighted: the object of regulation ( eg , a corporation , labor union , or natural person ) ; the asserted liberty interest ( eg , freedom of speech or association ) ; the asserted regulatory interest ( eg , deterring corruption ) ; the triggers of the regulatory interests ( eg , political advantages gained by assuming the corporate form ) ; the means by which the regulator obtained those interests ( eg , limiting campaign contributions ) ; the extent to which the regulation burdened first amendment liberties ( eg , completely prohibiting expenditures above a certain dollar amount ) ; and the scope of regulation ( eg , whether the regulation was "narrowly tailored" to serve the compelling governmental interests ) .

in buckley v. valeo , the supreme court considered the constitutionality of the federal election campaign act of 1971 ( feca ) , as amended in 1974 , and the presidential election campaign fund act .

the court upheld the constitutionality of certain statutory provisions , including ( 1 ) contribution limitations to candidates for federal office , ( 2 ) disclosure and record - keeping provisions , and ( 3 ) the system of public financing of presidential elections .

the court found other provisions unconstitutional , including ( 1 ) expenditures limitations on candidates and their political committees , ( 2 ) the $1,000 limitation on independent expenditures , ( 3 ) expenditure limitations by candidates from their personal funds , and ( 4 ) the method of appointing members to the federal election commission .

in general , the court struck down expenditure limitations , but upheld reasonable contribution limitations , disclosure requirements , and voluntary spending limits linked with public financing provisions .

in considering the constitutionality of these statutes , the buckley court applied the standard of review known as "exacting scrutiny," a standard applied by a court when presented with regulations that burden core first amendment activity .

exacting scrutiny requires a regulation to be struck down unless it is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest .

this section analyzes several supreme court opinions decided subsequent to buckley in which the court evaluated the constitutionality of contribution limitations .

specifically , in california medical association v. federal election commission ( fec ) , the court upheld limits on contributions from an unincorporated association to its affiliated , non - party , multicandidate political action committee ( pac ) .

in citizens against rent control v. berkeley , the court reviewed a statute severely limiting the ability of an unincorporated association to raise funds through contributions in connection with its activities in a ballot initiative , holding that the limit unduly burdened the association's free speech and association rights .

in nixon v. shrink missouri government pac , the court evaluated campaign contribution limit amounts and considered , among other things , whether buckley 's approved contribution limits established a minimum for state limits , with or without adjustment for inflation , and concluded that buckley did not .

finally , in fec v. beaumont , the court reaffirmed the prohibition on all corporations — including tax - exempt corporations — making direct treasury contributions in connection with federal elections .

this section analyzes several supreme court opinions decided subsequent to buckley in which the court evaluated the constitutionality of expenditure limitations .

the first area of case law involves the regulation of corporations .

in first national bank v. bellotti , the court held that corporate speech in the form of expenditures , in a state referendum , could not be suppressed under the first amendment .

in two other corporate speech cases , the court generally upheld a requirement that corporate political expenditures be made from a special segregated fund or political action committee ( pac ) , but subjected this requirement to an exception for "purely" political organizations: federal election commission ( fec ) v. massachusetts citizens for life ( mcfl ) and austin v. michigan chamber of commerce .

the second area of case law involves the regulation of labor unions .

in fec v. national right to work committee the court upheld a regulation restricting from whom labor unions can solicit funds for their separate segregated funds or pacs .

the third area of case law addresses the regulation of political party expenditures .

in colorado republican federal campaign committee v. fec , the court upheld a political party's purchase and broadcasting of radio "attack ads," finding it was an "uncoordinated independent expenditure. .

the fourth area of case law examines the regulation of pacs .

in fec v. national conservative political action committee ( ncpac ) , the court struck down a prohibition on independent expenditures above $1,000 in support of a "publicly funded" candidate .

finally , the issue of a state statute limiting state office candidate expenditures is examined .

in randall v. sorrell , the court struck down a vermont statute imposing expenditure limits finding that the state's primary justification for the limits was not significantly different from congress' rationale for the expenditure limits that the court struck down in buckley .

this section analyzes supreme court opinions decided subsequent to buckley in which the court evaluated the constitutionality of disclosure requirements .

the first line of cases clarifies the scope of buckley 's general rule , upholding liberal disclosure requirements .

in buckley v. american constitutional law foundation ( aclf ) , the court struck down a regulation prescribing , among other things , "payee" disclosure in connection with a ballot initiative .

moreover , in brown v. socialist workers ' 74 campaign committee , the court struck down a state disclosure requirement as applied to a minority party that had historically been the object of harassment and discrimination in the public and private sectors .

in the second regulatory context , the court in federal election commission v. akins was presented with the question of whether certain "political committees," without the primary purpose of electing candidates , must nonetheless disclose under feca .

the court , however , did not issue a holding on this issue .

in the landmark 1976 decision , buckley v. valeo , the supreme court established the constitutional framework for campaign finance regulation and in numerous subsequent decisions , extended its holding .

although it has provided much guidance with regard to the constitutionality of various aspects of campaign finance regulation , the court's jurisprudence in this area continues to evolve and many questions remain unanswered .

while awaiting further guidance from the court , those proposing or evaluating campaign finance legislation rely on buckley and its progeny for constitutional direction .

