congressional authority to discipline members is found in article i , section 5 , clause 2 of the constitution , which provides that "each house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member. .

through the years , disorderly behavior has been interpreted as improper conduct and included support of rebellion , disloyalty , corruption , and financial wrongdoing .

only since the 1960s has each chamber systematically undertaken self - discipline related to conduct .

this report examines the creation and evolution of the house and senate ethics committees and the formalization of the house and senate ethics processes .

it also describes some of the recent changes , implemented or proposed , in congressional enforcement of rules of conduct .

it does not deal with changes to federal or state criminal law or with criminal prosecutions of members of congress .

prior to the 1960s , neither the house nor the senate had a mechanism to consistently exercise disciplinary powers against members .

when allegations of misconduct were investigated , it was often by an ad hoc or select committee created for that purpose .

in addition , allegations were sometimes considered by the whole house or senate without prior committee action .

during this time , publicity and reelection were considered the major forms of redress for allegedly unethical behavior in congress .

since the creation of the committee on ethics , the house of representatives has amended the ethics review process to include both internal and external entities .

the committee on ethics was initially created in 1967 , as the committee on standards of official conduct , with the adoption of h.res .

418 .

it continues to serve as the internal ethics committee .

in 2008 , the house created the office of congressional ethics ( oce ) to serve as an external review body for ethics complaints against members , officers , and employees of the house .

the relationship between the committee on ethics and the oce is established in house and committee rules .

initially created in 1964 , the senate committee on standards and conduct was renamed the select committee on ethics in 1977 .

like its house counterpart , the senate select committee on ethics is bipartisan and in the 114 th congress consists of six members , three from each party .

it has both a disciplinary and advisory function .

unlike the house committee , the senate ethics committee does not separate its investigative and adjudicatory functions , and it has no "statute of limitations" for investigations of alleged past violations .

since the creation of the house and senate ethics committees , entities both inside and outside of congress have periodically evaluated the committees' work .

these evaluations have resulted in an episodic debate over whether members of congress are doing a good job in following the mandate of the constitution for self - discipline .

inevitably , congressional ethics enforcement is often linked to appearances of impropriety by members and changing perceptions on "conflict of interest. .

often the perception of wrongdoing or a conflict of interest is all that is needed for an investigation .

ethicist michael josephson summarized the importance of the perception of wrongdoing .

the core concept of this ... ethical consciousness is the demand that public servants perceive and avoid both actual and apparent wrongdoing ... it is no defense that an act is legal or that there is no actual impropriety .

it is enough that the conduct creates an inference of wrongdoing in the mind of a reasonable observer .

more than ever , the public demands that its elected officials avoid both actual and apparent wrongdoing .

evaluations often coincide with or follow periods when numerous or notorious ethics questions involving members arise .

following these periods , members , experts , and the public often seek to redefine standards and create new enforcement mechanisms .

sometimes the house or senate or both chambers act ; on other occasions , no action is taken , or there is prolonged discussion or delay .

since the 1960s , however , congress has developed more elaborate ethical standards and more structured means of self - discipline .

"while more standards of conduct for all government officials have been enacted to increase public confidence , each new law creates a new offense. .

