the social security number ( ssn ) was first introduced as a device for keeping account of contributions to the social security program .

through the years , however , the use of this identifying number has been expanded by government entities and the private sector to keep track of many other government and private sector records .

in the view of some , a person's ssn has attained the status of a quasi - universal personal identification number .

federal and state agencies collect and use ssns to verify eligibility for and administer government programs that provide benefits and services .

private sector entities routinely obtain and use ssns for a wide variety of purposes .

today one can be required to furnish one's ssn to obtain a driver's license , apply for public assistance , donate blood , or take out a loan .

ssns may also be used to access insurance records , track down student loan defaulters , compile direct marketing mailing lists , or identify convicted felons on lists of potential jurors .

there is no single federal law that comprehensively regulates ssn collection and confidentiality .

as early as the 1970s , concerns regarding increased uses of the ssn by both government and private entities prompted studies and subsequent congressional action limiting government uses of the ssn .

the social security administration created a task force in 1970 to investigate "non - program" uses of the ssn , and the task force's report the following year stated , any examination of ssn policy must begin with the recognition that the number has ceased to be merely a "social security number. .

especially in the past few years , the number has come into increasingly wide use as a numerical identifier throughout society , to the point where the adult american citizen is beginning to need a number to function effectively even if he is among the very small minority of people who never work in covered employment .

in 1973 , the department of health , education and welfare secretary's advisory committee on automated personal data systems proposed ( 1 ) that an individual whose ssn is requested should be informed as to whether or not divulging his number is legally required ; and ( 2 ) that no individual should be denied a benefit because of his refusal to divulge his ssn for purposes other than those required by federal law .

constitutional challenges to the collection of social security numbers by government agencies have , for the most part , been unsuccessful .

thus , various courts have held that requiring an ssn on a driver's license application is constitutional , as is the requirement that persons disclose their ssns as a condition for receiving welfare benefits or food stamps .

in cases where an individual's ssn is publicly displayed or disseminated , court challenges in recent years have been more successful , particularly where fundamental rights such as the right to vote or the right to free speech are involved .

with regard to the display of ssns in online public records , or in cases involving requests for ssns under federal or state open records statutes , the courts have attempted to balance the public's interest in the transparency of government processes with the private individual's interest in the confidentiality of personal identification and security information .

private sector use of the ssn is widespread , including activities such as using ssns for data exchanges to assess credit risk , tracking patient care among multiple providers , locating bankruptcy assets , and providing background checks on new employees .

one may be asked to provide one's ssn for such diverse activities as taking out an insurance policy , checking into a hospital , applying for a store charge account , buying a car , setting up a utility account , or joining a club .

section 7 of the privacy act 1974 and related federal statutes do not impose restrictions on private sector use of the ssn .

thus , private businesses and organizations may , in most circumstances , request an individual's ssn in exchange for goods or services , and no general federal law regulates such transactions .

although an individual can refuse to give his or her ssn to a company or organization , the business can also refuse to provide the goods or services unless the ssn is provided .

if the company insists on receiving a customer's ssn , the individual can refuse and take his or her business elsewhere .

in some cases , an accommodation may be reached whereby a business agrees to use an identifier other than a person's ssn , but there is no federal law that prohibits the private entity from requiring a person's ssn as a condition to providing goods or services .

state laws may , however , restrict private sector use of ssns , and should be consulted .

one federal statute that does impact the collection of ssns by businesses and financial institutions in the private sector is section 326 of the usa patriot act .

that provision directed the treasury department to promulgate regulations that require certain financial institutions to verify the identity of persons establishing a new line of credit or opening a new account and to consult "lists of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations provided to the financial institution by any government agency to determine whether a person seeking to open an account appears on any such list. .

these regulations require financial institutions such as banks to implement a customer identification program ( cip ) , which , at a minimum , must require that an individual provide his or her name , date of birth , residential or business address , and taxpayer identification number , which for u.s. citizens is the person's ssn .

thus , a person opening a bank or credit card account or financing a car through a loan from a financial institution may be told that supplying his or her ssn is "required by the patriot act. .

to be precise , it is the cip regulations issued pursuant to section 326 of the usa patriot act that require disclosure of a person's ssn under these circumstances .

a number of states have enacted statutes that restrict the use or display of ssns in various contexts , including restricting companies and individuals from posting or publicly displaying ssns , printing them on cards , transmitting them over the internet , or mailing them without safety measures .

california was the first state to pass such a law that bars certain businesses , such as insurance companies , from publicly displaying ssns .

the california law also prohibits printing an ssn on identification cards ; printing ssns on documents mailed to customers , except under certain circumstances ; and requiring persons to use an ssn to log onto a website without a password .

other states , including arizona , arkansas , connecticut , illinois , maryland , michigan , minnesota , missouri , oklahoma , texas , utah and virginia , have passed laws similar to california's law .

some states have gone further in protecting ssns , including restricting the solicitation of ssns by private companies , prohibiting disclosure of ssns or any number derived therefrom , or subjecting a truncated ssn to the same restrictions on display and transfer as the full ssn .

concerns have been expressed regarding the effect of technological advances on the availability and use of the ssn in private sector databases: organizations that sell personal information , including ssns , have benefited greatly from continuing advances in computer technology and the availability of computerized databases .

this practice may be exploited in a fraudulent manner .

for example , in february 2005 , choicepoint , the largest information broker in the country , "unwittingly sold personal information on at least 145,000 americans to a criminal ring engaged in identity theft. .

increasingly , states have passed laws that require state agencies and private entities to notify residents when a security breach results in the release of personal information , including ssns .

california was the first jurisdiction to pass such a law in 2002 .

as of october 2010 , at least 46 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands have enacted laws with similar requirements .

the chronology that follows details various federal developments relating to use of the ssn .

