the spread of housing into forests and other wildlands , combined with various ecosystem health problems , has substantially increased the risks to life and property from wildfire .

wildfires seem more common than in the 1960s and 1970s , with 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2012 being the most severe fire seasons since 1960 .

national attention was focused on the problem by a fire that burned 239 houses in los alamos , nm , in may 2000 .

issues for congress include oversight of the agencies' fire management activities and other wildland management practices that have altered fuel loads over time ; consideration of programs and processes for reducing fuel loads ; and federal roles and responsibilities for wildfire protection and damages .

funding for wildfire protection programs is also a significant congressional issue , but is covered separately in crs report r43077 , wildfire management: federal funding and related statistics and crs report rl33990 , federal funding for wildfire control and management .

many discussions of wildfire protection focus on the federal agencies that manage lands and receive funds to prepare for and control wildfires .

the forest service ( fs ) , in the department of agriculture , is the "big brother" among federal wildfire - fighting agencies .

the fs is the oldest federal land management agency , created in 1905 , with fire control as a principal purpose .

the fs administers more land in the 48 coterminous states than any other federal agency , receives about two - thirds of federal fire funding , and created the symbol of fire prevention , smokey bear .

the department of the interior ( doi ) contains several land - managing agencies , including the bureau of land management ( blm ) , national park service , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) ; doi fire protection programs have been coordinated and funded through the blm .

despite the substantial attention given to the fs and doi agencies , the majority of wildlands are privately owned , and states are responsible for fire protection for these lands , as well as for their own lands .

this report provides historical background on wildfires , and describes concerns about the wildland - urban interface and about forest and rangeland health .

the report discusses fuel management , fire control , and fire effects .

the report then examines federal , state , and landowner roles and responsibilities in protecting lands and resources from wildfires , and concludes by discussing current issues for federal wildfire management .

wildfire has existed in north america for millennia .

many fires were started by lightning , although native americans also used fire for various purposes .

wildfires were a problem for early settlers .

major forest fires occurred in new england and the lake states in the late 1800s , largely fueled by the tree tops and limbs ( slash ) left after extensive logging .

one particularly devastating fire , the peshtigo , is commonly cited as the worst wildfire in american history ; it burned nearly 4 million acres , obliterated a town , and killed 1,500 people in wisconsin in 1871 .

large fires in cut - over areas and the subsequent downstream flooding were principal reasons for congress authorizing the president in 1891 to establish forest reserves ( now national forests ) .

wildfires stir a primeval fear and fascination in most of us .

many have long been concerned about the loss of valuable timber to fire and about the effects of fire on soils , watersheds , water quality , and wildlife .

in addition , the loss of houses and other structures adds to wildfire damages .

historically , wildfires were considered a major threat to people and houses primarily in the brushy hillsides of southern california .

however , people have increasingly been building their houses and subdivisions in forests and other wildlands , and this expanding wildland - urban interface has increased the wildfire threat to people and houses throughout the west and in the south .

also , a century of using wildlands and suppressing wildfires has apparently significantly increased fuel loads , at least in some ecosystems , and led to historically unnatural combinations of vegetation and structures , exacerbating wildfire threats .

fuel management is a collection of activities intended to reduce the threat of significant damages by wildfires .

the fs began its fuel management program in the 1960s .

by the late 1970s , earlier agency policies of aggressive suppression of all wildfires had been modified , in recognition of the enormous cost of organizing to achieve this goal and of the ecological benefits that can result from some fires .

these understandings have in particular led to an expanded prescribed burning program .

the relatively recent recognition of historically unnatural fuel loads from dead trees , dense understories of trees and other vegetation , and non - native species has spurred additional interest in fuel management activities .

the presumption is that lower fuel loads and a lack of fuel ladders will reduce the extent of wildfires , the damages they cause , and the cost of controlling them .

numerous on - the - ground examples support this belief .

however , little empirical research has documented this presumption .

as noted in one research study , "scant information exists on fuel treatment efficacy for reducing wildfire severity. .

this study also found that "fuel treatments moderate extreme fire behavior within treated areas , at least in" frequent surface - fire ecosystems .

others have found different results elsewhere ; one study reported "no evidence that prescribed burning in these [southern california] brushlands provides any resource benefit ... in this crown - fire ecosystem. .

a recent summary of wildfire research reported that prescribed burning generally reduced fire severity , that mechanical fuel reduction did not consistently reduce fire severity , and that little research has examined the potential impacts of mechanical fuel reduction with prescribed burning or of commercial logging .

before examining fuel management tools , a brief description of fuels may be helpful .

wildfires are typically spread by fine fuels — needles , leaves , grass , etc. — both on the surface and in the tree crowns ( in a stand - replacement crown fire ) ; these are known as 1-hour time lag fuels , because they dry out ( lose two - thirds of their moisture content ) in about an hour .

small fuels , known as 10-hour time lag fuels , are woody twigs and branches , up to a quarter - inch in diameter ; these fuels also help spread wildfires because they ignite and burn quickly .

larger fuels — particularly the 1,000-hour time lag fuels ( more than 3 inches in diameter ) — may contribute to the intensity and thus to the damage fires cause , but contribute little to the rate of spread , because they are slow to ignite .

one researcher noted that only 5% of large tree stems and 10% of tree branches were consumed in high intensity fires , while 100% of the foliage and 75% of the understory vegetation were consumed .

finally , ladders of fine and small fuels between the surface and the tree crowns can spread surface fires into the canopy , thus turning a surface fire into a stand - replacement fire .

wildfires cause damages , killing some plants and occasionally animals .

firefighters have been injured and killed , and structures can be damaged or destroyed .

the loss of plants can heighten the risk of significant erosion and landslides .

some observers have reported "soil glassification," where the silica in the soils has been melted and fused , forming an impermeable layer in the soil ; however , research has yet to document the extent , frequency , and duration of this condition , and the soils and burning conditions under which it occurs .

others have noted that "even the most intense forest fire will rarely have a direct heating effect on the soil at depths below 7 to 10 cm" ( centimeters ) , about 3 to 4 inches .

damages are almost certainly greater from stand replacement fires than from surface fires .

stand replacement fires burn more fuel , and thus burn hotter ( more intensely ) than surface fires .

stand replacement fires kill many plants in the burned area , making natural recovery slower and increasing the potential for erosion and landslides .

also , because they burn hotter , stand replacement fires generally are more difficult to suppress , raising risks to firefighters and to structures .

finally , stand replacement fires generate substantial quantities of smoke , which can directly affect people's health and well - being .

wildfires , especially conflagrations , can also have significant local economic effects , both short - term and long - term , with larger fires generally having greater and longer - term impacts .

wildfires , and even extreme fire danger , may directly curtail recreation and tourism in and near the fires .

if an area's aesthetics are impaired , local property values can decline .

extensive fire damage to trees can significantly alter the timber supply , both through a short - term glut from timber salvage and a longer - term decline while the trees regrow .

water supplies can be degraded by post - fire erosion and stream sedimentation , but the volume flowing from the burned area may increase .

however , federal wildfire management includes substantial expenditures , and fire - fighting jobs are considered financially desirable in many areas .

ecological damages from fires are more difficult to determine , and may well be overstated , for two reasons .

first , burned areas look devastated immediately following the fire , even when recovery is likely ; for example , conifers with as much as 60% of the crown scorched are likely to survive .

second , even the most intense stand replacement fires do not burn 100% of the biomass within the burn's perimeter — fires are patchy .

for example , in the 1988 fires in yellowstone , nearly 30% of the area within the fire perimeters was unburned , and another 15% - 20% burned lightly ( a surface fire ) ; 50% - 55% of the area burned as a stand replacement fire .

emergency rehabilitation is common following large fires .

this is typically justified by the need for controlling erosion and preventing landslides , and may be particularly important for fire lines ( dug to mineral soil ) that go up steep slopes and could become gullies or ravines without treatment .

sometimes , the rehabilitation includes salvaging dead and damaged trees , because the wood's quality and value deteriorate following the fire .

emergency rehabilitation often involves seeding the sites with fast - growing grasses .

while helpful for erosion control , such efforts might inhibit natural restoration if the grasses are not native species or if they inhibit tree seed germination or seedling survival .

finally , as mentioned above , wildfires can also generate ecological benefits .

many plants regrow quickly following wildfires , because fire converts organic matter to available mineral nutrients .

some plant species , such as aspen and especially many native perennial grasses , also regrow from root systems that are rarely damaged by wildfire .

other plant species , such as lodgepole pine and jack pine , have evolved to depend on stand replacement fires for their regeneration ; fire is necessary to open their cones and spread their seeds .

one author identified research reporting various significant ecosystems threatened by fire exclusion — including aspen , whitebark pine , and ponderosa pine ( western montane ecosystems ) , longleaf pine , pitch pine , and oak savannah ( southern and eastern ecosystems ) , and the tallgrass prairie .

other researchers found that , of the 146 rare , threatened , or endangered plants in the coterminous 48 states for which there is conclusive information on fire effects , 135 species ( 92% ) benefit from fire or are found in fire - adapted ecosystems .

animals , as well as plants , can benefit from fire .

some individual animals may be killed , especially by catastrophic fires , but populations and communities are rarely threatened .

many species are attracted to burned areas following fires — some even during or immediately after the fire .

species can be attracted by the newly available minerals or the reduced vegetation allowing them to see and catch prey .

others are attracted in the weeks to months ( even years ) following , to the new plant growth ( including fresh and available seeds and berries ) , for insects and other prey , or for habitat ( eg , snags for woodpeckers and other cavity nesters ) .

a few may be highly dependent on fire ; the endangered kirtland's warbler , for example , only nests under young jack pine that was regenerated by fire , because only fire - regenerated jack pine stands are dense enough to protect the nestlings from predators .

in summary , many of the ecological benefits of wildfire that have become more widely recognized over the past 30 years are generally associated with light surface fires in frequent - fire ecosystems .

this is clearly one of the justifications given for fuel treatments .

damage is likely to be greater from stand replacement fires , especially in frequent - fire ecosystems , but even crown fires produce benefits in some situations ( eg , for the jack pine regeneration needed for successful kirtland's warbler nesting ) .

the severe fire seasons in recent years have raised many wildfire issues for congress and the public .

there have been spirited discussions about the effects of land management practices , especially timber sales , on fuel loads .

a broad range of opinion exists on this issue , but most observers generally accept that current fuel loads reflect the aggressive fire suppression of the past century as well as historic logging and grazing practices .

some argue that catastrophic wildfires are nature's way of rejuvenating forests that have been mismanaged in extracting timber , and that the fires should be allowed to burn to restore the natural conditions .

others argue that the catastrophic fires are due to increased fuel loads that have resulted from reduced logging in the national forests over the past decade , and that more logging could contribute significantly to reducing fuel loads and thus to protecting homes and communities .

however , the extent to which timber harvests affect the extent and severity of current and future wildfires cannot be determined from available data .

some critics suggest that historic mismanagement — excessive fire suppression and past logging and grazing practices — by the fs warrants wholesale decentralization or revision of the management authority governing the national forest system .

research information on causative factors and on the complex circumstances surrounding wildfire is limited .

the value of wildfires as case studies for building predictive models is constrained , because the a priori situation ( eg , fuel loads and distribution ) and burning conditions ( eg , wind and moisture levels , patterns , and variations ) are often unknown .

experimental fires in the wild would be more useful , but are dangerous and generally unacceptable to the public .

prescribed fires could be used for research , but the burning conditions are necessarily restricted .

fires in the laboratory are feasible , but often cannot duplicate the complexity and variability of field conditions .

thus , research on fire protection and control is challenging , and predictive tools for fire protection and control are often based substantially on expert opinion and anecdotes , rather than on documented research evidence .

concerns over forest and rangeland health , particularly related to fuel loads , have been discussed for nearly two decades ; a major conference on forest ecosystem health was held in idaho in 1993 .

significant funding to address these concerns , however , was not proposed until september 2000 .

while higher funding for wildfire protection , including fuel reduction , has persisted , some question whether this additional funding is sufficient to adequately reduce fuel loads .

in 1999 , gao estimated that it would cost $725 million annually — nearly $12 billion through 2015 — to reduce fuels using traditional treatment methods on the 39 million fs acres that were estimated to be at high risk of catastrophic wildfire .

this is nearly double the significantly increased appropriations for fs fuel reduction since fy2001 .

the cost of a comprehensive fuel reduction program , as many advocate , would likely exceed the gao estimate of $12 billion , because the scope of potential costs and proposed programs has increased .

the fs estimate of fs acres at high risk of ecological loss due to catastrophic fire increased from 39 million acres in 1999 to 51 million acres in 2003 .

in addition , the gao cost figure ( received from the fs ) of $300 per acre on average for fuel reduction might be low .

one might anticipate more careful federal prescribed burning after the may 2000 escaped prescribed fire burned 239 homes in los alamos , nm ; more cautious prescribed burning is likely to have higher unit costs than the gao figure .

also , many advocate emphasizing fuel reduction in the wildland - urban interface , and treatment costs in the interface are higher , because of risks to homes and other structures from prescribed burning and because of possible damage to aesthetics from mechanical treatments .

gao also addressed a subset of the widely advocated comprehensive fuel reduction program , by estimating the cost for the initial treatment of fs high - risk acres .

the fs has estimated that there are 23 million high - risk acres of doi land and 107 million high - risk acres of other land .

in addition , many advocate reducing fuels on lands at moderate risk — 80 million fs acres , 76 million doi acres , and 313 million other acres .

finally , in frequent - fire ecosystems , retreatment would be needed on the 5-35 year fire cycle ( depending on the ecosystem ) , suggesting that fuel management costs would need to be continued beyond the 16-year program examined by gao .

if a comprehensive program were undertaken to reduce fuels on all high - risk and moderate - risk federal lands , using gao's treatment cost rate of $300 per acre , the total cost would come to $69 billion — $39 billion for fs lands and $30 billion for doi lands — for initial treatment .

this would come to $4.3 billion annually over 16 years , whereas the administration's requested budget for fuel treatment in fy2008 was $499.8 million ( $297.0 million for the fs and $202.8 million for the blm ) , a little more than 10% of what some implicitly propose .

this raises questions about whether a comprehensive fuel reduction program is feasible and how to prioritize treatment efforts .

there is a final significant question: would it work ? .

the answer depends , in part , on how one defines successful fire protection .

fuel reduction might help restore "more natural" conditions to forests and rangelands , as many advocate , and would likely yield some social benefits ( eg , improved water quality , more habitat for fire - dependent animal species ) .

others , however , advocate fuel reduction to allow greater use of forests and rangelands , for timber production , recreation , water yield , etc .

fuel reduction will certainly not reduce the conflict over the goals and purposes of having and managing federal lands .

reducing fuel loads might reduce acreage burned and the severity and damages of the wildfires that occur .

research is needed in various ecosystems to document and quantify the relationships among fuel loads and damages and the probability of catastrophic wildfires , to examine whether the cost of fuel reduction is justified by the lower fire risk and damage .

however , it should also be recognized that , regardless of the extent of fuel reduction and other fire protection efforts , as long as there is biomass for burning , especially under severe weather conditions ( drought and high wind ) , catastrophic wildfires will occasionally occur , with the attendant damages to resources , destruction of nearby homes , other economic and social impacts , and potential loss of life .

agee , james k. fire ecology of pacific northwest forests .

washington , dc: island press , 1993 .

493 p. brown , arthur a. and kenneth p. davis .

forest fire control and use .

2 nd ed .

new york , ny: mcgraw - hill book company , 1973 .

686 p. carle , david .

burning questions: america 's fight with nature's fire .

westport , ct: praeger publishers , 2002 .

298 p. chandler , craig , phillip cheney , philip thomas , louis trabaud , and dave williams .

fire in forestry .

volume i: forest fire behavior and effects .

new york , ny: john wiley & sons , 1983 .

450 p. chandler , craig , phillip cheney , philip thomas , louis trabaud , and dave williams .

fire in forestry .

volume ii: forest fire management and organization .

new york , ny: john wiley & sons , 1983 .

298 p. gonzalez - caban , armando and philip n. omi , technical coordinators .

proceedings of the symposium on fire economics , planning , and policy: bottom lines .

general technical report psw - gtr - 173 .

berkeley , ca: usda forest service , pacific southwest research station , dec. 1999 .

332 p. kozlowski , t.t .

and c.e .

ahlgren , eds .

fire and ecosystems .

new york , ny: academic press , 1974 .

542 p. national academy of public administration .

wildfire suppression: strategies for containing costs .

washington , dc: sept. 2002 .

2 volumes .

nelson , robert h. a burning issue: a case for abolishing the u.s. forest service .

lanham , md: rowman & littlefield publishers , inc. , 2000 .

191 p. o'toole , randal .

reforming the fire service: an analysis of federal fire budgets and incentives .

bandon , or: thoreau institute , july 2002 .

53 p. pyne , stephen j .

fire in america : a cultural history of wildland and rural fire .

princeton , nj: princeton university press , 1982 .

654 p. pyne , stephen j. , patricia l. andrews , and richard d. laven .

introduction to wildland fire , 2 nd ed .

new york , ny: john wiley & sons , inc. , 1996 .

769 p. sampson , r. neil and david l. adams , eds .

assessing forest ecosystem health in the inland west: papers from the american forests workshop , november 14 th - 20 th , 1993 , sun valley , idaho .

new york , ny: food products press , 1994 .

461 p. sampson , r. neil , r. dwight atkinson , and joe lewis , eds .

mapping wildfire hazards and risks .

new york , ny: food products press , 2000 .

343 p. wright , henry a. and arthur w. bailey .

fire ecology: united states and southern canada .

new york , ny: john wiley & sons , 1982 .

501 p .

