energy tax policy involves the use of the government's main fiscal instruments - - primarilytax subsidies ( tax credits , deductions , exemptions , and lower tax rates ) as financial incentives , andincreased taxes as financial disincentives - - to alter the allocation or configuration of energyresources and thereby achieve policy objectives .

the idea of applying tax policy instruments to theenergy markets is not new , but until the 1970s energy tax policy had been little used , except topromote oil and gas development .

 ( 1 ) .

at the outset , it is important to address the notion that there is something inherently differentabout energy , or fuels from various energy resources , that requires government intervention throughthe tax code .

often energy tax proposals are premised on such arguments , that energy is tooimportant to be left to the unfettered private market system .

table 1 .

energy market failures and energy tax policy remedies source: adaptation based on fisher , anthony and michael h. rothkopf .

market failure and energy policy: the rationale for selective conservation .

energy policy , v.17 , august , 1989 .

according to economists , energy is a commodity that is produced to provideutility to consumers or end users , and , in general , is no different than any othereconomic good .

three features of energy as an economic good , however , differentiateit from other commodities .

first , most energy is derived from depletable mineralresources: petroleum products are derived from crude oil , natural gas resides indepletable reservoirs or deposits ( such as coal mines ) , and electricity is ( currently ) mostly derived from coal .

while this does not necessarily impede the smoothfunctioning of the competitive market system , it does mean that production decisionshave to be made functioning of the competitive market system , it does mean thatproduction decisions have to be made in an inter - temporal framework .

that raises theimportant inter - generational question: do markets optimally deplete resources overtime , or do they exploit them for short run gain at the expense of the long - termbenefits of the future generation of consumers ? .

the second distinguishing feature of energy is that the activities required toproduce it generate adverse environmental effects , and the process of transformingit to do work involves combustion , which also generates pollution from emissions .

in the presence of such pollution - - or externalities as discussed below - - marketsgenerally fail to produce and use the optimal quantities of energy - - they produce anduse too much energy , i.e. , more than the optimal amounts that maximize socialwell - being .

finally , energy is different from other commodities ( say , eg , food , clothingor housing ) in that both at the micro and macroeconomic level it enters theproduction process of many firms and industries in an important extent - - it is a majorfactor of production , just as are labor , capital , and managerial ability .

this hasimportant implications for the macro - economy: it means that changes in energyprices , particularly crude oil prices which are benchmarks for all energy prices , havethe potential to move the markets , and the macro - economy , in a major way .

fluctuations in energy prices could have major effects on the business cycle,affecting aggregate output ( gdp ) , employment , interest rates , and prices ( i.e.,inflation ) .

two examples of this are the recession of 1974-75 , which was caused bythe 1973 oil embargo , and the stagflation of the late 1970s , which was caused by thesharp run - up of crude oil prices of the 1970s .

under generally accepted economic and accounting principles , producers ofdepletable resources ( such as oil , gas , or coal ) , who attempt to maximize profits overa finite stock of a resource , should be taxed in the same manner as non - energyproducers not subject to the finite resource constraint .

under a pure income tax,depreciation deductions would be based on economic depreciation ; exploration anddevelopment drilling expenditures would be subject to cost depletion ( capitalized ) instead of expensed ( entirely deducted from current - year taxable income ) as iscurrently done ; and depletion allowances would be based on the actual decline ineconomic value of the mineral deposit ( or approximated by indexed cost depletioninstead of percentage depletion ) .

 ( 6 ) a neutral tax system would also generally capitalizedry hole costs , the intangible costs of drilling unsuccessful wells , as such expensesmay be viewed as part of the cost of developing successful wells - - essentially thecosts of creating an asset of value .

in the event that there are no successful wells , thena deduction for such costs in the year incurred is appropriate under a neutral incometax system .

such an income tax would be neutral ; i.e. , it would not distort resourceallocation , the optimal allocation that would otherwise result in a competitivemarket .

 ( 7 ) the current tax treatment of mineral producers - - which permits expensingof intangible drilling costs and dry hole costs , percentage rather than cost depletionfor smaller companies and for some royalty owners , exemption from passive losslimitation rules that apply to other industries , and special tax credits and othersubsidies ( such as the tax credit for oil and gas produced from marginal wells ) - - differs from this neutral tax treatment in that it provides several tax subsidies for oiland gas .

 ( 8 ) while the magnitude and value of the subsidies in the aggregate are not large relativeto the size of the oil and gas industry , this can still lead to increased investments inlocating reserves ( increased exploration ) , more profitable production , and someacceleration of oil and gas production ( increased rate of extraction ) and excessivelyrapid depletion of the resource ( i.e. , they provide an unambiguous incentive todeplete sooner rather than later ) .

it also would lead to a channeling of resources intothese activities that otherwise would be used for oil and gas activities abroad or forother economic activities in the united states .

while a change from the present tax system of tax subsidies to a neutral taxsystem would have a heavy adverse effect on many smaller oil and gas companies,particularly those that concentrate on onshore exploration , if the theory is correct , itwould be more than offset by the positive welfare effect on the country generally asmarket distortions are reduced , and resources would be allocated more efficiently .

perhaps more than other markets , the energy markets have characteristicswhich can lead to market failure and thus a misallocation of resources .

production,importation , and use of energy frequently generate non - market costs or benefits notaccounted for by the producers , importers , or consumers ( and therefore not measuredin the marketplace ) that spill over to people who are not a party to the transaction .

these spillovers - - or externalities - - are an energy market shortcoming because theyare uncompensated , not reflected in the equilibrium market prices for the fuel ( because without government intervention there are no economic incentives to do so ) .

with externalities operating , markets can fail to establish energy prices equalto marginal costs of supply .

with inaccurate cost / price signals , a competitivefree - market system may fail to achieve the socially optimal mix - - the allocationallyefficient mix - - of output .

the presence of externalities does not alter the economicargument that competitive mineral producers should be taxed under the same incometax rules as the competitive non - mineral producers , but it does suggest either aseparate energy tax ( in the case of a negative production externality , whereproduction and use of energy generates costs ) or an energy tax subsidy ( in the caseof a positive production externality , where the firm's competitive free market outputgenerates benefits to third parties ) .

energy taxes on producers and consumers that factor in the external costs ofenergy use , such as air pollution , would contribute significantly to energyconservation by raising energy prices and reducing the demand for energy .

thedemand for energy would decline both through a direct demand response , i.e.,curbing energy use through reductions in output , service , or utility levels ( eg , byreducing the number of miles driven , indoor temperatures during winter by turningdown the thermostat , etc. ) .

and through substitution of more energy - efficient for lessenergy - efficient technologies .

this would be true for all energy that generatesexternal costs , but is particularly true for fossil fuels , whose external costs aregenerally greater than for other energy types .

however , energy taxes to encourage conservation should be unnecessary oneconomic grounds because over the longer term , as depletion gradually diminishesthe stock of exhaustible energy resources ( such as petroleum ) , conventional energyprices would be expected to increase in real terms , all else ( such as technologicaladvancements and innovations , and the degree of recycling ) remaining thesame .

 ( 22 ) as a result , more of the energy efficient technologies would become profitable andinvestment in energy - efficient technologies would increase ( for example , moreenergy efficient housing , automobiles with higher miles per gallon , and more energyefficient industrial equipment such as boilers ) .

 ( 23 ) thus , aside from energy taxes or subsidies to correct for energy productionand consumption externalities , and aside from possible user charges , economists generally argue there is no economic justification for additional taxes or tax subsidiesto encourage greater energy conservation , or energy efficiency .

this is because thereis generally no market failure in energy use ( notwithstanding the environmentalexternalities discussed above , or the exceptions discussed below ) or in investmentin energy - using technologies - - at either the household or business level - - thatrequires such tax subsidies .

just as the competitive market system , corrected forexternalities , automatically and efficiently leads to the optimal production and useof energy resources , it also leads to the optimal amount of investment in energyefficiency technologies .

all this is done without the effect of subsidies , in terms ofrevenue losses and allocational distortions , which reduce aggregate output and thegeneral welfare .

there are four market failures in energy use , however , that may be aneconomic justification for government intervention , but only one is a rationale forcertain types of conservation tax subsidies .

in rental housing , the tenant and thelandlord lack strong financial incentives to invest in energy conservation equipmentand materials , even when the benefits clearly outweigh the costs , because thebenefits from such conservation may not entirely accrue to the party undertaking theenergy - saving expenditure and effort .

builders and buyers may also lack sufficientinformation , a problem which is also discussed below .

as a general rule , tenants are not going to improve the energy efficiency ofa residence that does not belong to them , even if the unit is metered .

they might ifthe rate of return ( or payback ) is sufficiently large , but most tenants do not occupyrental housing long enough to reap the full benefits of the energy conservationinvestments .

part of the problem is also that it is not always easy to calculate theenergy savings potential ( hence , rates of return ) from various retrofitting investments .

landlords may not be able to control the energy consumption habits of renters tosufficiently recover the full cost of the energy conservation expenditures , regardlessof whether the units are individually metered or not .

if the units are individuallymetered , then the landlord would not undertake such investments since all thebenefits therefrom would accrue to the renters , unless a landlord could charge higherrents on apartments with lower utility costs .

if the units are not individually metered,but under centralized control , the benefits of conservation measures may accruelargely to the landlord , but even here the tenants may have sufficient control overenergy use to subvert the accrual of any gains to the landlord .

in such cases , from thelandlord's perspective , it may be easier and cheaper to forego the conservationinvestments and simply pass on energy costs as part of the rents .

individual meteringcan be quite costly and while it may reduce some of the distortions , it is not likely tocompletely eliminate these , because even if the landlord can charge higher rents , hemay not be able to recover the costs of energy conservation efforts or investments .

these market failures may lead to under investment in conservation measuresin rental housing and provide the economic rationale for internal revenue code ( irc ) â§136 , which allows the value of any energy conservation subsidy provided byelectric utilities to households to be excluded from gross income .

without suchexplicit exclusion , such subsidies would be treated as gross income and subject totax .

this exclusion , however , applies to both owner - occupied and rental housing,and to a limited extent to business conservation subsidies .

there are other types of market failures in energy use that may suggest eitherminimum efficiency standards or government - provided information such as energyefficiency labels .

as suggested above , many homeowners may not know the precisepayback or rate of return of a particular energy - efficiency enhancing investment , ormay not know how to calculate it .

this may be a particularly serious problem forolder homes , which are less energy efficient then newer models - - those built sincethe energy crisis of the 1970s .

this market failure problem suggestsgovernment - provided information as a solution , however , rather than tax subsidies .

a third energy market failure arises out of asymmetric information betweenenergy consumers and manufacturers of energy efficient equipment .

the energyconsumer may have little incentive to become fully informed about the energyefficiency of a particular energy - using or - saving item , while the producer , who hascomplete and accurate information , doesn't have the incentive to produce a higherpriced and more energy efficient product , since it is might be more difficult to marketand sell such a product .

thus , while a particular energy - saving device may have ahigh rate of return , the market may not provide it .

this problem suggests eithergovernment mandated efficiency standards or labeling as is currently being done withappliance energy labels and fuel economy labels .

finally , although capital markets are generally competitive and efficient , low - income consumers may have difficulty acquiring loans for conservation investments,even when such investments are profitable ( the present value of the energyexpenditure savings is greater than the capital costs ) .

this suggests that low or zerointerest rate loans for low income consumers or even weatherization grants couldaddress the problem .

the higher energy prices that would result from taxes imposed onconventional energy to address external costs would also lead to more investment toincrease the supply of alternative fuels , which would , in time , lead to even moreconservation of ( reduced demand for ) conventional fuels .

over the longer term , thesupply of these alternatives would tend to increase as depletion of conventionalenergy raises its real price .

even without increases in conventional fuel prices,alternative energy could gain a price advantage through future technologicaladvances .

as in the case of energy conservation , there are no externalities or marketfailures that cause under - investment in alternative energy technologies andunder - supply of alternative fuels .

the private market system works effectively andefficiently in developing any form of energy and its technologies if there aresufficient profit incentives , i.e. , if the rate of return on such investments is above theopportunity cost of capital .

moreover , the market ensures that the least - cost , mostefficient alternatives become commercialized first , and the market adjusts quicklyand efficiently to the changing dynamics of the marketplace .

in general , in cases where alternative fuels have difficulty penetrating themarket , it is because they cannot be competitively priced , relative to conventionalfuels , generally because either oil prices are too low , capital costs of alternative fuelstechnologies are too high , or both .

to illustrate , compare the estimated 30-yearlevelized costs , per unit of electrical output , and the capital costs of varioustechnologies for producing electricity using conventional fuels ( primarily coal , butalso natural gas ) and alternative fuels such as biomass and wind energy systems .

 ( 24 ) electricutilities can upgrade existing coal - fired units at a cost of 2.0â¢ / kwh , or they can investin the latest efficient and cleaner technology ( the advanced combined - cycle naturalgas unit ) at a cost of about 3.5â¢ / kwh .

these are substantially lower than someestimates of the cost / kwh of the following energy alternatives: 15.0â¢ forphotovoltaics ; 5-10â¢ for small hydroelectric ; 6-8â¢ for solar thermal power ; 4-7â¢ forwind power ; and 4-6â¢ for biomass .

much of these cost differences are due to thesignificantly higher capital costs of generating electricity with alternative energyresources ( $7,000 / kw for photovoltaics , $1,500 / kw for biomass , $1,000 / kw forwind ) as compared with conventional fuels ( $400 / kw for the combined cycle naturalgas and $200 / kw for retrofitting existing coal - fired units ) .

 ( 25 ) volatile oil prices can increase investor risk and inhibit the development ofalternative , renewable ( solar , wind , etc .

 ) , and unconventional resources .

this isbecause oil is the benchmark energy resource that sets the long - term price ( andtherefore influences the profitability ) of all other fuels .

hypothetically , if alternativefuels would be profitable at oil prices of $40 per barrel , but prices fluctuate between$20 per barrel and $60 per barrel , there will generally be less investment inrenewable and unconventional resources than if the price were stable at $40 everyyear .

however , as discussed before , tax subsidies for alternative fuels are a costlyand inefficient policy to correct for such risks .

energy taxes have also been proposed for primarily fiscal reasons - - togenerate revenues for deficit reduction .

the first federal gasoline tax was enacted in1932 ( at 1â¢ / gal .

for gasoline and 2â¢ for diesel fuel ) as a way of cushioning federaldeficits , which were mounting with the great depression .

energy tax proposals fordeficit reduction were commonplace during the 1982-1993 period as budget deficitsmounted due to huge tax cuts under the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l.97-34 ) and the nation experienced reduced inflation , economic recession , defensebuildups , and the federal inability to control spending .

several energy taxes wereproposed at that time: an increase in the excise taxes on gasoline , diesel , and othermotor fuels ; a sizeable tax on imported oil ( in addition to the customs dutiesthat are already imposed on imported petroleum ) ; a tax on both imported and domestically produced crude oil ; and a broadly - based or general energy tax on all or most types ofenergy consumption , either based on the heat content of the fuel ( btu tax ) , the carboncontent of the fuel ( the carbon tax ) , or on the sales price ( the ad valorem energy tax ) .

eventually , only the tax on gasoline and other motor fuels was increased ( by 5â¢ in1982 , 5â¢ in 1990 , and by 4.3â¢ in 1993 ) .

as a general economic principle there is no distinct fiscal rationale for afederal energy tax as a source of general fund financing of federal activities or fordeficit reduction .

economic principles suggest federal programs ought to be financedby general income or general consumption taxes .

such taxes , however , while lessdistortive and more equitable than energy taxes and other selective excise taxes ( ordifferential commodity taxes ) are also distortional .

income taxes , for instance , distortthe choice between work and leisure by raising the price of work relative to the priceof leisure , which tends to increase leisure and reduce work .

income taxes also distortthe choice between consuming and saving for the future by raising the price ofconsuming in the future ( i.e. , saving ) .

if an efficiency enhancing tax , such as an externality correcting energy tax,could be substituted for a distortional tax in a revenue neutral way , not only wouldthere be no budgetary effect , but there would be a gain in efficiency ( eg , a reductionin pollution to the environment ) .

 ( 27 ) in some cases , the revenue gain - - hence thepossible efficiency gain - - could be substantial .

for example , a $30 / ton tax on carbonemissions , which would roughly stabilize carbon emissions at their 2000 levels,would generate about $40 billion annually ; a $100 per ton tax could generate as muchas $100 billion annually .

 ( 28 ) another example is the gasoline tax .

currently , the burden of the gasoline taxis largely offset or counterbalanced by the benefits received from highways andinfrastructure financed from the tax .

this means that under current law , and indeedsince the inception of the gasoline tax , there has never been a tax on gasoline thataccounts for the external costs of driving: the environmental costs of oil productionand refining , the environmental costs from tailpipe emissions , the costs of oil importdependence , and the road congestion .

a policy to impose a tax on gasoline as asubstitute for a distorting income tax would not only make drivers pay for theexternal costs of driving , it would reduce income tax distortions , and enhanceeconomic efficiency .

moreover , higher gasoline prices would promote petroleumconservation , reduce air pollution , and carbon emissions substantially , and wouldpromote the development of alternative fuels without a large cost , in terms of reducedrevenues from subsidization , to the federal budgetary .

however , gasoline taxes ofthis magnitude could be , unless phased - in gradually , a significant shock to theeconomy .

energy taxes and subsidies , when used to correct for externalities and othermarket failures , offer an efficient alternative or supplement to regulations as aninstrument of environmental policy .

regulations prescribe the type of technology orequipment for environmental protection , the maximum permitted rate of emission fora particular pollutant , or a minimum energy - efficiency standard , and are part of the"command - and - control" approach to environmental protection .

regulations , suchas standards , give policymakers more assurance that environmental policy goals willbe achieved regardless of cost , but are often more costly and less economicallyefficient than taxes or tradeable emissions permits .

to illustrate the fundamental reason why a standard would be economicallyless efficient than the tax , consider a regulation that prescribes that electric utilitygenerators must be at least 45% energy - efficient as a way of conserving energy andreducing power plant emissions .

that is , every fossil - fuel - fired generator in usewould have to have an efficiency rate of 45% .

in response to the standard , and givencurrent economics of alternative generation strategies , most utilities would invest inthe advanced combined - cycle natural gas system ( accng ) , which is the cheapestand most energy efficient technology , with an efficiency rate close to 50% .

subjecting all firms to the same regulatory standard essentially ensures the samebehavioral response regardless of differences in the marginal costs of reducing airemissions .

but , while the accng system is the least - costly technology among thosefeasible technologies that meet the 45% energy efficiency standard , it may not be theleast - cost energy conservation or air pollution control strategy for every single utility,in every single plant , every single generating unit , and for each of the various typesof emissions .

intuition suggests , and many studies have confirmed , that the marginal costsof pollution control ( marginal abatement costs ) vary for each type of pollutant andwith the type of technology that utilities use .

with the regulation as described , noaccount would be taken of the differences among utilities , plants , and generatingunits in their capacity to reduce emissions .

yet , because of differences in sitecharacteristics , design , and utilization rate , current generating units differsignificantly with respect to the difficulty ( or ease ) and the cost of reducingemissions .

as a result , those firms with the greater pollution abatement costs wouldhave to undertake the same level of abatement as those with lower marginalabatement costs .

because of these cost differences , there are many different strategies andoptions that utilities might use to reduce exhaust emissions from power plants .

forexample , some utilities might just reduce output , others might invest in pollutioncontrol equipment , and still others might replace their coal - fired units with advancedtechnologies .

if there are enough differences among utilities and their marginalabatement costs , then the total costs of reducing emissions with the regulatorystandard would be greater ( less efficient ) than any of the market - based approaches .

in contrast , a tax would provide the incentive for each polluter to reducepollution in the least costly way - - up to the point at which the tax just equals themarginal abatement costs .

in the above illustration , the utility with the lowermarginal abatement costs of reducing pollution would undertake more pollutionabatement than the utility with higher marginal abatement costs .

in that way the totalcost of abatement would be minimized .

tax revenues could be used to compensatethe parties that are harmed by the emissions .

the total costs of emissions controlfrom utilities would be much lower if utilities were permitted to use varioustechnologies and control options that are the least cost for that particular utility , thatparticular plant , and that particular generating unit , to address different emissions,which is how a tax would work .

by using a tax instead of a standard , all thoseanti - pollution activities that cost less than the tax will , in theory , be undertaken .

the level of , and changes to , energy taxes and subsidies can affect energyprices and output , economic growth rates , income distribution , and internationaltrade .

thus , they can be a very powerful energy and economic policy instrument .

as was discussed above , energy taxes and subsidies can be a usefulinstrument to correct for pre - existing distortions in the allocation of resources andsimultaneously generate tax revenues , if they are imposed on activities orcommodities such as energy resources whose production and use generate externalcosts , or if they are imposed as user fees for the services of a public good .

otherwise,selective energy excise taxes for either greater production , improved technical energyefficiency , or increased supply of alternative fuels reduce the efficiency of theeconomy .

reduced efficiency implies reduced output and lower standards of living .

with respect to energy taxes on supply , there is generally no separate equitycase that can be made for taxing energy at a higher rate than other commodities .

dueto nonrenewable resources' finite stock , economic rents ( also called scarcity rents ) arecreated when these resources are produced .

under competitive conditions such rentswould be expected to rise at the rate of interest so as to achieve asset or capital market equilibrium .

such rents are not excessive under competitive supply and neednot be taxed away on equity grounds .

 ( 32 ) energy taxes on consumers ( eg , gasoline taxes,oil taxes , or general energy taxes ) also frequently have negative distributionalconsequences because the incidence of such taxes often falls disproportionately onlower incomes .

finally , energy tax subsidies frequently also have adversedistributional effects .

one example - - there are others - - is the income tax credit ( theâ§29 tax credit ) for non - conventional energy resources , which in addition to distortingresource allocation , losing tax revenues , and not reducing oil import dependence ( since it has basically increased the supply of methane gas rather than alternatives topetroleum ) is also questionable on tax equity grounds .

supporters of the creditcontend that it encourages domestic energy production , however , and could becomemore important in the future .

they also note that domestic methane resulting fromthe credits helps offset the growing u.s. need for natural gas imports .

increases in energy taxes are basically a contractionary fiscal policy thatwould tend to reduce aggregate output and employment , and produce a temporaryincrease in the rate of inflation above the baseline .

increases in taxes on final energydemand , such as a hike in the gasoline tax , tend to be ( dollar for dollar ) lesscontractionary than energy taxes on industry ( such as an oil tax ) although these , too,reduce household income , consumer spending , and to some extent business costs andprofits .

sizeable taxes on oil increase the price of all energy and can trigger relativelylarge cutbacks in industrial energy use and energy used as inputs into production .

such taxes , including an oil import tax , can produce macroeconomic effects akin toan oil price shock , resulting in a temporary but sharp slowdown in the economy'sgrowth .

