the filibuster is widely viewed as one of the senate's most distinctive procedural features .

today , the term is most often used to refer to senators holding the floor in extended debate .

more generally , however , filibustering includes any tactics aimed at blocking a measure by preventing it from coming to a vote .

as a consequence , the senate has no specific rules for filibustering .

instead , possibilities for filibustering exist because senate rules lack provisions that would place specific limits on senators' rights and opportunities in the legislative process .

in particular , those rules establish no generally applicable limits on the length of debate , nor any motions by which a majority could vote to bring a debate to an end , or even limit it .

the only senate rule that permits the body , by vote , to bring consideration of a matter to an end is paragraph 2 of rule xxii , known as the cloture rule .

in general , invoking cloture requires a super - majority vote ( usually 60 out of 100 senators ) and , in such cases , doing so does not terminate consideration but only imposes a time limit .

cloture also imposes restrictions on certain other procedures that potentially could be used to dilatory effect .

in recent years , as a result , cloture has increasingly been used to overcome filibusters being conducted not only by debate , but through various other delaying tactics .

this report discusses major aspects of senate procedure related to filibusters and cloture .

the two , however , are not always as closely linked in practice as they are in popular conception .

even when opponents of a measure resort to extended debate or other tactics of delay , supporters may not decide to seek cloture ( although this situation seems to have been more common in earlier decades than today ) .

in recent times , by contrast , senate leadership has increasingly made use of cloture as a normal tool for managing the flow of business on the floor , even when no evident filibuster has yet occurred .

it would be erroneous to assume the presence or absence of cloture attempts is a reliable guide to the presence or absence of filibusters .

inasmuch as filibustering does not depend on the use of any specific rules , whether a filibuster is present is always a matter of judgment .

it is also a matter of degree ; filibusters may be conducted with greater or lesser determination and persistence .

for all these reasons , it is not feasible to construct a definitive list of filibusters .

the following discussion focuses chiefly on the conduct of filibusters through extended debate and on cloture as a means of overcoming them .

the report does not encompass all possible contingencies or consider every relevant precedent , though it identifies key modifications to the rule and its application in recent years .

authoritative information on cloture procedure can be found under that heading in riddick ' s senate procedure .

senators and staff also may wish to consult the senate parliamentarian on any question concerning the senate's procedural rules , precedents , and practices .

the core rule of the senate governing floor debate is paragraph 1 ( a ) of rule xix , which states that when a senator desires to speak , he shall rise and address the presiding officer , and shall not proceed until he is recognized , and the presiding officer shall recognize the senator who shall first address him .

no senator shall interrupt another senator in debate without his consent , and to obtain such consent he shall first address the presiding officer , and no senator shall speak more than twice upon any one question in debate on the same legislative day without leave of the senate , which shall be determined without debate .

this is essentially all the senate's rules have to say about the right to speak on the floor , so the rule is just as important for what it does not say as for what it does say .

the lack of discretion by the chair in recognizing senators and the lack of time limits on debate combine to create the possibility of filibusters by debate .

conducting a filibuster by extended debate is potentially straightforward , although it can be physically demanding .

a senator seeks recognition and , once recognized , speaks at length .

when that first senator concludes and yields the floor , another senator seeks recognition and continues the debate .

even if the senate continues in the same legislative day , the debate can proceed in this way until all the participating senators have made their two speeches on the pending question .

then , it usually is possible to offer an amendment , or make some other motion , to create a new debatable question on which the same senators can each make two more speeches .

there is no need for the participating senators to monopolize the debate .

what is important is that someone speak , not that it be someone on a given side of the question .

although one purpose of a filibuster is to try to change the minds of senators who support the question being debated , the purpose of delay is served by any senator speaking ( or being available to initiate procedural actions ) regardless of which side of the question he or she takes .

the procedures for invoking cloture are governed by paragraphs 2 and 3 of rule xxii ( which also govern procedure under cloture , as discussed later in this report ) .

the following discussion mostly addresses procedure stemming from paragraph 2 , including reinterpretation of its application to nominations .

other recent changes in rule xxii's operation on selected questions are referenced in footnotes .

the process begins when a senator presents a cloture motion that is signed by 16 senators , proposing "to bring to a close the debate upon" the pending question .

the motion is presented to the senate while it is in session and must be presented while the question on which cloture is sought is pending .

for example , it is not in order for a senator to present a motion to invoke cloture on a bill the senate has not yet agreed to consider or on an amendment that has not yet been offered .

a senator does not need to be recognized by the chair to present a cloture petition .

the senator who has the floor may be interrupted for the purpose but retains the floor thereafter and may continue speaking .

the motion is read to the senate , but the senate then returns to whatever business it had been transacting .

in almost all cases , the senate does not act on the cloture motion in any way on the day on which it is submitted or on the following day .

instead , the next action on the motion occurs "on the following calendar day but one" — that is , on the second day of session after it is presented .

so if the motion is presented on a monday , the senate acts on it on wednesday .

during the intervening time , the senate does not have to continue debating the question on which cloture has been proposed but can turn to other business .

one hour after the senate convenes on the day the cloture motion has ripened or matured , the presiding officer interrupts the proceedings of the senate , regardless of what is under consideration at the time , and presents the cloture motion to the senate for a vote .

at this point the presiding officer is required to direct that an actual ( or live ) quorum call take place .

 ( the senate often waives this quorum call by unanimous consent. ) .

when the presence of a quorum is established , the senate proceeds , without debate , to vote on the cloture motion: "the presiding officer shall , without debate , submit to the senate by a yea - and - nay vote the question: 'is it the sense of the senate that the debate shall be brought to a close ? ' .

the terms of the rule require an automatic roll call vote .

invoking cloture usually requires a three - fifths vote of the entire senate — "three - fifths of the senators duly chosen and sworn. .

thus , if there is no more than one vacancy , 60 senators must vote to invoke cloture .

in contrast , most other votes require only a simple majority ( that is , 51% ) of the senators present and voting , assuming those senators constitute a quorum .

in the case of a cloture vote , the key is the number of senators voting for cloture , not the number voting against .

failing to vote on a cloture motion has the same effect as voting against the motion: it deprives the motion of one of the 60 votes needed to agree to it .

there are two important exceptions to the three - fifths requirement to invoke cloture .

first , under rule xxii , an affirmative vote of two - thirds of the senators present and voting is required to invoke cloture on a measure or motion to amend the senate rules .

this provision has its origin in the history of the cloture rule .

before 1975 , two - thirds of the senators present and voting ( a quorum being present ) was required for cloture on all matters .

in early 1975 , at the beginning of the 94 th congress , senators sought to amend the rule to make it somewhat easier to invoke cloture .

however , some senators feared that if this effort succeeded , that would only make it easier to amend the rule again , making cloture still easier to invoke .

as a compromise , the senate agreed to move from two - thirds of the senators present and voting ( a maximum of 67 votes ) to three - fifths of the senators duly chosen and sworn ( normally , and at a maximum , 60 votes ) on all matters except future rules changes , including changes in the cloture rule itself .

second , pursuant to precedents established by the senate on november 21 , 2013 , and april 6 , 2017 , the senate can invoke cloture on a nomination by a majority of senators voting ( a quorum being present ) .

if the senate does vote to invoke cloture , that vote may not be reconsidered .

on the other hand , it is in order to reconsider the vote by which the senate voted against invoking cloture .

in current practice , supporters of cloture sometimes enter a motion to reconsider a vote against cloture , so that a second vote on cloture can later occur without a second petition being filed .

they can arrange for the second vote to take place at any point , as long as the senate then agrees , first , to the motion to proceed to the motion to reconsider , and then to the motion to reconsider itself .

both motions are non - debatable under these circumstances and require only a simple majority vote .

if the senate agrees to the motion to reconsider , the new vote on the cloture motion then occurs immediately , and cloture is invoked if three - fifths of the full senate ( or other majority , as appropriate ) now votes for it .

the senate sometimes agrees by unanimous consent to alter the way in which various requirements of the cloture rule apply to consideration of a specified matter .

in particular , senators by unanimous consent sometimes permit a cloture motion to be filed on a matter that is not then pending .

also , as mentioned , the required quorum call preceding a cloture vote is often waived by consent .

in addition , the senate may give unanimous consent to adjust the time when the cloture vote will take place .

on some occasions , the senate has even agreed , by unanimous consent , to vote on cloture at a specified time even though no cloture motion is formally filed .

in most cases , invoking cloture on a bill does not produce an immediate vote on it .

in general , the effect of invoking cloture on a bill is only to guarantee that a vote will take place eventually .

obviously , a filibuster has the greatest impact on the senate when the requisite support cannot be assembled to invoke cloture .

in that case , the measure or other matter that is being filibustered will not receive chamber approval unless its opponents relent and allow the senate to vote on it .

even if cloture is invoked , however , a filibuster can significantly affect how , when , and even whether the senate conducts its legislative and executive business .

for this reason , filibusters and the prospect of filibusters shape much of the way in which the senate does its work on the floor .

in principle , a truly determined minority of senators , even one too small to prevent cloture , usually can delay for as much as two weeks the time at which the senate finally votes to pass a bill that most senators support .

table 1 summarizes a hypothetical example for a typical bill .

in this example , a motion to proceed to the bill's consideration is made on a monday ( day 1 ) .

if a filibuster on that motion is begun or is anticipated , proponents of the motion and the bill can present a cloture motion on the same day .

however , under rule xxii , the cloture vote on the motion to proceed does not take place until wednesday ( day 3 ) .

assuming the senate invokes cloture on wednesday , there then begins the 30-hour period for post - cloture consideration of the motion .

if the senate is in session for 8 hours per day , monday through friday , the 30-hour period , if fully consumed , will extend over almost 4 full days of session , or at least until the end of the senate's session on the following monday ( day 6 ) .

if , at that time , the senate votes for the motion to proceed , the bill's opponents then may begin to filibuster the bill itself , requiring another cloture motion , another successful cloture vote ( on day 8 ) , and the expiration of another 30-hour period for post - cloture consideration .

under these conditions , rule xxii would require that the vote on final passage occur on the 11 th day of consideration , or the 15 th calendar day after the motion to proceed was made .

how long an actual filibuster can delay final senate action may be affected by the answers that can be given , in the individual case , to many questions .

these include is cloture proposed as soon as the motion to proceed is made , and then again as soon as possible after the senate takes up the bill ( after having agreed to the motion to proceed ) ? .

can the bill's supporters secure the 60 votes needed to agree to the first cloture motion on the motion to proceed , or is more than one attempt necessary before the senate votes for cloture on the motion ? .

similarly , does the senate adopt the first cloture motion on the bill itself , or is cloture invoked on the bill only on a second or subsequent attempt ? .

can the senate agree by unanimous consent to expedite the process by providing for votes on cloture before the expiration of time specified in rule xxii ? .

are the bill's opponents willing and able to consume the entire 30-hour period for post - cloture consideration of the motion to proceed , and also the same amount of time for post - cloture consideration of the bill ? .

after the senate invokes cloture , for how many days , and for how many hours per day , is the senate in session to consider the bill ? .

does the senate meet late into the evening , or all night , or on the weekend , in order to consume both 30-hour periods more quickly than it otherwise would ? .

can unanimous consent be obtained to run the clock when the senate is not considering the bill or is not in session ? .

although the actual time consumed varies from case to case , clearly filibusters can create significant delays , even when there are 60-vote majorities to invoke cloture .

how much delay the senate experiences depends in part on how much time the senate , and especially its majority party leadership , is prepared to devote to the bill in question .

if the bill is particularly important to the nation and to the majority party's legislative agenda , for example , the majority leader may be willing to invest the days or even weeks that can be necessary to withstand and ultimately end a filibuster .

another consideration is the point in the annual session and in the biennial life of a congress at which a filibuster takes place .

in the first months of the first session , for example , there may be relatively little business that is ready for senate floor consideration .

in that case , the senate may be able to endure an extended filibuster without sacrificing its ability to act in a timely way on other legislation .

toward the end of each session , however , and especially as the senate approaches sine die adjournment at the end of the second session , time becomes increasingly scarce and precious .

every hour and every day of floor time that one bill consumes is time that is not available for the senate to act on other measures that will die if not enacted into law before the end of the congress .

therefore , the costs of filibusters increase because their effects on the legislative prospects of other bills become greater and greater .

however much effect filibusters have on the operations of the senate , perhaps a more pervasive effect is attributable to filibusters that have not taken place — at least not yet .

in many instances , cloture motions may be filed not to overcome filibusters in progress , but to preempt ones that are only anticipated .

also , the prospect of a filibuster often affects when or whether the senate will consider a measure on the floor , and how the senate will consider it .

a senator who does not want the senate to consider a certain measure , whether temporarily or permanently , could monitor the senate floor and then object if and when the majority leader proposes to call up the question for consideration .

the practice of placing holds on measures , however , has developed informally as a way for senators to interpose such an objection in advance and without having to do so in person on the floor .

a senator placing a hold is implicitly requesting that the majority leader not even try to call up the measure for consideration , at least not without giving advance notice to the senator who has placed the hold .

the senate's standing rules do not address this practice , and the party leaders are not bound by such requests .

fundamentally , however , when a senator places the hold , he or she is implicitly registering his or her intention to object to any unanimous consent request for consideration of the measure .

in turn , the majority leader and the measure's prospective floor manager understand that a senator who objects to allowing a bill or resolution to be called up by unanimous consent may back up his or her objection by filibustering a motion to proceed to its consideration .

recent majority leaders have accordingly tended to honor holds , both as a courtesy to their colleagues , and in recognition that if they choose not to do so , they may well confront filibusters that they prefer to avoid .

in this way , the threat of a filibuster often is sufficient to prevent a measure from coming to the senate floor .

at a minimum , a bill's supporters may discuss with the senators making the threat whether the bill can be amended in a way that satisfies their concerns and removes any danger of a filibuster .

even if the bill's proponents are satisfied that they could invoke cloture on the bill , they still may be willing to accept unwelcome amendments to the bill to avoid a protracted process of floor consideration .

in fact , depending on the importance of the bill and the other measures that await floor action , the majority leader may be reluctant to schedule the bill unless he is assured that the senate can complete action on it without undue delay .

as noted above , sometimes a filibuster or the threat of a filibuster can affect the prospects of other measures or matters simply by compelling the senate to devote so much time to the filibustered matter that there is insufficient time available to take up all the other measures that it otherwise would consider and pass .

senators also have been known to use their rights under rule xxii to delay action on a bill or item of executive business as leverage to secure the action ( or inaction ) they want on another , unrelated question .

suppose , for example , that a senator opposes s. 1 , but knows that he or she lacks the support to filibuster against it effectively .

a senator in this situation may not have enough leverage to prevent senate floor consideration of s. 1 or to secure satisfactory changes in the bill .

so the senator may seek to increase his or her leverage by delaying , or threatening to delay , the senate's consideration of other bills that are scheduled for floor action before s. 1 .

by threatening to filibuster s. 2 , s. 3 , and s. 4 , for example , or by actually delaying their consideration , the senator may strengthen his or her bargaining position by making it clear that more is at stake than the prospects and provisions of s. 1 .

in this way , senators' opposition to one bill can affect the senate's floor agenda in unexpected and unpredictable ways .

more generally , the possibility of filibusters creates a powerful incentive for senators to strive for legislative consensus .

the votes of only a majority of senators present and voting are needed to pass a bill on the floor .

it can , however , require the votes of 60 senators to invoke cloture on the bill in order to overcome a filibuster and enable the senate to reach that vote on final passage .

knowing this , a bill's supporters have good reason to write it in a way that will attract the support of at least three - fifths of all senators .

what is more , there often are more bills that are ready to be considered on the senate floor than there is time available for acting on them .

under these circumstances , the majority leader may be reluctant , especially toward the end of a congress , even to call up a bill unless he can be assured that it will not be filibustered .

the threat of a filibuster may be enough to convince the majority leader to devote the senate's time to other matters instead , even if all concerned agree that the filibuster ultimately would not succeed in preventing the senate from passing the bill .

in such a case , a bill's supporters may not be content with securing the support of even 60 senators .

in the hope of eliminating the threat of a filibuster , the proponents may try to accommodate the interests of all senators , or at least to convince them that a good faith effort has been made to assuage their concerns .

at best , opponents can become supporters .

at worst , opponents may remain opposed , but may decide against expressing their opposition through a filibuster .

although true consensus on major legislative issues may be impossible , the dynamics of the senate's legislative process do promote efforts to come as close to consensus as the strongly held beliefs of senators permit .

