the central asian region — bordering regional powers russia , china , and iran — is an age - old east - west and north - south trade and transport crossroads .

after many of the former soviet union's republics had declared their independence by late 1991 , the five republics of central asia followed suit .

since this beginning of independence , surprising to most of the region's population , the central asian countries have taken some uneven steps in building defense and other security structures and ties .

in some respects , the states have viewed their exposure to outside influences as a mixed blessing .

while welcoming new trade , aid , and other ties , the leaders of central asia have been less receptive to calls to democratize and respect human rights .

this report discusses the internal and external security concerns of the central asian states .

security concerns faced by the states include mixes of social disorder , crime , corruption , terrorism , ethnic and civil conflict , border tensions , water and transport disputes , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , and trafficking in illegal narcotics and persons .

the central asian states have tried with varying success to bolster their security forces and regional cooperation to deal with these threats .

the united states has provided assistance for these efforts and boosted such aid and involvement after the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , but questions remain about what should be the appropriate level and scope of u.s. interest and presence in the region .

central asia's states have slowly consolidated and extended their relations with neighboring and other countries and international organizations that seek to play influential roles in central asia or otherwise affect regional security .

these include the bordering or close - by countries of russia , afghanistan , china , iran , turkey , and the south caucasus states ( see below , appendix ) , and others such as the united states , germany , france , india , israel , pakistan , saudi arabia , south korea , and ukraine .

in terms of ties with close - by states , turkmenistan may be concerned more about bordering iran and afghanistan than with non - bordering china , while kazakhstan may be concerned more about bordering russia than with non - bordering afghanistan .

while soliciting and managing ties with these states , the central asian countries also seek assistance through regional and international organizations , including the world bank , international monetary fund ( imf ) , economic community organization ( eco ) , organization of the islamic conference ( oic ) , the european union ( eu ) , the commonwealth of independent states ( cis ) , the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) , and nato .

outside powers , while sometimes competing among themselves for influence in central asia , also have some common interests .

after september 11 , 2001 , russia , china , and the united states cooperated somewhat in combating terrorism in the region .

this cooperation has appeared to ebb since then , but as the security situation in afghanistan becomes more complicated , cooperation may improve .

cooperation is also needed to combat drug , arms , and human trafficking , manage water resources , develop and deliver energy , and tackle infectious diseases .

iran and russia have collaborated since the latter 1990s to hinder the united states and turkey from further involvement in developing caspian sea oil and natural gas resources .

some observers warn that increasing collaboration or similarity of interests among russia , iran , and china in countering the west and in attempting to increase their influence could heighten threats to the sovereignty and independence of the central asian states .

others discount such threats , stressing the ultimately diverging goals of the three states .

the problems of authoritarian regimes , crime , corruption , terrorism , and ethnic and civil tensions jeopardize the security and independence of all the new states of central asia , though to varying degrees .

kazakhstan has faced the potential of separatism in northern kazakhstan where ethnic russians are dominant , although this threat has appeared to ebb in recent years with the emigration of hundreds of thousands of ethnic russians .

tajikistan faces threats from economic mismanagement and the possibility of separatism , particularly by its northern soghd ( formerly leninabad ) region .

in kyrgyzstan , northern and southern regional interests vie for influence over central political and economic decision - making .

turkmenistan faces clan and provincial tensions and widespread poverty that could contribute to instability .

uzbekistan faces escalating civil discontent and violence from those whom president islam karimov labels as islamic extremists , from a large ethnic tajik population , and from an impoverished citizenry .

ethnic uzbeks and kyrgyz clashed in 1990 in the fergana valley .

this fertile valley is divided between kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan , and contains about one - fifth of central asia's population .

all the states are harmed by drug and human trafficking and associated corruption and health problems .

despite these problems , turkmenistan's oil and gas wealth could contribute to its long - term stability .

also , its location at a locus of silk road trade routes potentially could increase its economic security .

uzbekistan's large population and many resources , including oil , natural gas , and gold , could provide a basis for its stable development and security .

kyrgyzstan's beleaguered civil society might eventually succeed in reducing authoritarianism and boosting entrepreneurial activity and good governance , which eventually might permit the country to increase its budgetary expenditures for defense and security .

it would seem that affinities among the current regional elites would facilitate cooperative ties .

many of the officials in the states learned a common language ( russian ) and were communist party members .

religion ( islam ) and ethnicity ( turkic or persian ) are other seeming grounds for links among most in the region .

in actuality , however , regional cooperation has been halting .

the vast majority of the people in the central asian states suffered steep declines in their quality of life in the first few years after the dissolution of the soviet union .

the gap widened between the rich and poor , accentuating social tensions and potential instability .

social services such as health and education , inadequate during the soviet period , declined further .

in the new century , however , negative trends in poverty and health have been reversed in much of central asia , according to one world bank report , although the quality of life remains far below that of western countries .

economic difficulties associated with the world financial crisis that began in 2008 could exacerbate social tensions , separatism , and extremism , although large percentages of the states' populations remain employed in the agricultural sector where economic gyrations have been somewhat buffered .

this sector has a surfeit of manpower , however , and cannot readily absorb new workers as the populations continue to increase .

in the past , substantial out - migration by many workers to russia and the return of remittances to relatives in central asia somewhat eased poverty and tension and buttressed national gdps .

however , russia's economic problems have caused these remittances to fall off and have forced many of these guest workers to return to their countries of origin .

after the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , the former bush administration stated that u.s. policy toward central asia focused on three inter - related activities: the promotion of security , domestic reforms , and energy development .

the september 11 , 2001 , attacks led the bush administration to realize that "it was critical to the national interests of the united states that we greatly enhance our relations with the five central asian countries" to prevent them from becoming harbors for terrorism , according to former deputy assistant secretary of state b. lynn pascoe in testimony in june 2002 .

according to this thinking , the instability that is characteristic of "failed states" — where central institutions of governance and security are unable to function throughout a state's territory — can make these states attractive to terrorist groups as bases to threaten u.s. interests .

although then - u.s. caspian emissary elizabeth jones in april 2001 carefully elucidated that the united states would not intervene militarily to halt incursions by islamic terrorists into central asia , this stance was effectively reversed after september 11 , 2001 .

u.s. - led counter - terrorism efforts were undertaken in afghanistan , including against terrorists harbored in afghanistan who aimed to overthrow central asian governments and who were assisting the taliban in fighting against the coalition .

added security training and equipment were provided to the central asian states , supplemented by more aid to promote democratization , human rights , and economic reforms , because the latter aid addressed "root causes of terrorism," according to jones in testimony in december 2001 .

she averred that "we rely on [central asian] governments for the security and well - being of our troops , and for vital intelligence," and that the united states "will not abandon central asia" after peace is achieved in afghanistan .

in october 2003 , then - assistant secretary jones in testimony stressed that "our big strategic interests [in central asia] are not temporary" and that the united states and its international partners have no alternative but to "be a force for change in the region. .

then - defense secretary donald rumsfeld similarly stressed in february 2004 that "it is caspian security ... that is important for [the united states] and it is important to the world that security be assured in that area. .

the 2004 final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) and the president's 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism call for the united states to work with central asian and other countries to deny sponsorship , support , and sanctuary to terrorists .

the report and strategy also call for assisting the states to democratize , respect human rights , and develop free markets to reduce underlying vulnerabilities that terrorists seek to exploit .

participating with members on november 18 , 2009 in launching the congressional caucasus on central asia , assistant secretary of state robert blake , jr. stated that the obama administration "has placed a high priority on building partnerships and enhancing our political engagement in central asia. .

signs of this enhanced engagement include the establishment of high - level annual bilateral consultations with each of the regional states on counter - narcotics , counter - terrorism , democratic reform , rule of law , human rights , relations with ngos , trade and investment , health , and education , he stated .

other initiatives include the creation of a working group within the state department to encourage the regional states to work out water - sharing arrangements , including the possibly bolstered supply of water from tajikistan to afghanistan and from tajikistan to pakistan .

in testimony on december 15 , 2009 , deputy assistant secretary of state george krol listed five objectives of u.s. policy in central asia: to maximize the cooperation of the regional states with coalition counter - terrorism efforts in afghanistan and pakistan ; to increase the development and diversification of the region's energy resources and supply routes ; to promote the eventual emergence of good governance and respect for human rights ; to foster competitive market economies ; and to prevent state failure in tajikistan and kyrgyzstan , including by enhancing food security assistance .

the state department in 2006 included central asia in a revamped bureau of south and central asian affairs .

according to former principal deputy assistant secretary of state steven mann , "institutions such as nato and the osce will continue to draw the nations of central asia closer to europe and the united states," but the united states also will encourage the states to develop "new ties and synergies with nations to the south," such as afghanistan , india , and pakistan .

in may 2007 , defense secretary robert gates urged asian countries to provide central asia with road and rail , telecommunications , and electricity generation and distribution aid to link the region with asia ; to help it combat terrorism and narcotics trafficking ; to send technical advisors to ministries to promote political and economic reforms ; to offer more military trainers , peacekeepers , and advisors for defense reforms ; and to more actively integrate the regional states into "the asian security structure. .

director of national intelligence dennis blair warned in testimony on february 3 , 2010 , that although the central asian states generally have been stable so far , "the region's autocratic leadership , highly personalized politics , weak institutions , and social inequality make predicting succession politics difficult and increase the possibility that the process could lead to violence or an increase in anti - us sentiment. .

he also raised concerns about the ability of kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and turkmenistan to combat islamic extremist influences from afghanistan and pakistan .

the potential for instability in the region , he stated , is heightened by "competition over water , cultivable land , and ethnic tensions," by the global economic crisis , which has resulted in reduced migrant worker remittances to the region , and by perennial food and energy shortages in some parts of the region .

u.s. ties to the central asian states appeared generally sound in the immediate wake of u.s. - led coalition operations in iraq in march - april 2003 to eliminate state - sponsored terrorism and weapons of mass destruction .

initial responses in the region ranged from support by uzbekistan to some expressions of concern by kyrgyzstan and turkmenistan that diplomacy had not been given enough of a chance .

alleged incidents where civilians have been killed during u.s. operations have been criticized by some islamic groups and others in central asia .

uzbekistan was the only central asian state to join the "coalition of the willing" that supported upcoming operations in iraq ( kazakhstan joined later ) .

uzbek president islam karimov on march 6 , 2003 , stated that the iraq operation was a continuation of "efforts to break the back of terrorism. .

on may 8 , his national security council endorsed sending medical and other humanitarian and rebuilding aid to iraq , but on august 30 , karimov indicated that plans to send medics to iraq had been dropped .

he has argued for greater u.s. attention to terrorist actions in afghanistan that threaten stability in central asia .

the kazakh foreign minister on march 28 , 2003 , voiced general support for disarming iraq but not for military action .

however , on april 24 kazakh president nursultan nazarbayev stated that saddam's removal in iraq enhanced central asian and world security .

reportedly after a u.s. appeal , nazarbayev proposed and the legislature in late may approved sending military personnel to iraq .

about two dozen kazakh combat engineers were deployed to iraq in late august 2003 and served with polish and ukrainian units until pulling out in late 2008 .

tajik president emomaliy rakhman reportedly on march 13 , 2003 , refused russia's request to denounce coalition actions in iraq .

tajik political analyst suhrob sharipov stated on april 3 that tajikistan was neutral regarding u.s. - led coalition actions in iraq because tajikistan had benefitted from u.s. aid to rebuild the country and from the improved security climate following u.s. - led actions against terrorism in afghanistan .

the kyrgyz foreign minister on march 20 , 2003 , expressed "deep regret" that diplomacy had failed to resolve the iraq dispute , raised concerns that an iraq conflict could destabilize central asia , and proclaimed that the manas airbase could not be used for iraq operations .

during a june 2003 u.s. visit , however , he reportedly told then - vice president cheney that kyrgyzstan was ready to send peacekeepers to iraq ( and afghanistan ) .

the kyrgyz defense minister in april 2004 announced that kyrgyzstan would not send troops to iraq , because of the increased violence there .

turkmenistan's late president saparmurad niyazov on march 12 , 2003 , stated that he was against military action in iraq and , on april 11 , called for the u.n. to head up the creation of a democratic iraq and for aid for ethnic turkmen in iraq displaced by the fighting .

the u.s. government has moved to classify various groups in the region as terrorist organizations , making them subject to various sanctions .

in september 2000 , the state department designated the imu , led by yuldash , as a foreign terrorist organization , stating that the imu resorts to terrorism , actively threatens u.s. interests , and attacks american citizens .

the "main goal of the imu is to topple the current government in uzbekistan," it warned , linking the imu to bombings and attacks on uzbekistan in 1999-2000 .

the imu is being aided by afghanistan's taliban and by terrorist bin laden , according to the state department , and it stressed that the "united states supports the right of uzbekistan to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity from the violent actions of the imu. .

at the same time , the united states has stressed that efforts to combat terrorism cannot include widespread human rights violations .

the designation made it illegal for u.s. entities to provide funds or resources to the imu ; made it possible to deport imu representatives from , or to forbid their admission to , the united states ; and permitted the seizure of its u.s. assets .

it also permitted the united states to increase intelligence sharing and other security assistance to uzbekistan .

on september 20 , 2001 , then - president bush in his address to a joint session of congress stressed that the imu was linked to al qaeda and demanded that the taliban hand over all such terrorists , or they would be targeted by u.s. - led military forces .

according to most observers , the president was stressing that uzbekistan should actively support the united states in the afghan operation .

among other terrorist groups , then - cia director porter goss testified to the senate armed services committee on march 17 , 2005 , that the ijg / iju "has become a more virulent threat to u.s. interests and local governments. .

on may 25 , 2005 , the state department designated ijg / iju as a global terrorist group , and on june 1 , 2005 , the u.n. security council added ijg / iju to its terrorism list .

officials in germany arrested several individuals on september 5 , 2007 , on charges of planning explosions at the u.s. airbase at ramstein , at u.s. and uzbek diplomatic offices , and other targets in germany .

the iju claimed responsibility and stated that it was targeting u.s. and uzbek interests because of these countries' "brutal policies towards muslims," and targeting germany because it has a small military base in termez , uzbekistan , which is used to support nato operations in afghanistan .

reportedly , the suspects had received training at imu and al qaeda terrorist training camps in pakistan .

in u.s. congressional testimony on september 10 , 2007 , john redd , then - director of the national counterterrorism center , and mike mcconnell , then - director of national intelligence , stated that u.s. communications intercepts shared with germany had facilitated foiling the plot .

in august 2002 , the united states announced that it was freezing any u.s. assets of the east turkestan islamic movement ( etim ) , a uighur group operating in central asia , since the group had committed numerous terrorist acts in china and elsewhere and posed a threat to americans and u.s. interests .

in september 2002 , the united states , china , and other nations asked the u.n. to add etim to its terrorism list .

china reported that its military exercises with kyrgyzstan in november 2002 were aimed at helping kyrgyzstan to eliminate the group .

on the other hand , the united states has not yet classified hizb ut - tahrir ( ht ) as a terrorist group .

according to the state department's country reports on terrorism 2006 , "radical extremist groups such as ht may also present a danger to the region .

ht [is] an extremist political movement advocating the establishment of a borderless , theocratic islamic state throughout the entire muslim world... .

the united states has no evidence that ht has committed any acts of international terrorism , but the group's radical anti - american and anti - semitic ideology is sympathetic to acts of violence against the united states and its allies .

ht has publicly called on muslims to travel to iraq and afghanistan to fight coalition forces. .

nonetheless , u.s. officials have criticized central asian governments for imprisoning ht members who are not proven to be actively engaged in terrorist activities , and for imprisoning other political and religious dissidents under false accusations that they are ht members .

according to a november 2002 state department factsheet , ht has not advocated the violent overthrow of central asian governments , so the united states has not designated it a foreign terrorist organization .

the factsheet also urges central asian government to "prosecute their citizens for illegal acts , not for their beliefs. .

among other western countries , germany outlawed ht activities in january 2003 , declaring that ht was a terrorist organization that advocates violence against israel and jews .

the united states and the central asian states signed defense cooperation accords prior to september 11 , 2001 , that provided frameworks for aid and joint staff and working group contacts and facilitated enhanced cooperation after september 11 , 2001 .

according to the 9 / 11 commission , such pre - september 11 , 2001 , ties included uzbek permission for u.s. clandestine efforts against al qaeda in afghanistan .

according to former assistant secretary of defense crouch in testimony in june 2002 , "our military relationships with each [central asian] nation have matured on a scale not imaginable prior to september 11 th . .

kyrgyzstan , he relates , is a "critical regional partner" in operation enduring freedom ( oef ; military actions in afghanistan ) , providing basing for combat and combat support units at manas airport for u.s. and other coalition forces .

uzbekistan provided a base for u.s. operations at karshi - khanabad and a base for german units at termez , and a land corridor to afghanistan for humanitarian aid via the friendship bridge at termez .

it also leased to the coalition il - 76 transport airlift for forces and equipment .

kazakhstan provided overflight rights and expedited rail transhipment of supplies .

turkmenistan permitted blanket overflight and refueling privileges for humanitarian flights in support of oef .

tajikistan permitted use of its international airport in dushanbe for u.s. , british , and french refueling and basing .

while the former bush administration rejected the idea of permanent military bases in these states , crouch stated in june 2002 that "for the foreseeable future , u.s. defense and security cooperation in central asia must continue to support actions to deter or defeat terrorist threats" and to build effective armed forces under civilian control .

according to a late november 2002 state department fact sheet , the united states does not intend to establish permanent military bases in central asia but does seek long - term security ties and access to military facilities in the region for the foreseeable future to deter or defeat terrorist threats .

the fact sheet also emphasizes that the u.s. military presence in the region likely will remain as long as operations continue in afghanistan .

in mid - 2004 , tents at the manas airbase reportedly were being replaced with metal buildings .

u.s. officers allegedly denied that the buildings were permanent but averred that there was no end yet in sight for operations in afghanistan .

the overseas basing commission ( obc ) , in its may 2005 report , concurred with the former bush administration that existing bases in kyrgyzstan and uzbekistan had been useful for supporting oef .

the obc considered that there could be some possible merit in establishing cooperative security locations in the region but urged congress to seek further inter - agency vetting of "what constitutes vital u.s. interests in the area that would require [a] long - term u.s .

presence. .

prior to september 11 , 2001 , the united states fostered military - to - military cooperation through nato's pfp , which all the central asian states except tajikistan had joined by mid - 1994 .

with encouragement from the u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) , tajikistan indicated in mid - 2001 that it would join pfp , and it signed accords on admission in february 2002 .

at the signing , a nato press release hailed tajikistan's support to the coalition as "of key importance" to combating international terrorism .

central asian officers and troops have participated in pfp exercises in the united states since 1995 , and u.s. troops have participated in exercises in central asia since 1997 .

many in central asia viewed these exercises as "sending a message" to islamic extremists and others in afghanistan , iran , and elsewhere against fostering regional instability .

kazakhstan and uzbekistan appeared to vie to gain services from nato .

u.s. security accords were concluded with several central asian states after september 11 , 2001 .

these include a u.s. - uzbekistan declaration on the strategic partnership signed on march 12 , 2002 , that included a nonspecific security guarantee .

the united states affirmed that "it would regard with grave concern any external threat" to uzbekistan's security and would consult with uzbekistan "on an urgent basis" regarding a response .

the two states pledged to intensify military cooperation , including "re - equipping the armed forces" of uzbekistan .

similarly , then - kyrgyz president askar akayev and then - president bush issued a joint statement on september 23 , 2002 , pledging to deepen the strategic partnership , including cooperation in counter - terrorism , and the united states highlighted its aid for kyrgyzstan's border security and military capabilities .

uscentcom in 1999 became responsible for u.s. military engagement activities , planning , and operations in central asia ( the region was previously under the aegis of european command ) .

it states that its peacetime strategy focuses on ties between the regional military forces and u.s. and nato forces , and to foster "apolitical , professional militaries capable of responding to regional peacekeeping and humanitarian needs" in the region .

uscentcom commanders visited the region regularly , setting the stage for more extensive military ties post - september 11 , 2001 .

besides these continuing visits by uscentcom commanders , other u.s. military officials regularly have toured the region .

a u.s. - uzbek status of forces agreement ( sofa ) was signed on october 7 , 2001 , and the air campaign against afghanistan began an hour later .

the sofa provided for use of uzbek airspace and for up to 1,500 u.s. troops to use a soviet - era airbase ( termed karshi - khanabad or k2 ) 90 miles north of the afghan border near the towns of karshi and khanabad .

in exchange , the united states provided security guarantees and agreed that terrorists belonging to the islamic movement of uzbekistan ( imu ) who were fighting alongside taliban and al qaeda forces would be targeted .

according to some reports , the problems in negotiating the u.s. - uzbek sofa further spurred the united states to seek airfield access at the manas international airport in kyrgyztan , which in early 2002 became the primary hub for operations in afghanistan .

u.s. military engineers upgraded runways at the manas airfield and built an encampment next to the airport , unofficially naming it the peter j. ganci airbase , in honor of a u.s. fireman killed in new york on september 11 , 2001 .

besides these airbases , uzbekistan also has provided a base for about 300 german troops at termez and a land corridor to afghanistan for humanitarian aid via the friendship bridge at termez .

over 100 french troops have used the dushanbe airport in tajikistan for refueling and humanitarian shipments .

kazakhstan has allowed overflight and transhipment rights , and u.s. - kazakh accords were signed in 2002 on the emergency use of kazakhstan's almaty airport and on military - to - military relations .

turkmenistan , which has sought to remain neutral , allowed the use of its bases for refueling and humanitarian trans - shipments .

kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , and uzbekistan have sent several military liaison officers to uscentcom .

on july 5 , 2005 , the presidents of uzbekistan , kyrgyzstan , and tajikistan signed a declaration at an sco summit that stated that "as large - scale military operations against terrorism have come to an end in afghanistan , the sco member states maintain that the relevant parties to the anti - terrorist coalition should set a deadline for the temporary use of ... infrastructure facilities of the sco member states and for their military presence in these countries. .

despite this declaration , none of the central asian leaders immediately called for closing the coalition bases .

however , after the united states and others interceded so that refugees who fled from andijon to kyrgyzstan could fly to romania , uzbekistan on july 29 demanded that the united states vacate k2 within six months .

on november 21 , 2005 , the united states officially ceased operations to support afghanistan at k2 .

perhaps indicative of the reversal of u.s. military - to - military and other ties , former pro - u.s. defense minister qodir gulomov was convicted of treason and received seven years in prison , later suspended .

many k2 activities shifted to the manas airbase in kyrgyzstan .

some observers viewed the closure of k2 and souring u.s. - uzbek relations as setbacks to u.s. influence in the region and as gains for russian and chinese influence .

others suggested that u.s. ties with other regional states provided continuing influence and that u.s. criticism of human rights abuses might pay future dividends among regional populations .

with the closure of k2 and the cooling of u.s. - uzbek relations , the united states appeared to shift more of its regional emphasis to kazakhstan .

in a joint statement issued at the close of nazarbayev's september 2006 u.s. visit , the two countries hailed progress in "advancing our strategic partnership. .

the two presidents called for "deepen[ing] our cooperation in fighting international terrorism and the proliferation of wmd,... strengthen[ing] our cooperation to enhance regional security and economic integration,... expand[ing] our joint activities to ensure the development of energy resources,... supporting economic diversification and reform,... [and] accelerating kazakhstan's efforts to strengthen representative institutions. .

in a speech on u.s. - kazakh relations in august 2006 , then - deputy assistant secretary of state evan feigenbaum affirmed that the united states firmly supported kazakhstan's efforts to become the economic powerhouse in the region .

defense analyst roger mcdermott has warned that these apparently closer u.s. - kazakh relations mask tightening russian military influence over kazakhstan .

he has argued that the united states needs to match the rhetoric of partnership with increases in defense aid to kazakhstan that are closely monitored to cut down on corruption within kazakhstan's armed forces .

in early 2006 , kyrgyz president bakiyev reportedly requested that lease payments for use of the manas airbase be increased to more than $200 million per year and at the same time re - affirmed russia's free use of its nearby base .

after reportedly drawn - out negotiations , the united states and kyrgyzstan issued a joint statement on july 14 , 2006 , that they had resolved the issue of the continued u.s. use of airbase facilities at manas .

although not specifically mentioning u.s. basing payments , it was announced that the united states would provide $150 million in "total assistance and compensation over the next year," subject to congressional approval ( some reports indicated that the "rent" portion of this amount would be $17-$20 million ) .

kyrgyz security council secretary miroslav niyazov and former u.s. deputy assistant defense secretary james macdougall also signed a protocol of intentions affirming that the united states would compensate the kyrgyz government and businesses for goods , services , and support of coalition operations .

some observers suggested that increased terrorist activities in afghanistan and a may 2006 terrorist incursion from tajikistan into kyrgyzstan may have contributed to a kyrgyz evaluation that the u.s. coalition presence was still necessary .

visiting central asia in late july 2006 , uscentcom's then - head gen. john abizaid stated that the united states probably would eventually reduce its military presence in the region while increasing its military - to - military cooperation .

following the shooting death of a civilian by a u.s. serviceman at the u.s. - leased manas airbase in kyrgyzstan on december 6 , 2006 , president kurmanbek bakiyev the next day reportedly ordered his foreign ministry to re - examine provisions of a late 2001 status of forces agreement precluding u.s. soldiers serving in kyrgyzstan from prosecution in local courts .

although kyrgyz authorities insisted that the u.s. serviceman stand trial in kyrgyz courts , he was rotated back to the united states .

during a february 3 , 2009 , meeting in moscow with russian president dmitriy medvedev , kyrgyz president kurmanbek bakiyev announced that the u.s. manas airbase would be closed .

bakiyev claimed that u.s. compensation for use of the base had been inadequate and that the kyrgyz public wanted the base to be closed .

he also argued that counter - terrorism operations in afghanistan had been concluded , which had been the main reason for keeping the airbase open .

at the meeting , medvedev had offered a $1.7 billion loan to kyrgyzstan for building a dam and hydroelectric power station and a $300 million loan and a $150 million grant for budget stabilization .

russia also agreed to cancel a $180 million debt owed by kyrgyzstan in exchange for some properties .

many observers suggested that the assistance was a quid pro quo for krygyzstan's agreement to close the base , but both russian and kyrgyz officials denied the link .

responding to bakiyev's announcement of the base closure , medvedev stated that "our states will continue to support regional operations of the anti - terrorist coalition. .

as outlined subsequently , such support ostensibly was to include the provision of transit privileges for nonlethal supplies for operations of the international security assistance force in afghanistan ( see below ) and protection by the csto from terrorism emanating from afghanistan .

on february 19 , the kyrgyz legislature overwhelmingly approved a government request to cancel the status of forces agreement ( sofa ) with the united states on using the airbase .

the next day , president bakiyev signed the bill into law .

the sofa between the united states and kyrgyzstan calls for the airbase to be vacated within 180 days upon notification that the agreement is cancelled .

the defense department announced on june 24 , 2009 , that an agreement of "mutual benefit" had been concluded with the kyrgyz government "to continu[e] to work , with them , to supply our troops in afghanistan , so that we can help with the overall security situation in the region. .

the agreement was approved by the legislature and signed into law by president bakiyev , to take effect on july 14 , 2009 .

according to kyrgyz foreign minister kadyrbek sarbayev , the government decided to conclude the annually renewable "intergovernmental agreement with the united states on cooperation and the formation of a transit center at manas airport," because of growing alarm about "the worrying situation in afghanistan and pakistan. .

a yearly rent payment for use of land and facilities at the manas airport would be increased from $17.4 million to $60 million per year and the united states had pledged more than $36 million for infrastructure improvements and $30 million for air traffic control system upgrades for the airport .

sarbayev also stated that the united states had pledged $20 million dollars for a u.s. - kyrgyz joint development fund for economic projects , $21 million for counter - narcotics efforts , and $10 million for counter - terrorism efforts .

all except the increased rent had already been appropriated or requested ( see below , congressional concerns ) .

the agreement also reportedly includes stricter host - country conditions on u.s. military personnel .

one kyrgyz legislator claimed that the agreement was not a volte - face for kyrgyzstan because russia and other central asian states had signed agreements with nato to permit the transit of supplies to afghanistan ( see below ) .

undersecretary william burns visited kyrgyzstan in early july 2009 and reportedly stated that "we welcome a new decision of president bakiyev regarding the set up of a transport and logistics hub in manas airport.... [the agreement] is an important contribution into our common goals in afghanistan. .

he also stated that "the new administration believes that we should expand and deepen the level and scope of our bilateral relations" with kyrgyzstan , and he announced that a u.s. - kyrgyzstan bilateral commission on trade and investment would be set up .

in early 2010 , it was reported that more facilities were being constructed at the "transit center" to handle the increased numbers of u.s. troops deployed to afghanistan .

kyrgyzstan had also requested that french and spanish troops who were deployed at manas had to leave , and they had pulled out by october 2009 .

the french detachment ( reportedly 35 troops and a tanker aircraft ) moved temporarily to dushanbe .

the spanish unit ( reportedly 60 troops and two transport aircraft ) moved temporarily to herat , west afghanistan , and dushanbe is being used temporarily as a stopover for troop relief flights .

france and spain are negotiating with kyrgyzstan on their return to manas .

because u.s. - coalition and nato supplies transiting pakistan to afghanistan frequently were subject to attacks , the central asian region has become an important alternative transit route .

gen. david petraeus , the commander of the u.s. central command , visited kazakhstan and tajikistan in late january 2009 to negotiate alternative air , rail , road , and water routes for the commercial shipping of supplies to support nato and u.s. operations in afghanistan ( he also visited kyrgyzstan to discuss airbase issues ) .

to encourage a positive response , the u.s. embassies in the region announced that the united states planned to purchase many non - military goods locally to transport to the troops in afghanistan .

kazakhstan and tajikistan agreed in principle to such transit in february 2009 ( although technicalities were not worked out with kazakhstan until 2010 ) , uzbekistan permitted it in april 2009 , and kyrgyzstan permitted it in july 2009 ( georgia had given such permission in 2005 , russia in 2008 , and azerbaijan in march 2009 ) .

a first rail shipment of non - lethal supplies entered afghanistan in late march 2009 after transiting russia , kazakhstan , and uzbekistan .

uzbekistan's navoi airport also is being used to transport supplies to afghanistan .

besides this commercial shipping , u.s. military aircraft have been given overflight privileges for the transport of weapons to afghanistan .

in testimony on december 15 , 2009 , deputy assistant secretary of defense david sedney reported that 4,769 containers had been moved through central asia to afghanistan as of the end of november , by some estimates up to one - third of u.s. military shipments to afghanistan .

most of the containers had entered afghanistan from uzbekistan , with a fewer number entering from tajikistan .

some containers transited the caucasus countries , the caspian sea , kazakhstan , and uzbekistan , while others transited russia and kazakhstan , and thence either through uzbekistan or ( far less frequently ) through kyrgyzstan and tajikistan .

he also stated that the united states supported the building of a railroad to run from uzbekistan's border town of hairaton across the friendship bridge over the amu darya to mazar - i - sharif in afghanistan .

richard holbrooke , the state department's special representative for afghanistan and pakistan , visited central asia in february 2010 to discuss the ndn and other regional assistance to u.s. and nato stabilization operations in afghanistan .

in kyrgyzstan , he discussed issues involving u.s. use of the manas "transit center," including the upcoming annual renewal of some leasing provisions .

some observers have raised concerns that greater reliance on the ndn might make the united states less willing to criticize participating governments for democracy and human rights abuses .

concerns also have been raised that that taliban forces and other terrorists may begin to target the ndn and destabilize central asia .

in early september 2009 , two tanker trucks from tajikistan that were delivering fuel to nato forces were hijacked by taliban insurgents in kunduz province in afghanistan , which borders tajikistan .

after the hijacked trucks had stalled while crossing the kunduz river , german forces called in a u.s. airstrike , which reportedly resulted in dozens of civilian and insurgent casualties .

in recent months , there have been several battles between taliban insurgents in kunduz province and u.s. , nato , and afghan government forces .

in january 2010 , a battle took place in a small town in kunduz province just a few miles from the tajik border .

u.s. peace and security assistance amounted to $1.5 billion in cumulative budgeted funds through fy2008 , of which the largest quantity went to kazakhstan for comprehensive threat reduction ( ctr ) programs ( see table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 , below ) .

u.s. security assistance to the region declined somewhat in absolute terms for several years after reaching $198 million in fy2002 , reaching low points of $105 million in fy2003 and fy2006 .

in fy2007 , however , budgeted peace and security assistance was boosted to its highest ever level , $203 million , with increases in defense department funding for coalition and stability operations aid and proliferation prevention in kazakhstan ; department of energy funding for global threat reduction in kazakhstan ; and department of state law enforcement aid for tajikistan .

also in fy2007 , the defense department boosted counter - narcotics aid to kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , and tajikistan .

in fy2008 , peace and security assistance was boosted further to $213 million , with increases in defense and energy department funding for global threat reduction in kazakhstan and uzbekistan , defense department sec .

1206 funding for caspian sea security training and equipping in kazakhstan , defense department sec .

1206 funding for counter - terrorism training and equipping in kyrgyzstan , and defense department sec .

1207 funding for stabilization operations and security sector reform in tajikistan .

in percentage terms , peace and security assistance has become an increasingly prominent aid sector .

budgeted peace and security aid to central asia in fy2002 was 34% of all aid to the region .

budgeted peace and security assistance increased to 78% of all aid to the region in fy2007 , and was 66% in fy2008 .

after the breakup of the soviet union , u.s. fears of nuclear proliferation were focused on nuclear - armed kazakhstan , and it has received the bulk of regional ctr and department of energy ( doe ) aid for de - nuclearization , enhancing the "chain of custody," and demilitarization .

some ctr and doe aid also has gone to uzbekistan .

material physical protection aid provided to kazakhstan's ulba metallurgical plant includes alarms , computers for inventory control , and hardening of doors .

aid was provided to help decommission and secure kazakhstan's aktau reactor .

agreements were signed at the november 1997 meeting of the u.s. - kazakh joint commission to study how to safely and securely store over 300 metric tons of highly - enriched uranium and plutonium spent fuel from the aktau reactor , some of which had become inundated by the rising caspian sea and was highly vulnerable to theft .

enhanced aid for export controls and customs and border security for kazakhstan followed after reports of conventional arms smuggling , including a 1999 attempted shipment of soviet - era migs to north korea .

kazakhstan has received ctr funds for dismantling equipment and for environmental monitoring at several soviet - era chemical and biological warfare ( cbw ) facilities .

on may 19 , 2009 , the u.s. national nuclear security administration announced that ctr funds had been used to remove 162.5 lb .

of highly enriched uranium "spent" fuel from kazakhstan .

the material originally had been provided by russia to kazakhstan , and was returned to russia by rail for storage in a series of four shipments between december 2008 and may 2009 .

at the u.s. - uzbek joint commission meeting in may 1999 , the two sides signed a ctr implementation agreement on securing , dismantling , and de - contaminating the soviet - era nukus chemical research facility .

other aid helped keep uzbek weapons scientists employed in peaceful research .

on june 5 , 2001 , then - secretary of state colin powell signed his first international agreement , extending new ctr assistance to uzbekistan .

the united states assisted in cleaning up a soviet - era cbw testing site and dump on an island in the aral sea belonging to kazakhstan and uzbekistan , where western media in june 1999 had reported the alarming discovery of live anthrax spores .

other prominent ctr - supported activities in uzbekistan include the transfer of eleven kilograms of enriched uranium fuel , including highly enriched uranium , to russia in september 2004 and the transfer of 63 kilograms of uranium from uzbekistan to russia in april 2006 .

the national defense authorization act for fy2003 ( p.l .

107-314 , sec .

1306 ) provided for the president to waive prohibitions on ctr aid ( as contained in sec .

1203 of p.l .

103-160 ) to a state of the former soviet union if he certified that the waiver was necessary for national security and submitted a report outlining why the waiver was necessary and how he planned to promote future compliance with the restrictions on ctr aid .

although russian arms control compliance appeared to be the main reason for the restrictions , on december 30 , 2003 ( for fy2004 ) , and on december 14 , 2004 ( for fy2005 ) , the president explained that uzbekistan's human rights problems necessitated a waiver .

the waiver authority under this act , exercisable each fiscal year , expired at the end of fy2005 , but the national defense authorization act for fy2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ; sec .

1303 ) amended the language to eliminate an expiration date for the exercise of yearly waivers .

in the 110 th congress , senator sam nunn introduced s. 198 on january 8 , 2007 , to amend p.l .

103-160 to eliminate the restrictions on ctr aid , including respect for human rights .

although waivers can be and are exercised when the conditions are not met , he stated , the lengthy process of making determinations and exercising waivers threatens the primary u.s. national security goal of combating wmd .

language similar to s. 198 was included in h.r .

1 , implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 , signed into law on august 3 , 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) .

according to the state department and u.s. drug enforcement agency ( dea ) , drugs produced in or transiting central asia have not yet reached the united states in major quantities .

however , there is rising u.s. concern , since latin american and other international organized groups have become involved in the central asian drug trade , and european governments have begun to focus on combating drug trafficking through this new route .

u.s. policy also emphasizes the threat of rising terrorism , crime , corruption , and instability posed by illegal narcotics production , use , and trafficking in central asia .

the fbi , dea , and customs have given training in counter - narcotics to police , customs , and border control personnel in central asia as part of the anti - crime training and technical assistance program sponsored by the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) .

some central asian drug officials have received training at the international law enforcement academy in budapest and by the u.s. coast guard .

dea has provided training at the international counter - narcotics training center at the russian advanced police academy in domodedovo .

u.s. aid to the u.n. office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) has supported the establishment of the central asian regional information and coordination center ( caricc ; members include azerbaijan and russia as well as the central asian states ) in almaty to share narcotics trafficking intelligence among law enforcement agencies .

since the bulk of opiates enter central asia from afghanistan , where they are produced , u.s. assistance for drug control efforts in afghanistan can have an effect on trafficking in central asia .

the united states provided $3.8 million ( over one - third of all international funding ) for the establishment of the central asian regional information and coordination center ( caricc ; members include azerbaijan , kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , russia , tajikistan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan ) , which began operations in almaty in late 2009 ( a pilot project had begun in 2007 ) .

caricc aims to enhance regional cooperation in information - sharing and other measures to combat drug trafficking .

among bilateral programs undertaken in central asia: a u.s. agreement went into force with kazakhstan in 2003 to provide counter - narcotics training and equipment for police and border guards .

with u.s. assistance , kyrgyzstan in 2004 set up a drug control agency , and the united states and unodc have provided guidance for hiring police and staff .

in 2007 , uscentcom , the nebraska national guard , u.s. customs , dea ,and inl trained and equipped kyrgyz police , customs service , and border guards to form the first of four planned mobile interdiction teams ( mobits ) .

the effectiveness of the mobits did not meet expectations , so in 2008 two retired dea officers were assigned to the mobits headquarters to provide guidance , mentoring and technical assistance .

in tajikistan , an agreement on cooperation on narcotics control and law enforcement was signed in 2003 .

the dea dushanbe country office was set up in 2007 and has regional responsibility for central asia .

uscentcom partially funds the budget and otherwise supports tajikistan's drug control agency .

in may 2009 , the u.s. embassy signed an amendment to the 2003 agreement that provides an extra $9.43 million in assistance for narcotics control , law enforcement , and justice sector reform .

the inl office provides financial support to the drug control agency mobile team operating in tajikistan's gorno badakhshan region to assist in detecting , investigating , interdicting , and reporting on the trafficking of narcotics and pre - cursor chemicals in the inadequately patrolled region .

since 2007 , the dea dushanbe country office has worked with unodc to manage and fund an office of the drug control agency in the town of taloqan in northern afghanistan .

the state department warns that "it is unlikely that the government of tajikistan will take on the costs of sustaining follow - on to inl programs in the near future," so that continued funding is necessary .

in uzbekistan , u.s. assistance was provided under the aegis of a 2001 u.s. - uzbek agreement on narcotics control and law enforcement assistance .

training was provided to facilitate investigating and prosecuting narcotics trafficking cases .

the state department reported that u.s. counter - narcotics cooperation with uzbekistan greatly declined after 2005 .

remaining programs included usaid's drug demand reduction project and the provision of customs and border control equipment funded by the state department .

uzbek cooperation with uscentcom on counter - narcotics began to revive in fy2008 .

to help counter burgeoning drug trafficking from afghanistan , the conference report on the emergency supplemental for fy2006 ( p.l .

109-234 ; h.rept .

109-494 ) recommended about $150.5 million for central asia and afghanistan , of which about $30 million was recommended for central asia .

the conference report on the emergency supplemental for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ; h.rept .

111-151 ) recommended $120.4 million for central asia and afghanistan , of which about $52.9 million was recommended for central asia .

the principal components of u.s. military assistance to central asia are foreign military financing ( fmf ) , international military education and training ( imet ) , the regional defense counter - terrorism fellowship program ( ctfp ) , the regional centers for security studies ( rcss ) , and transfers of excess defense articles ( eda ) .

fmf aid supports military interoperability with nato and participation in pfp exercises , and has included communications equipment , computers , medical items , and english language and nco training .

in february 2000 , the united states transferred sixteen military transport vehicles to the uzbek military to enhance interoperability with nato forces , the first sizeable military equipment to be provided under the fmf program to central asia .

fmf aid to the region was boosted after september 11 , 2001 , to $55.7 million in fy2002 ( over $36 million of which went to uzbekistan ) .

fmf aid dropped to $16.1 million in fy2003 and continued to decline to $2.55 million in fy2008 .

some of this reduction since fy2004 was due to conditions placed on assistance to uzbekistan ( see below ) .

the imet program supports pfp by providing english language training to military officers and exposure to democratic civil - military relations and respect for human rights .

the ctfp , a defense department program , complements imet but focuses on special operations training for officers .

central asian officers also receive training at the marshall european center for security studies in germany to enhance security , foster bilateral and multilateral partnerships , improve defense - related decision - making , and strengthen cooperation , according to the defense department .

the state and defense departments reported that 784 personnel from central asia received imet , ctfp , rcss , or other training in fy2004 , 1,118 personnel in fy2005 , 391 in fy2006 , and 501 in fy2007 .

conditions on assistance blocked imet assistance to uzbekistan beginning in fy2004 , but eligibility was restored in fy2010 ( see below ) .

the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ; signed into law on october 28 , 2009 ) , sec .

801 permits the secretary of defense to procure "products and services produced in countries along a major route of supply to afghanistan" to support stability operations in afghanistan , to reduce u.s. transportation costs and risks , or "to encourage countries along a major route of supply to afghanistan to cooperate in expanding supply routes through their territory. .

the countries covered include the central asian and south caucasian states and pakistan , and the exercise of authority is granted for three years .

in addition , section 1223 of the act expands earlier legislation to authorize reimbursement to key cooperating nations that provide logistical , military , and other support , including access for u.s. military operations in afghanistan or iraq , and legislates up to $1.6 billion in fy2010 for such reimbursements .

according to some observers , such procurement of products and services and reimbursements for access might represent a major new form of u.s. assistance to central asia .

a few observers warn that large - scale u.s. purchases of goods and services along the ndn could exacerbate corruption in central asia .

supplemental appropriations for fy2002 ( h.r .

4775 ; p.l .

107-206 ) , signed into law on august 2 , 2002 , called for fmf aid to uzbekistan to be conditioned on a report by the secretary of state confirming that it was making progress in meeting its human rights commitments under the declaration on strategic partnership and cooperation signed in march 2002 by former uzbek foreign minister abdulaziz komilov and former secretary of state colin powell .

the secretary of state reported that uzbekistan was making progress in human rights .

foreign operations appropriations bills in subsequent years have retained similar language limiting assistance to uzbekistan , and in fy2003 added similar language limiting assistance to kazakhstan ( but with a national security waiver provision ) .

in may 2003 , the secretary of state reported that uzbekistan was making progress in democratization and respect for human rights .

at about the same time , however , international media widely reported the torture death of a prisoner in uzbekistan .

in july 2003 , the secretary reported that kazakhstan was making progress .

the next year , the state department reported again that kazakhstan was making progress in respecting human rights , but announced that , despite some "encouraging progress" in respecting human rights , up to $18 million in aid to uzbekistan might be withheld because of "lack of progress on democratic reform and restrictions put on u.s. assistance partners on the ground. .

this determination potentially affected imet and fmf programs among others , since legislative provisions condition imet and fmf on respect for human rights .

the state department reprogrammed or used notwithstanding authority ( after consultation with congress ) to expend some of the funds , so that about $8.5 million was ultimately withheld .

during an august 2004 visit to uzbekistan , gen. richard myers , the then - chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , criticized the cutoff of imet and fmf programs as "shortsighted" and not "productive," since it reduced u.s. military influence .

in may 2005 , then - secretary of state rice reported to congress for the first time that kazakhstan had failed to significantly improve its human rights record , but that she had waived aid restrictions on national security grounds .

the secretary of state in fy2005 did not determine and report to congress that uzbekistan was making significant progress in respecting human rights , so aid restrictions remained in place .

for fy2006 , the language of h.r .

3057 ( foreign operations appropriations ; p.l .

109-102 ) , reported in the senate in the nature of a substitute , introduced a condition that the uzbek government should permit an international investigation of violence against civilians in andijon .

secretary of state rice reported to congress in may 2006 that kazakhstan had failed to significantly improve its human rights record but that she had waived aid restrictions on national security grounds .

she did not determine and report to congress that uzbekistan was making significant progress in respecting human rights , so aid restrictions remained in place .

the secretary of state made the same findings in fy2007 .

in fy2008 , conferees added language ( p.l .

110-161 ) conditioning u.s. assistance to kazakhstan on its meeting human rights and civil liberties commitments made at the late 2007 madrid meeting of the osce .

the senate added another condition that if the secretary of state had credible evidence that uzbek officials might be linked to the deliberate killings of civilians in andijon ... or for other gross violations of human rights , these individuals would be ineligible for admission to the united states .

the secretary was permitted to waive this ineligibility if admission was necessary to attend the united nations or to further u.s. law enforcement .

in fy2008 and fy2009 , the state department again issued waivers for kazakhstan but conditions remained in place for uzbekistan that limited u.s. military - to - military ties .

consolidated appropriations for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) retained the provisions for kazakhstan and uzbekistan , but added language excluding imet from the restrictions on assistance .

provisions for imet had been included in a proposed action plan for u.s. - uzbekistan cooperation for 2010 that had been developed following an october 2009 visit to tashkent by assistant secretary of state robert blake .

the cooperation plan was finalized during u.s. - uzbekistan bilateral consultations in december 2010 .

reportedly , the action plan calls for the provision of fmf and eda , which appear subject to restrictions on assistance .

the u.s. state department advises u.s. citizens and firms that there are dangers of terrorism in the region , including from etim , imu , and al qaeda .

groups such as hizb ut tahrir ( ht ) also foment anti - americanism .

the peace corps pulled personnel out of kyrgyzstan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan after september 11 , 2001 , but in a policy aimed at fostering pro - u.s. views among islamic peoples , personnel were re - deployed by mid - 2002 ( uzbekistan declined peace corps services in 2005 ) .

u.s. military personnel in the region mostly stay on base , and travel in groups off base to maximize their safety .

in the wake of the november 2002 coup attempt in turkmenistan , the state department advised u.s. citizens to carefully consider travel to turkmenistan because of the heightened security tensions .

one u.s. citizen was held for several weeks in connection with the coup attempt .

uzbekistan had no known incidents of damage to western firms or politically - motivated violence against u.s. personnel until the bombing of the u.s. embassy in july 2004 .

the risks of political violence and kidnapping are high in tajikistan , and the state department advises u.s. citizens to avoid travel to areas near the afghan and kyrgyz borders and in the karategin valley and tavildara region .

in june 2001 , members of an international humanitarian group that included one u.s. citizen were taken hostage in tajikistan , but were soon released .

kazakhstan , though viewed as low risk for political violence , including insurrections , has had economic protests that potentially could involve western firms .

some observers have suggested that u.s. policies regarded with disfavor by many muslims in the region , such as the 2003 invasion of iraq , and subsequent problems in iraq , could harm the u.s. image and perhaps increase dangers to the safety of u.s. citizens and property .

among reported plots against u.s. military targets , an uzbek court in november 2004 sentenced sixteen people to 12-17 years in prison for planning to bomb the u.s. coalition airbase at karshi - khanabad .

kyrgyz officials announced in november 2003 that individuals trained in afghanistan and pakistan had been arrested for planning to bomb the u.s. manas airbase .

kyrgyz media reported in july 2004 that the outgoing u.s. manas base commander thanked kyrgyz authorities for helping to thwart three planned terrorist attacks on the base .

in all the central asian states , widespread corruption is an obstacle to u.s. firms seeking to invest .

in kazakhstan and turkmenistan , u.s. firms have reported that corruption is pervasive throughout the central and regional governments and most sectors of the economy , and is an obstacle to u.s. investment .

in terms of crime , the state department warns that western investment property and personnel are not safe in tajikistan , and that crime rates are increasing in all the states ( though rates are lower than in many other countries ) .

immediately after september 11 , 2001 , u.s. embassies in the region were placed on heightened alert because of the danger of terrorism .

they have remained on alert because of the ongoing threat of terrorism in the region .

the imu explained that the suicide bombing of the u.s. embassy in tashkent , uzbekistan , in july 2004 was motivated by u.s. support for karimov and u.s. opposition to islam .

no embassy personnel were injured .

embassy personnel also may have faced greater danger to their personal safety after uzbek officials accused the embassy of orchestrating and financing the may 2005 uprising in andijon .

since late 2002 , the u.s. embassy in kyrgyzstan has restricted official travel to areas south and west of osh because of the threat of terrorism and presence of land mines along the kyrgyz - uzbek border and in the batken region .

during the tajik civil war , u.s. personnel faced various threats and some embassy personnel were evacuated during flare - ups of fighting .

two u.s. embassy guards were killed in dushanbe in february 1997 while off - site but in uniform .

after the bombing of u.s. embassies in tanzania and kenya in august 1998 , and intense fighting in dushanbe , u.s. embassy facilities in dushanbe were deemed to be vulnerable and diplomatic staff were moved to almaty in kazakhstan .

some operations were resumed in 2000 and more were resumed in the wake of september 11 , 2001 .

u.s. government personnel in tajikistan often must travel in the embassy's armored cars with bodyguards , and are occasionally restricted from travel to certain areas because of safety concerns .

u.s. officials have judged the embassy to be highly vulnerable to terrorism , including threats from the imu and al qaeda .

the 2007 crime and safety report warns that u.s. commercial interests could become potential targets of opportunity in tajikistan , in part because the u.s. embassy in tajikistan had become more secure ( see below ) .

pakistani police in june 2002 reported the apprehension of three uighurs with photographs and plans of u.s. embassies in kazakhstan and kyrgyzstan .

the u.s. embassy in beijing accused etim of working with al qaeda to plan the attack against the u.s. embassy in kyrgyzstan .

in july 2005 , the u.s. embassy in kyrgyzstan issued a warden message announcing that it had bolstered its security posture , and in october 2005 the state department's bureau of consular affairs warned that there continued to be indications that terrorist groups might be planning possible future attacks against u.s. interests in kyrgyzstan , so the u.s. embassy in bishkek continued to maintain a heightened security posture .

in september 2006 , a u.s. military officer serving at the manas airbase in kyrgyzstan allegedly was kidnapped but was eventually released .

the 2007 crime and safety report for kazakhstan warns that increasing numbers of u.s. diplomats and other official personnel , including several peace corps volunteers , have been victims of crime .

conferees on h.r .

4775 ( emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2002 ; p.l .

107-206 ) approved $20.3 million for opening and securing diplomatic posts in dushanbe , tajikistan and kabul , afghanistan .

among other diplomatic premises in the region , congress approved state department requests for fy2002 and for fy2003 for designing and building secure embassy facilities in tashkent , uzbekistan and in kazakhstan's new capital of astana .

the new embassy compound in tashkent opened in february 2006 and that in astana was dedicated in november 2006 .

most in congress have supported u.s. assistance to bolster independence and reforms in central asia and other nis .

attention has included several hearings and legislation , the latter including conditions on aid to kazakhstan and uzbekistan , sense of congress provisions on u.s. policy toward central asia , statements and resolutions concerning violations of human rights in the region , and endorsements of aid for energy development .

 ( for details , see crs report rl32866 , u.s. assistance to the former soviet union , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

many policymakers have argued that the united states should emphasize ties with the central asian states .

they maintain that u.s. interests do not perfectly coincide with those of its coalition partners and friends , that turkey and other actors possess limited aid resources , and that the united states is in the strongest position as a superpower to influence democratization and respect for human rights in these new states .

they stress that u.s. leadership in world efforts to provide humanitarian and economic reform aid will help alleviate the high levels of social distress that are exploited by anti - western islamic extremist groups seeking new members .

they emphasize that u.s. and other western aid and investment strengthen the independence of the states and their openness to the west and forestall russian or chinese attempts to ( re - ) subjugate the region .

they also underline that the central asian "front line" states provide basing and access for u.s. and nato operations in afghanistan .

those who object to a more forward u.s. policy toward central asia argue that the united states has historically had few interests in this region , and that if peace is established in afghanistan , the region again will be less important to u.s. interests .

they advocate limited u.s. involvement undertaken along with turkey and other friends and coalition partners to ensure general u.s. goals of preventing strife , fostering democratization and regional cooperation , and improving human rights and the quality of life .

some objections to a forward u.s. policy might appear less salient since the united states undertook counter - terrorism operations in afghanistan in late 2001 .

for instance , it no longer seems possible to argue that anti - western islamic extremism will never threaten secular regimes or otherwise harm u.s. interests .

although a consensus appears to exist among most u.s. policymakers and others on the general desirability of fostering such objectives in central asia as democratization , the creation of free markets , trade and investment , integration with the west , and responsible security policies , there are varying views on the levels and types of u.s. involvement .

uzbekistan's decision in mid - 2005 to ask the united states to vacate k2 and kyrgyzstan's periodic threats to close manas have spurred the debate over what role the united states should play in the region .

some analysts argue that the region is "strategically tangential" to u.s. concerns for the stability of afghanistan , pakistan , russia , china , turkey , and the persian gulf , and for combating global human rights abuses , nuclear proliferation , and drug trafficking .

they point to the dangers of civil and ethnic conflict and terrorism in the region as reasons for the united states to eschew major involvement that might place u.s. personnel and citizens at risk .

these analysts call for withdrawing u.s. military personnel from the region and depending on u.s. rapid deployments from other bases outside the region .

many of those who endorse continued or enhanced u.s. support for central asia argue that the united states has a vital interest in preventing the region from becoming an afghanistan - like hotbed of terrorism aimed against u.s. interests .

they argue that political instability in central asia can produce spillover effects in important nearby states , including afghanistan , pakistan , turkey , and other u.s. allies and friends .

u.s. and nato efforts to stabilize afghanistan and u.s. support for stability in pakistan are partly dependent on supply routes through central asia and on energy and other commodities from central asia .

these analysts also assert that the united states has a major interest in preventing outside terrorist regimes or groups from illicitly acquiring nuclear weapons - related materials and technology from the region .

they also advocate the greater diversification of world energy supplies as a u.s. national security interest ( see below , " how significant are regional energy resources to u.s .

interests ? .

" ) .

calling for greater u.s. policy attention to central asia and south caucusus , senator sam brownback introduced "silk road" legislation in the 105 th and 106 th congresses .

similar legislation was sponsored in the house by representative benjamin gilman ( 105 th ) and representative doug bereuter ( 106 th ) .

in introducing the silk road act in the 106 th congress , senator brownback pointed out that the central asian and south caucasian states are "caught between world global forces that seek to have them under their control. .

to counter such forces , he argued , the united states should emphasize democratization , the creation of free markets , and the development of energy and trade with the region to bolster its independence and pro - western orientations .

the silk road language was eventually enacted by reference in h.r .

3194 ( istook ) , consolidated appropriations act for fy2000 , and signed into law on november 29 , 1999 ( p.l .

106-113 ) .

the silk road language calls for enhanced policy and aid to support conflict amelioration , humanitarian needs , economic development , transport ( including energy pipelines ) and communications , border controls , democracy , and the creation of civil societies in the south caucasian and central asian states .

many u.s. policymakers argue that u.s. and other western aid and investment strengthen the independence of the states and forestall russian , iranian , and chinese attempts to dominate the region .

some observers warn that a more authoritarian russia might seek to reabsorb central asia into a new empire .

others , however , discount such plans by a russia facing immense internal economic , political , ethnic , and military disorder , but nonetheless endorse close monitoring of russian activities that might infringe on the independence of the soviet successor states .

some appear to acquiesce to russia's argument of historic rights to a "sphere of influence" in central asia that provides a reduced scope for u.s. involvement .

according to some observers , u.s. policy should focus more clearly on refereeing russian , iranian , and chinese influence in the region , since these states are bound to play roles in the region , with the aim of maximizing the independence of the central asian states and protecting u.s. interests .

u.s. interests may correspond to other outside states' interests in political and economic stability and improved transport in the region , so that the coordination of some activities in the region becomes possible .

alternatively , u.s. interests might conflict with those of russia , iran , or china , leading to compromises , tradeoffs , or deadlock .

the u.s. interest in restricting iran's financial ability to sponsor international terrorism , for instance , may conflict with central asian - iranian energy cooperation .

u.s. - iranian rapprochement might contribute to a less hostile iranian attitude toward u.s. regional investment .

poor u.s. - iranian relations and questions about russia's role contributed to u.s. support for the btc pipeline and the scp .

while successive u.s. administrations have supported a role for turkey in the region , others argue that its disagreements in 2003 with u.s. policy toward iraq indicate that it may not always serve optimally as a proxy for u.s. interests in central asia .

the united states and russia agreed to set up a working group on afghanistan in june 2000 that assumed greater importance in the bush administration , particularly after september 11 , 2001 .

headed on the u.s. side by then - first deputy secretary of state richard armitage and on the russian side by vyacheslav trubnikov , it was central to obtaining russian acquiescence to the u.s. use of military facilities in central asia , with armitage visiting moscow just days after september 11 , 2001 .

in may 2002 , the group's mandate reportedly was expanded to more broadly cover counter - terrorism in central asia , the south caucasus , and south asia .

a joint statement issued at the june 2008 meeting of the working group listed nine accomplishments , including an agreement in principle to provide russian military materiel to the afghanistan national army ; a commitment to support and contribute to the nato - russia council counternarcotics project , including joint training at the russian advanced police academy in domodedovo for afghan and central asian police ; continued support for osce projects to provide training and mentoring of customs and borders officials in afghanistan and central asia ; and an agreement to expedite the approval of framework documents for the central asia regional information coordination center .

some of this cooperation was set back by the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict .

the counter - terrorism working group was retained by the obama administration as part of the u.s. - russia bilateral presidential commission .

the administration reported that the state department coordinator for counterterrorism , daniel benjamin , met with special presidential representative anatoliy safonov in november 2009 in berlin and agreed to work together "in the multilateral arena" to strengthen international counterterrorism norms and increase capacity building ; counter the ideological dimension of violent extremism ; improve transportation security ; and discuss afghanistan .

oil exports from kazakhstan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan might have constituted about 2.1% of world oil exports and gas exports might have constituted about 7.4% , according to 2007-2008 data in the world factbook .

oil and gas exports from these countries are projected to increase in coming years , making these countries of incremental significance as world suppliers , according to this view .

the may and november 2002 u.s. - russia summit statements on energy cooperation appeared to mark a u.s. policy of cooperation with russia in the development of caspian oil resources .

however , the united states backed the construction of the btc oil pipeline and the scp for gas in part as hedges against a possibly uncooperative russia .

successive u.s .

administrations have argued that the economic benefits gained by the region by developing its energy resources would be accompanied by contractual and other rule of law developments , which could foster regional stability and conflict resolution .

in january 2010 , richard morningstar , the state department's special envoy for eurasian energy , stressed that the three main goals of the administration's eurasian energy strategy are to encourage the development of oil and gas resources in the caspian region ; to support energy security in europe by advocating the development of multiple sources of energy supplies and multiple routes to market ; and to assist the caspian countries in expanding their export routes .

he averred that the united states plays "a supporting , not leading , role" in implementing these goals by "listen[ing] , identify[ing] common interests and priorities and play[ing] a facilitating role where we can. .

such efforts include the creation of a ministerial - level consultative u.s. - eu energy council and an energy working group within the u.s. - russia bi - national presidential commission .

to diversify supply routes to europe , the administration supports the completion of the turkey - greece - italy ( tgi ) gas pipeline , the building of the nabucco gas pipeline , and kazakhstan's expansion of oil shipments through the south caucasus .

he urged that turkey and azerbaijan agree on the transit of the latter's gas to europe and that turkmenistan and iraq ( but not iran ) also agree to supply gas through "south corridor" pipelines .

the united states also calls for european energy integration and the development of other sources of supply for europe , such as gas from north africa and lng from qatar and nigeria .

he stated that the administration's focus on diversified sources and routes means that it is not opposed to russia's pipeline projects , such as nord stream or south stream — since europe must decide which pipeline routes best serve their interests — or russia's decision to expand the capacity of the caspian pipeline consortium's oil pipeline .

critics of u.s. policy question the economic viability of the btc , scp , nabucco , tgi , and trans - caspian pipeline routes given uncertainties about regional stability , ownership of caspian sea fields , and sources of supply .

they question whether the oil and gas and other natural resources in these new states are vital to u.s. security and point out that they are , in any event , unlikely to constitute more than a small fraction of western energy imports .

analyst amy jaffe has argued that caspian energy "hardly seems worth the risks" of an enhanced u.s. presence .

some of those who oppose u.s. policy also juxtapose an emphasis on energy development in these states to what they term the neglect of broader - based economic reforms that they argue would better serve the population of the region .

other critics argue that u.s. policy opposition to energy routes and projects involving iran makes it more likely that the central asian states will have to rely to a major extent on existing or proposed transit routes through neighboring russia and china .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , transformed the u.s. security relationship with central asia , as the region actively supported u.s. - led coalition anti - terrorism efforts in afghanistan .

these efforts were a top u.s. national security concern , but a major question is how the region may be regarded if afghanistan becomes more stable .

some observers advocate maintaining the u.s. security relationship even if afghanistan becomes more stable and the threat of al qaeda and other terrorism based in the area recedes .

they stress that central asia was host to soviet - era weapons of mass destruction and associated research and development facilities , and that residual technologies , materials , and personnel might fall prey to terrorist states or groups .

they view military education and training programs as fostering the creation of a professional , western - style military and democratic civil - military relations , and reducing chances of military coups .

training that these militaries receive through pfp is multinational in scope , involving cooperation among regional militaries , with the purpose of spurring these states to continue to work together .

they also argue that as iran increases its military capabilities , including missiles and possibly nuclear weapons , the central asian states may necessarily seek closer countervailing ties with the united states .

they argue that a major dilemma of u.s. policy has been that while the united states proclaimed vital interests in the region , it also averred that military basing arrangements in the region ( as well as the military deployments in afghanistan ) were temporary .

this made the u.s. commitment appear uncertain and spurred the central asian states to look elsewhere for long - term security ties , these analysts warn .

the question of who the united states should partner with in central asia is also topical .

before uzbekistan requested in mid - 2005 that the united states vacate k2 , it seemed that some in the former bush administration emphasized the strategic importance of building ties with uzbekistan .

others emphasized ties with kazakhstan .

in the case of uzbekistan , its central location in the region and sizeable population and other resources ( including energy ) were stressed .

energy and other resources were also stressed in the case of kazakhstan , as well as its huge territory and lengthy borders .

some observers argued that uzbekistan was more likely to become unstable because of its more authoritarian government , so was a less suitable u.s. strategic partner .

post - andijon , it appeared that the former bush administration emphasized security ties with kazakhstan .

some observers argue that kazakhstan's long border with russia makes it likely to continue close security ties with russia .

critics of greater u.s. security involvement in the region argue that the united states should primarily seek to assist the states in bolstering their counter - terrorism capabilities .

they oppose providing formal security guarantees to regional states and urge the pullout of u.s. bases once the taliban threat has abated and al qaeda has been rousted out of afghanistan .

some analysts warn that increased u.s. engagement in the region is unlikely to soon turn the countries into free market democracies , and risks linking the united states to the regimes in the eyes of the local populations .

this may exacerbate anti - american islamic extremism , place u.s. personnel in danger , and antagonize china and russia .

although central asia's leaders have appeared to weigh stability against democratization and to opt for stability , many policymakers have viewed the two concepts as complementary , particularly in the long term .

the former bush administration appeared to place greater diplomatic emphasis on democratization in the region , in parallel with policy toward iraq and the wider middle east .

to some degree , this emphasis tracked with increased congressional concerns over human rights conditions in central asia .

according to some critics , the former bush administration's protests over human rights abuses at andijon contributed to the loss of u.s. military access to k2 and other security ties with uzbekistan .

these critics argued that simultaneous emphases on democratization and security ties proved corrosive to both goals , and that the united states instead should have carefully engaged with the central asian states to maintain important security relationships and cautiously encouraged them to eventually emulate the positive features of turkish or other islamic democracies .

supporters of the former bush administration's reaction to the events at andijon argued that the alternative policy — a stress on working with central asian regimes with the hope of fostering gradual political change — connoted support for the stability of the sitting authoritarian leaders in the region .

they warned that the populations of these states would come to view the united states as propping up these leaders and that such authoritarianism encouraged the countervailing rise of islamic fundamentalism as an alternative channel of dissent .

some of these observers supported reducing or cutting off most aid to repressive governments that widely violated human rights and rejected arguments that u.s. interests in anti - terrorism , nonproliferation , regional cooperation , trade , and investment outweighed concerns over democratization and human rights .

these observers urged greater u.s. assistance to grass - roots democracy and human rights organizations in central asia and more educational exchanges .

russia for the central asian states , the challenge is to maintain useful ties with russia without allowing it undue influence .

this concern is most evident in kazakhstan and uzbekistan .

kazakhstan , because of its shared 4,200 mile border with russia and its relatively large ethnic russian population , is highly vulnerable to russian influence .

uzbekistan is interested in asserting its own regional power .

alternatively , tajikistan's president rakhman has relied to some extent on russian security and economic assistance to stay in power .

russia's behavior in central asia partly depends on alternative futures of russian domestic politics , though regardless of scenario , russia will retain some economic and other influence in the region as a legacy of the political and transport links developed during tsarist and soviet times .

prior to september 11 , 2001 , the putin administration had tried to strengthen russia's interests in the region while opposing the growth of u.s. and other influence .

after september 11 , 2001 , uzbekistan reaffirmed its more assertive policy of lessening its security dependence on russia by granting conditional overflight rights and other support to the u.s. - led coalition , nudging a reluctant putin regime to accede to a coalition presence in the region in keeping with russia's own support to the northern alliance to combat the taliban .

russia's other reasons for permitting the increased coalition presence included its interests in boosting some economic and other ties to the west and its hope of regaining influence in a post - taliban afghanistan .

on september 19 , 2001 , russian foreign minister igor ivanov indicated that the nature of support given by the central asian states to the u.s. - led coalition was up to each state , and president putin reiterated this point on september 24 , 2001 , giving russia's accedence to cooperation between these states and the united states .

russia initially cooperated with central asia in supporting u.s. and coalition efforts , including by quickly sending military equipment and advisors to assist the northern alliance in attacks on the taliban .

russian officials have emphasized interests in strategic security and economic ties with central asia , and concerns over the treatment of ethnic russians .

strategic concerns have focused on drug trafficking and regional conflict , and the region's role as a buffer to islamic extremism .

russia's economic decline in the 1990s and demands by central asia caused russia to reduce its security presence .

former president putin and current president medvedev may have reversed this trend , although the picture is mixed .

about 11,000 russian border troops ( mostly ethnic tajiks under russian command ) formerly defended "cis borders" in tajikistan .

russia announced on june 14 , 2005 , that it had handed over the last guard - house along the afghan - tajik border to tajik troops .

russian border forces were largely phased out in kyrgyzstan in 1999 .

in late 1999 , the last russian military advisors left turkmenistan .

in 1999 , uzbekistan withdrew temporarily from the csto , citing its ineffectiveness and obtrusiveness .

russia justified a 1999 military base accord with tajikistan by citing the islamic extremist threat to the cis .

in an apparent shift toward a more activist russian role in central asia , in january 2000 , then - acting president putin approved a "national security concept" that termed foreign efforts to "weaken" russia's "position" in central asia a security threat .

in april 2000 , russia called for the members of the csto to approve the creation of rapid reaction forces in central asia to combat terrorism emanating from afghanistan .

russian officials suggested that such a force might launch pre - emptive strikes on afghan terrorist bases ( see also below ) .

a may 2001 csto summit approved the creation of a central asian rapid deployment force composed ( at least on paper ) of nine russian , kazakh , kyrgyz , and tajik country - based battalions of 4,000 troops and a headquarters in bishkek .

this initiative seemed in part aimed to protect russian regional influence in the face of nascent u.s. and nato anti - terrorism moves in the region .

this force remained a paper exercise and was later abolished ( see below ) .

a regional branch of the cis anti - terrorism center , composed of intelligence agencies , opened in bishkek , kyrgyzstan , in january 2002 ( this organization reportedly has proven ineffective in sharing intelligence data ) .

russia's threats of pre - emptive strikes against the taliban prompted the taliban in may 2000 to threaten reprisals against the central asian states if they permitted russia to use their bases for strikes .

at the june 2000 u.s. - russia summit , the two presidents agreed to set up a working group to examine afghan - related terrorism , and the group held two meetings prior to september 11 , 2001 .

these events prior to september 11 , 2001 , helped to ease the way for russian and central asian assistance to the u.s. - led coalition in afghanistan .

soon after september 11 , 2001 , russia seemed to reverse the policy of drawing down its military presence in central asia by increasing its troop presence in tajikistan by a reported 1,500 .

in mid - june 2002 , russia also signed military accords with kyrgyzstan extending leases on military facilities to fifteen years ( including , amazingly , a naval test base ) , opening shuttered kyrgyz defense industries , and training kyrgyz troops .

most significantly , kyrgyzstan also agreed that its kant airfield outside its capital of bishkek could be used as a base for the central asian rapid deployment force , marking a major re - deployment of russian forces into the country .

in signing the accords , russian defense minister sergey ivanov declared that they marked russia's help — along with the u.s. - led coalition and china — in combating terrorism , were necessary for russia to monitor the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and marked russia's intention to maintain a military presence in the region .

attack jets , transports , jet trainers , helicopters , and russian personnel began to be deployed at kant at the end of 2002 .

russia's military deployments at kant appeared at least partially intended to check and monitor u.s. regional military influence , and these intentions also were reflected in support for the 2005 sco communique calling for the closure of u.s. - led coalition bases in central asia .

taking advantage of uzbekistan's souring relations with many western countries , russia signed a treaty on allied relations with uzbekistan in november 2005 that contains provisions similar to those in the csto that call for mutual defense consultations in the event of a threat to either party .

in 2006 , uzbekistan rejoined the csto .

during a february 3 , 2009 , meeting in moscow with russian president dmitriy medvedev , kyrgyz president bakiyev announced that the u.s. manas airbase would be closed .

bakiyev claimed that u.s. compensation for use of the base had been inadequate and that the kyrgyz public wanted the base to be closed .

he also argued that counter - terrorism operations in afghanistan had been concluded , which had been the main reason for keeping the airbase open .

at the meeting , medvedev had offered a $1.7 billion loan to kyrgyzstan for building a dam and hydroelectric power station and a $300 million loan and a $150 million grant for budget stabilization .

russia also agreed to cancel a $180 million debt owed by kyrgyzstan in exchange for some properties .

many observers suggested that the assistance was a quid pro quo for krygyzstan's agreement to close the base .

the next day at a meeting of the csto , president medvedev proposed setting up csto collective operational reaction forces ( corf ) under a single command and based in russia .

in 2010 , it was announced that the central asian rapid reaction force would be retained as separate from corf as a regional force to combat terrorism and drug trafficking emanating from afghanistan .

russian economic policy in central asia has been contradictory , involving pressures to both cooperate with and to oppose us and western interests .

russia has cut off economic subsidies to central asia and presses demands for the repayment of energy and other debts the states owe russia .

russia increasingly has swapped this debt for equity in strategic and profitable energy and military industries throughout central asia .

its opposition to u.s. and western private investment in the region initially led it to demand that caspian sea oil and gas resources be shared in common among littoral states and to insist that oil pipeline routes transit russian territory to russian black sea ports .

russia's oil discoveries in the caspian sea , however , contributed to its decision to sign accords with kazakhstan in 1998 and with azerbaijan in 2001 on seabed borders .

russian energy firms have become partners with u.s. and western firms in several regional oil and gas development consortiums .

nonetheless , russia continues to lobby for pipeline routes through its territory .

former president putin in 2002 called for the central asian states to form a eurasian gas alliance to "export through a single channel," which russian media speculated meant that putin aimed to counter u.s. energy influence in the region .

kazakhstan is an observer state in the international gas exporter organization , formed in 2008 with russia's leadership .

instead of opposing u.s. and western private investment and business in the region , some russians argue that enhanced cooperation would best serve russian national interests and its oil and other companies .

russia has been wary of growing chinese economic influence in the region .

the region's continuing economic ties with russia are encouraged by the existence of myriad moscow - bound transport routes , the difficulty of trade through war - torn afghanistan , and u.s. opposition to ties with iran .

also , there are still many inter - enterprise and equipment supply links between russia and these states .

while seeking ties with russia to provide for some security and economic needs , at least in the short term , the central asian states have tried with varying success to resist or modify various russian policies viewed as diluting their sovereignty , such as russian calls for dual citizenship and closer cis economic and security ties .

karimov and nazarbayev have been critics of what they have viewed as russian tendencies to treat central asia as an "unequal partner. .

the safety of russians in central asia is a populist concern in russia , but has in practice mainly served as a political stalking horse for those in russia advocating the "reintegration" of former "russian lands. .

ethnic russians residing in central asia have had rising concerns about employment , language , and other policies or practices they deem discriminatory and many have emigrated , contributing to their decline from 20 million in 1989 to 6.6 million in 2001 .

they now constitute 12% of the population of central asia , according to the cis statistics agency .

remaining russians tend to be elderly or low - skilled .

in kazakhstan , ethnic kazakhs have again become a majority .

afghanistan the stability of afghanistan is of central concern to central asia , china , and russia .

particular concerns of central asia in recent years have focused on the export of drugs and islamic extremism from afghanistan .

historical trade routes facilitate the smuggling of drugs and other contraband through the region to russian and european markets .

central asia's leaders do not want islamic extremists to use bases in afghanistan , as the tajik opposition once did .

they objected to the refuge the taliban provided for the imu and for terrorist osama bin laden , who allegedly contributed financing and training for islamic extremists throughout central asia who endeavored to overthrow governments in that region .

several central asian ethnic groups reside in northern afghanistan , raising concerns in central asia about their fates .

tajikistan has been concerned about the fate of 6.2 million ethnic tajiks residing in afghanistan .

uzbekistan , likewise , has concerns about 1.5 million ethnic uzbeks in afghanistan .

karimov has supported ethnic uzbek paramilitary leader abdul - ul - rashid dostum in afghanistan .

dostum lost to taliban forces in august 1998 and exited afghanistan , but returned to help lead northern alliance forces to victory post - september 11 , 2001 .

iran and tajikistan supported ethnic tajik ahmad shah masood , who was killed on september 9 , 2001 , allegedly by al qaeda operatives .

iran's massing of troops on the afghan border in august 1998 in response to the taliban's takeover of mazar - e - sharif and killing of iranian diplomats and shiite civilians also gave support to masood .

turkmenistan's concerns about the status of half a million ethnic turkmen residing in afghanistan , and its hopes for possible energy pipelines through afghanistan , led it to stress workable relations with both the taliban and the successor government .

tajikistan was especially challenged by the taliban's growing power .

a taliban victory in afghanistan threatened to present it with regimes in both the north ( uzbekistan ) and south ( afghanistan ) that pressed for undue influence .

iran and uzbekistan backed different sides in the tajik civil war , but both opposed the taliban in afghanistan .

tajik opposition ties with iran provided friction with the taliban .

tajikistan's instability and regional concerns caused the rakhman government to rely more on russia and , by granting formal basing rights to russia , antagonized uzbekistan and the taliban .

if afghanistan stabilizes , central asian states will be able to establish more trade ties , including with pakistan .

hopes for the construction of a gas pipeline from turkmenistan to pakistan were evidenced by the signing of a framework agreement in december 2002 by the late president niyazov , afghan president hamed karzai , and pakistan's prime minister mir zafarullah khan .

the problems of drug production in afghanistan and trafficking through central asia have increased , however , in part because the afghan government remains weak .

interest in regional stability led afghanistan , tajikistan , turkmenistan , uzbekistan , china , iran , and pakistan to sign a "declaration of good neighborly relations" in kabul in december 2002 pledging mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity .

russia's attempts to influence developments in afghanistan are facilitated by its basing arrangement with tajikistan , but its favored warlords were largely excluded in december 2004 from the new karzai government .

 ( see also crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

china china's objectives in central asia include ensuring border security , non - belligerent neighbors , and access to trade and natural resources .

in april 1996 , the presidents of kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , russia , and tajikistan traveled to shanghai to sign a treaty with chinese president jiang zemin pledging the sanctity and substantial demilitarization of borders .

they signed protocols that they would not harbor or support separatists , aimed at china's efforts to quash separatism in its uighur autonomous region of xinjiang province , which borders central asia .

according to the u.s. state department , china continues to commit human rights abuses against the uighurs , an islamic and turkic people .

in april 1997 , the five presidents met again in moscow to sign a follow - on treaty demilitarizing the 4,000 mile former soviet border with china .

in may 2001 , the parties admitted uzbekistan as a member and formed the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ) , and agreed to pursue common antiterrorist actions through a center established in the region .

in theory , china could send troops into central asia at the request of one of the states .

the states signed a shanghai convention on joint fighting against terrorism , extremism and separatism , viewed by some observers as russia's and china's effort to gain greater support by the central asian states for combat against extremists and regime opponents of the two major powers .

china's goals in the sco echo its general regional goals noted above , as well as containing u.s. influence .

after september 11 , 2001 , sco members did not respond collectively to u.s. overtures but mainly as individual states .

china encouraged pakistan to cooperate with the united states .

china benefitted from the u.s. - led coalition actions in afghanistan against the imu and the taliban , since these groups had been providing training and sustenance to uighur extremists .

nonetheless , the u.s. presence in central asia poses a challenge to china's aspirations to become the dominant asian power .

most analysts do not anticipate chinese territorial expansion into central asia , though china is seeking greater economic influence .

china is a major trading partner for the central asian states and may become the dominant economic influence in the region .

in comparison , turkey's trade with the region is much less than china's .

central asia's china trade exceeded $1 billion annually by the late 1990s .

kazakhstan and kyrgyzstan have been deft in building relations with china .

they have cooperated with china in delineating borders , building roads , and increasing trade ties .

the construction of oil and gas pipelines from kazakhstan and turkmenistan to china's xinjiang region mark china's growing economic influence in the region ( see below ) .

however , officials in these states also have been concerned about chinese intentions and the spillover effects of tensions in xinjiang .

some have raised concerns about growing numbers of chinese "suitcase" traders and immigrants , and there are tensions over issues like water resources .

china's crackdown on dissidence in xinjiang creates particular concern in kazakhstan , because over one million ethnic kazakhs reside in xinjiang and many uighurs reside in kazakhstan .

some ethnic kyrgyz also reside in xinjiang .

on the other hand , kazakhstan fears that uighur separatism in xinjiang could spread among uighurs residing in kazakhstan , who may demand an alteration of kazakh borders to create a unified uighur "east turkestan. .

china's relations with tajikistan improved with the signing of a major agreement in may 2002 delineating a final section of borders in the pamir mountains shared by the two states .

in 1993 , china abandoned its policy of energy self - sufficiency , making central asia's energy resources attractive .

in september 1997 , kazakhstan granted china's national petroleum corporation ( cnpc ) production rights to develop major oil fields , including the aktyubinsk region of northwestern kazakhstan .

china pledged to build a 1,900 mile trans - kazakh pipeline to xinjiang within five years ( and a shorter pipeline to the turkmen border ) .

china was unable to interest international investors in the pipeline , and decided to finance the construction .

in 2005 , cnpc purchased the canadian - based company petrokazakhstan , giving it ownership of refineries and control over production licenses for twelve oilfields and exploration licenses for five blocks .

responding to the sale , the kazakh legislature quickly passed a law giving the government the right to preempt such transfers .

in order to complete the sale , cnpc reportedly had to transfer about one - third of the petrokazakhstan shares to kazmunaigaz ( kazakhstan's state - owned oil and gas firm ) , and yield effective control over the shymkent refinery , which kazakhstan wanted to control to ensure domestic supplies .

kazakhstan and china completed construction in mid - 2006 of a 600 mile oil pipeline from atasu in central kazakhstan to xinjiang .

at atasu , the pipeline links to another pipeline from kumkol , also in central kazakhstan , and will be linked to atyrau on kazakhstan's caspian sea coast in 2010 .

xinjiang officials reported in early 2009 that about 92 million barrels of oil had been imported through the pipeline in its first two years of operation ( other oil continued to be imported by rail ) .

perhaps as part of an effort to gain greater access to kazakh oil to help fill the pipeline — particularly the large reserves of oil in western kazakhstan — china's state - owned citic group investment firm acquired the kazakh oil assets of canada's nations energy company for $1.91 billion at the end of 2006 .

this acquisition gave china the rights to develop the karajanbas oil and gas field , near aqtau on the caspian sea , until 2020 .

this pending sale reportedly raised concerns in the kazakh legislature and in the energy ministry that china was obtaining too many national energy assets .

these concerns may have led to a concession by citic to give kazmunaigaz a 50% stake in the operating company .

although turkmen - chinese energy relations were minor compared to turkmen - russian ties , china reportedly provided a $12 million loan in the late 1990s to turkmenistan's state - owned turkmennebit oil firm and turkmengaz gas firm to purchase chinese drilling and hoist equipment and spare parts .

in 2003 , china provided a $1.875 million grant and a $3.6 million loan ( for 20 years with no interest ) to develop turkmenistan's gas industry .

indicative of stepped - up relations , then - president niyazov visited china in april 2006 and the two countries signed general accords to construct a gas pipeline for the export of 30 billion cubic meters of turkmen gas to china .

china also pledged new preferential loans .

cnpc signed a $150 million service contract with turkmenistan in may 2007 for drilling and exploration work at the gunorta eloten oil and gas field .

according to some estimates , the gunorta eloten oil and gas field may contain massive reserves of 247 trillion cubic feet of natural gas .

in july 2007 , visiting turkmen president berdymuhammedow and president hu jintao witnessed the signing of a gas sales and purchase agreement between cnpc and the turkmen state agency for the management and use of hydrocarbon for the supply of 1.1 trillion cubic feet of gas per year for the period 2009-2038 .

the two sides also signed a production sharing agreement to develop the bagtyyarlyk area in eastern turkmenistan , near the uzbek border .

cnpc has been the only foreign firm to be permitted to develop an on - shore gas field .

iran iran has pursued limited economic interests in central asia and has not fomented the violent overthrow of the region's secular regimes .

its economic problems and technological backwardness have prevented it from playing a major investment role in the region .

iran's support for the northern alliance against the taliban placed it on the same side as most of the central asian states and russia .

iran has had good ties with turkmenistan , having established rail and pipeline links .

iran's relations with other central asian states are more problematic .

kazakhstan's ties with iran have improved in recent years with a visit by iran's then - president mohammad khatami to astana in april 2002 , during which a declaration on friendly relations was signed .

nazarbayav continues to urge iran to agree to a median - line delineation of caspian sea borders rather than demand territorial concessions ( kazakhstan claims the largest area of seabed ) , and dangles prospects for energy pipelines through iran and enhanced trade as incentives .

uzbek - iranian relations have been mercurial .

iran allegedly harbored some elements of the imu , creating uzbek - iranian tensions .

relations appeared somewhat improved after 2003 as both states cooperated on rebuilding projects in afghanistan and as uzbekistan attempted to develop trade and transport links to middle eastern markets .

the establishment of the u.s. military presence in central asia and afghanistan after september 11 , 2001 , has directly challenged iran's security and interests in the region by surrounding iran with u.s. friends and allies , although iran also has gained from the u.s. - led defeat of the taliban and coalition operations in iraq .

iran views the u.s. - backed btc pipeline and its regional military presence as part of u.s. efforts to make central asia part of an anti - iranian bloc .

during the 1990s , iran and russia shared similar interests in retaining their influence in the caspian region by hindering the growth of u.s. and western influence .

they also opposed u.s. encouragement of turkey's role in the region .

they used the issue of the status of the caspian sea to hinder western oil development efforts .

after russia concluded agreements with kazakhstan and azerbaijan on oil and gas development on the caspian seabed , iran in 2001 became isolated in still calling for the sea to be held in common , or alternatively for each of the littoral states to control 20% of the sea ( and perhaps , any assets ) .

this ongoing stance and u.s. opposition have restrained kazakhstan's interest in building pipelines through iran to the persian gulf .

 ( see also crs report rl32048 , iran: u.s .

concerns and policy responses , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

turkey turkey's strategic interests have included enhancing its economic and security relations with both the south caucasian and central asian states along the "silk road" to bolster its access to regional oil and gas .

turkey's role as an energy conduit also would enhance its influence and appeal as a prospective member of the eu , according to some turkish views .

turkey desires the abatement of ethnic conflict in the caspian region that threatens energy development .

while turkey plays a significant and u.s. - supported role in trade and cultural affairs in central asia among the region's mainly turkic peoples , it has been hampered by its own political struggles between secularists and islamic forces and has been obsessed with its own economic and ethnic problems .

also , the authoritarian leaders in central asia have been reluctant to embrace the "turkish model" of relatively free markets and democracy .

perhaps a sign of greater interest in forging ties , turkey revived meetings of turkic heads of state in 2006 ( the last meeting was in 2001 ) , which was attended by the presidents of kazakhstan and kyrgyzstan , and by turkmenistan's ambassador to turkey .

at the most recent meeting in october 2009 in nakhchevan , azerbaijan , the kazakh and kyrgyz presidents attended as well as an emissary from turkmenistan .

the attendees agreed to set up a turkic - speaking countries cooperation council that is envisaged to be similar to the cis , the council or europe , or the arab league .

sub - groups include a foreign ministers council , a senior officials council , and a wise men delegation .

the attendees also agreed to establish a secretariat in i̇stanbul , a turkic academy in kazakhstan , and a parliamentary liaison headquarters in baku .

until recent years , russia opposed growing turkish influence in central asia and the caspian region , including turkey's building of gas and oil pipelines ( the btc oil pipeline from azerbaijan's caspian sea fields to turkey's mediterranean sea port at ceyhan has provided kazakhstan with another oil export route circumventing russia ) .

perhaps marking improved turkish - russian ties , prime minister putin visited istanbul in august 2009 and agreed to consider a proposal by prime minister recep tayyip erdogan to set up a bilateral strategic cooperation council like ones that turkey had formed with iraq and with syria .

turkey agreed to permit the off - shore construction of russia's proposed south stream gas pipeline to europe .

the formation of a strategic council was further discussed during prime minister erdogan's january 2010 visit to moscow , and the council may be established during a mid - 2010 visit to istanbul by president medvedev .

during erdogan's visit , prime minister putin urged turkey not to link the settlement of the armenia - azerbaijan conflict over nagorno karabakh to the implementation of protocols signed ( but not ratified ) by armenia and turkey on the establishment of diplomatic relations and the opening of borders .

the south caucasus central asia is linked with the south caucasus region as an historic and re - emerging transport corridor .

construction and plans for major pipeline and transport routes from central asia through the south caucasus region to europe make central asia's economic security somewhat dependent on the stability of the south caucasus .

at the same time , the authoritarian central asian leaders have been concerned that democratization in georgia could inspire dissension against their rule .

