house procedures are not based solely on the rules that the chamber adopts at the outset of each new congress .

the foundations of house parliamentary procedure also include constitutional mandates , principles of parliamentary practice set forth in jefferson ' s manual , provisions of law that have the force and effect of rules , published precedents reflecting authoritative rulings and interpretations of the foregoing authorities , and informal practices .

they also include committee rules , "memorandums of understanding" between committees regarding committee jurisdiction , and the rules of each party's caucus or conference .

this report identifies and describes documents , published by the house or organs and offices thereof , that provide an official record of these parliamentary authorities .

members usually cite these documents when raising a point of order or defending against one .

they may be grouped into three classes .

the first comprises the texts of the chief authorities governing parliamentary procedure in the house .

these authorities , which are presented in the house manual with annotations by the parliamentarian , include the constitution ; jefferson ' s manual ; the adopted rules of the house ; and provisions of law that have the force and effect of rules ( "rule - making statutes" ) .

a second group of official reference documents compiles and digests the precedents of the house .

this group includes house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents and procedures of the house ; deschler ' s ( and deschler - brown ) precedents of the u.s. house of representatives ; hinds ' and cannon ' s precedents of the house of representatives of the united states .

procedure in the u.s. house of representatives and its supplements ; and cannon ' s procedure in the house of representatives .

finally , parliamentary reference documents prepared by committees , offices , and other organs of the house include committee rules , adopted by the respective committees and compiled , in each congress , by the house committee on rules in a print , rules adopted by committees of the house of representatives ; "memorandums of understanding" ( often called "letters of agreement" ) between committees regarding committee jurisdiction ; floor procedure in the u.s. house of representatives from the house committee on rules ; how our laws are made from the office of the house parliamentarian ; and the rules of the democratic caucus and of the republican conference , adopted by the respective bodies and prepared by each for its own members .

this report begins by reviewing some principles of house procedure that condition the way in which these parliamentary reference sources can be used .

the body of the report describes the format of each parliamentary reference document and the content of the authorities it contains .

many of the descriptions of printed sources also are illustrated with sample pages that show the format of the document and are annotated to indicate special features and components .

although some of these illustrations do not reflect the most recent , current edition of the document from which they are taken , the format and other features they illustrate are retained in the current editions .

boxes following the description of each authority present information on how to locate it in various documentary sources , both in printed form and through the internet .

in these access boxes , the names of websites appear in bold type .

the appendices of the report summarize the information contained in the access boxes .

appendix a furnishes citations for each printed reference document covered in this report , and for related congressional research service ( crs ) products .

appendix b summarizes house parliamentary reference information available through the internet .

official guidance on house parliamentary procedure is available from the office of the house parliamentarian ( 5-7373 ) .

crs staff ( [phone number scrubbed] ) also can assist in clarifying house rules and procedures .

the house applies the regulations set forth in its various parliamentary authorities in accordance with several principles that remain generally applicable across the entire range of procedural situations .

among these principles may be listed the following: ( 1 ) house procedure is governed by multiple authorities , not by chamber rules alone ; ( 2 ) the house has a constitutional power to make its own rules of procedure ; ( 3 ) house rules are generally not self - enforcing ; ( 4 ) the house rarely disregards its precedents ; and ( 5 ) the house adheres to many practices that have developed without being formally adopted .

each of these principles is discussed below .

as already discussed , selected precedents of the house are summarized in the parliamentarian's annotations in the house manual .

moreover , procedural floor exchanges that establish house precedents are recorded in the congressional record on the dates when they occurred .

in addition , however , house precedents in general are compiled , digested , described , or referenced in five official publications of the house: house practice ; deschler ' s precedents ; hinds ' and cannon ' s precedents ; procedure in the u.s. house of representatives and its supplement ; and cannon ' s procedure .

house practice presents comprehensive , consolidated information about contemporary procedure in the house , including reference to the precedents and other parliamentary authorities on which it is grounded .

the three collections of precedents listed compile precedents of the house , setting forth both the principles they illustrate and the proceedings that established or exemplify them .

deschler ' s precedents compiles precedents established from 1936 through the date of publication , hinds ' precedents those established up to 1906 , and cannon ' s precedents those established between 1906 and 1936 .

the other two documents listed are no longer current , but can be viewed as predecessor documents of house practice .

although the format of each document is different , each presents a digest of the then current practice of the house with citations of precedential and other authorities in which it is grounded .

when examining published precedents for their application to a particular parliamentary situation , the reader might bear in mind the principles of house procedure discussed earlier in this report .

members needing to find precedents to support or rebut a parliamentary argument might wish to seek the official advice of office of the house parliamentarian ( 5-7373 ) .

as noted at the outset , in the section "the house adheres to many informal practices," procedure in the house is governed not only by the constitution , formally adopted rules , and precedents interpreting those authorities , but also by a variety of other practices that have become usual in the course of time .

although these "informal" practices have not been formally adopted by the house itself , they supplement the rules and have some guiding force .

to the extent that they establish consistent standards of action , they constitute a standard that helps to determine the actual courses of action that occur in the house .

in this sense , they too represent a form of procedural authority .

some of these practices are embodied in written statements that provide additional guidance on the procedures that proceedings in the house will follow .

this section discusses two authorities of this kind: ( 1 ) announced policies of the speaker ; and ( 2 ) memorandums of understanding developed by agreement between committees about the relation of their respective jurisdictions .

the chief institutional elements that make up the internal structure of the house of representatives are the committees and the party conferences ( known , in the case of the democratic party , as the caucus ) .

the committees , especially the standing committees established by house rules , are chiefly responsible for developing the substance of legislative proposals , and one of the chief functions of the party conferences is to assign their respective members to leadership and committee roles .

each committee and each conference has developed its own rules , which in the modern practice are written and adopted by each individual group .

although these rules of the individual groups are not per se binding on the house as a whole , their provisions often have effects on the way proceedings in the house occur , and to that extent , they must be considered as among the procedural authorities by which the house is regulated .

several additional publications prepared by various committees and offices of the house provide valuable information about house parliamentary procedure and practices .

while these publications are not official parliamentary reference sources , they come from official congressional sources and often make references to official sources such as the rules of the house and published precedents .

this section describes two publications of this kind that are issued under the auspices of house committees .

floor procedure in the u.s. house of representatives is designed to provide a ready reference for practical guidance on undertaking a variety of parliamentary actions , including reference to applicable house rules and , often , typical procedural language .

the work , also styled floor procedures manual , consists of a series of short sections , currently 18 in number , arranged in rough correspondence with the daily order of business in the house , from the speaker's call to order through adjournment .

an "abridged parliamentary dictionary" appears as an appendix .

new in the edition for the 110 th congress is a section addressing the operation and implications of the new house rules regulating the "earmark" provisions that may appear in appropriations and other legislation .

the introduction to the floor procedures manual , by the former chairman and current ranking minority member of the house committee on rules , explains that the manual is intended "to provide house members and staff with a concise , yet informative user guide to the basic legislative process in the house of representatives. .

the original version of this document was entitled floor operations manual , and was written by robert e. bauman , a former member of the house from maryland , principally for the use of republican members .

subsequent editions were revised and updated , sometimes under the title of " republican floor operations manual ," by other leading republican members and former members .

after republicans gained the house majority in the 104 th congress , versions of the document were prepared , and distributed to house offices , under the auspices of the house committee on rules .

recent editions have been prepared through the committee or , in the 110 th congress , its republican contingent .

they have been published by the congressional institute , inc. , a non - governmental organization , and distributed to member offices by the committee on rules or the committee's republican members .

how our laws are made was first published in 1953 by the house judiciary committee .

the work provides a summary of the legislative process focusing on house procedures , from the drafting of legislation to final approval and presidential action .

although the document is intended for nonspecialists , its summary descriptions of house procedures serve as a useful reference source .

the 23 rd edition of how our laws are made was published in 2003 .

prepared by the office of the house parliamentarian in consultation with the office of the senate parliamentarian , the 23 rd edition is available online .

it reflects changes in congressional procedures since the 22 nd edition , which was revised and updated in 2000 .

some earlier editions included sample documents from key stages of the process .

the senate has maintained a publication providing a concise summary of the legislative process under the title enactment of a law: procedural steps in the legislative process .

this document , prepared by the parliamentarian of the senate under the direction of the secretary of the senate , explains senate floor procedures and the functions of the various senate officials , such as the secretary of the senate , the sergeant at arms , and the senate parliamentarian .

some information about house and conference procedures and presidential action also is provided .

in addition , the document contains illustrations of some of the chief kinds of document used in the legislative process .

enactment of a law has not appeared in a new printed edition since 1981 and appears no longer to be readily available in print .

an updated version , however , was prepared in february 1997 by senate parliamentarian robert b. dove , and is available on - line .

this online version reflects changes made to the congressional budget process and senate rules and procedures since the last printed edition .

appendix a. bibliography of house parliamentary reference sources official reference sources u.s. congress .

house .

cannon ' s procedure in the house of representatives .

87 th congress , 2 nd session .

h.doc .

no .

610 .

washington: gpo , 1963 .

 — — .

constitution , jefferson ' s manual and the rules of the house ( published each congress as a house document ) .

109 th congress , 2 nd session .

h.doc .

no.109-157 .

washington: gpo , 2007 .

 — — .

deschler ' s precedents of the u.s. house of representatives ( in 16 volumes to date ; volumes 10-16 are formally titled deschler - brown precedents of the u.s. house of representatives ) .

94 th congress , 2 nd session .

h.doc .

no .

94-661 .

washington: gpo , 1977 .

 — — .

hinds ' and cannon ' s precedents of the house of representatives ( in 11 volumes ) .

washington: gpo , 1907-1908 , 1935-1941 .

 — — .

house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents and procedures of the house .

108 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 2003 .

 — — .

procedure in the u.s. house of representatives , a summary of the modern precedents and practices of the house , 86 th cong .

 - 97 th cong .

washington: gpo , 1982 .

 — — .

procedure in the u.s. house of representatives , 1985 supplement .

washington: gpo , 1986 .

 — — .

procedure in the u.s. house of representatives , 1987 supplement .

washington: gpo , 1987 .

u.s. congress .

house .

house committee on rules .

rules adopted by the committees of the house of representatives , 110 th congress , 2007-2008 .

committee print .

110 th congress , 1 st session .

washington: gpo , 2007 .

u.s. congress .

house .

rules of the house of representatives , an unnumbered print usually issued each session of congress by the clerk of the house .

u.s. congress .

senate .

a manual of parliamentary practice for the use of the senate of the united states ( more commonly known as jefferson ' s manual ) .

103 rd congress , 1 st session .

s.doc .

103-8 .

washington: gpo , 1993 .

publications of committees and offices of the house floor procedure in the u.s. house of representatives was issued in january 1999 by the house rules committee and published by the congressional institute .

an earlier version entitled floor operations manual: u.s. house of representatives was issued in april 1997 .

a version under the title house republican floor manual was issued by the office of the house majority leader in january 1997 .

how our laws are made ( 23 rd edition ) , prepared by the office of the house parliamentarian , 108 th congress , 1 st session .

h.doc .

no .

108-93 .

washington: gpo , 2003 .

crs products most titles , including multimedia and the general distribution memorandum , are available from the crs home page at http: / / www.crs.gov .

crs report 98-995 , the amending process in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30244 , the committee markup process in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20147 , committee of the whole: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 95-187 , committee system: rules changes in the house , 104 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 97-138 , committee system: rules changes in the house , 105 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs20017 , committee system rules changes in the house , 106 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs20769 , committee system rules changes in the house , 107 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs21382 , committee system rules changes in the house , 108 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rs22018 , committee system rules changes in the house , 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl32207 , commonly used motions and requests in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 96-708 , conference committee and related procedures: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21339 , congress' early organization meetings , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32200 , debate , motions , and other actions in the committee of the whole , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-856 , the discharge rule in the house: recent use in historical context , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-552 , the discharge rule in the house: principal features and uses , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31382 , expulsion , censure , reprimand , and fine: legislative discipline in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-888 , "fast - track" or expedited procedures: their purposes , elements , and implications , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30725 , the first day of a new congress: a guide to proceedings on the house floor , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30945 , house and senate rules of procedure: a comparison , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-169 , house committee reports: required contents , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-309 , house legislative procedures: published sources of information , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-357 , house rules affecting committees , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-1045 , house rules and precedents affecting committee markup procedures , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-262 , house rules manual: summary of contents , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-228 , house voting procedures: forms and requirements , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20067 , how measures are brought to the house floor: a brief introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 95-563 , the legislative process on the house floor: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20131 , morning hour debates: current house practices , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33860 , the motion to recommit in the house: the minority's motion , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30135 , one - minute speeches: current house practices , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-865 , points of order in the congressional budget process , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-710 , " self - executing " rules reported by the house committee on rules , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-780 , the speaker of the house: house officer , party leader , and representative , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30136 , special order speeches: current house practices , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 96-938 , special rules in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 98-314 , suspension of the rules in the house: principal features , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-988 , voting and quorum procedures in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

appendix b .

house parliamentary reference information available through the internet throughout this report , internet locations and websites at which electronic versions of various house parliamentary reference sources are available have been cited .

this appendix lists these online resources in a single compendium for the convenience of the reader .

the vast majority of the referenced links can be accessed through one of three "gateway" websites maintained by legislative branch organizations: the legislative information system ( lis ) , gpo access , and the house committee on rules website .

each of these sites ( detailed below ) provides a good entry point for research into house parliamentary procedure .

documents relating to house parliamentary procedure can also be found at other library of congress and house of representatives websites at the locations indicated .

internet addresses are provided for documents cited .

the list is current as of this report's publication date .

given that information on the internet is constantly changing , this list should not be considered exhaustive .

legislative information system of the u.s. congress ( lis ) http: / / www.congress.gov ( available to congress only ) the legislative information system was released at the start of the 105 th congress .

the information in the system is organized into six web pages: home , senate , house , government , news , and a - z index .

each page is accessible by clicking on one of the navigation tabs near the top of the page .

the senate and house pages include multiple links under the category "rules , and procedures. .

the "government" page includes a link to gpo access ( legislative ) , where many documents related to parliamentary procedure are located .

crs guides to congressional processes / analysis / pages / congressionaloperations.aspx the latest version of this crs electronic guide provides a wealth of information relating to house and senate procedures .

there are links to current versions of house and senate rules and crs reports on specific procedural topics .

electronic versions of how our laws are made and enactment of a law provide an overview of procedures in each chamber .

links within the fact sheets and procedural overviews take the user directly to pertinent house or senate rules and to definitions in congressional quarterly's american congressional dictionary .

house committee on rules http: / / www.house.gov / rules / in addition to the house rules and manual , the text of house rules , and house practice , this location includes links to explanatory material about house rules and procedure developed by the committee itself and by several other sources .

there are links here to numerous sub - pages covering all of the following topics: rules and precedents of the house , parliamentary terms and definitions , general parliamentary procedure , the budget process , house committee procedures , house floor procedures , resolving differences with the senate , senate process and procedure , parliamentary outreach program , special rules reported , and the opening day rules package .

house rules committee web page on "rules and precedents of the house," provides links to several procedural publications and documents .

http: / / www.rules.house.gov / house_rules_precedents.htm house rules committee web page for the rules of the 110 th congress , provides a link to a copy of the entire document .

http: / / www.house.gov / rules / house_rules.htm provides a link , identified as "a guide to the rules , precedents and procedures of the house," to the text of house practice at the gpo access internet location .

http: / / www.house.gov / rules / house_rules_precedents.htm rules committee link to the 1999 version of floor procedure in the u.s. house of representatives .

http: / / www.rules.house.gov / house_rules_precedents.htm gpo access gpo access home page http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / index.html searchable version of the house manual .

http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / hrm / index.html a searchable version of the 1992 edition of the constitution of the united states of america: analysis and interpretation ) , and the 1996 , 1998 , and 2000 supplements is available through http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / serialset / cdocuments / search.html .

a pdf version of a more recent edition of the main volume ( s.doc .

108-17 ) can be accessed through http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / serialset / cdocuments / index.html .

these documents are prepared by the congressional research service , which also maintains an online version at http: / / www.crs.gov / products / conan / index.shtml .

searchable version of house practice .

http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / hpractice / index.html provides links to rules of most house committees .

http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / congress / index.html other library of congress sites constitution http: / / lcweb2.loc.gov / const / const.html bill of rights http: / / www.loc.gov / rr / program / bib / ourdocs / billofrights.html how our laws are made , version dated june 20 , 2003. http: / / thomas.loc.gov / home / lawsmade.toc.html other house of representatives sites house home page http: / / www.house.gov clerk's print of house rules for the 110 th congress , dated september 14 , 2007. http: / / clerk.house.gov / legislative / rules110 / 110th.pdf links to how our laws are made , house practice , and other parliamentary sources http: / / clerk.house.gov / legislative / legprocess.html house committees web page http: / / www.house.gov / committeewww.html most committee websites include a link to "committee rules. .

links to these rules are listed below .

