u.s. law provides for a range of administrative measures to reduce the adverse effects offoreign trade policies and practices on u.s. industries .

three forms of relief - - safeguards,antidumping , and countervailing duty remedies - - have been the subjects of recent legislation andare the subject of the report .

 ( 1 ) .

ad , cvd and safeguard remedies reflect and are subject to u.s. international rulesestablished under the world trade organization ( wto ) and under the north american free tradeagreement ( nafta ) .

the united states and other wto members must adhere to the uruguayround agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures , which delineates definitions,procedures , and other criteria for member cvd programs .

 ( 15 ) for example , the subsidiesagreement requires that a determination of material injury ( or threat thereof ) to a domestic industrymust be made before a subsidy is countervailable ( when the subsidized imports are from anotherwto member - country ) .

the agreement also prohibits certain subsidies and allows others anddefines subsidies that are countervailable .

in addition , the agreement provides for adjudication ofcvd disputes between wto members .

similarly , the united states and other wto members mustadhere to the uruguay round antidumping agreement which establishes procedures forimplementing national antidumping programs , including determinations of dumping , and materialinjury or the threat thereof .

 ( 16 ) article xix of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( 1994 ) lays out the basicconditions under which a wto member can apply safeguards remedies .

the uruguay roundnegotiations resulted in an expansion of article xix by stipulating , among other things , sunsetrequirements for member safeguard actions already in effect , time limits on new safeguard actions,and criteria for determining "serious injury. .

before the enactment of the uruguay roundagreements , member countries that were the targets of safeguard actions could seek compensationfrom the country taking the action .

under the safeguards agreement such compensation is delayedfor three years .

the united states also has obligations regarding trade remedies vis - a - vis canada and mexicounder the nafta .

chapter eight of the nafta provides , among other things , that escape clausemeasures against nafta members generally last no more than three years .

chapter 19 allows for cvd and ad final determinations involving another member's goods to be reviewed by a binationalpanel instead of in a domestic court .

a number of trading partners , including japan , korea , chile , and brazil , have criticized u.s.use of its trade remedy laws , especially ad , as not fully in line with wto rules .

they argued thata review of member - country trade remedy practices and policies should be on the agenda of theforthcoming wto round of negotiations .

the united states resisted this demand and manymembers of congress opposed it .

however , in november 2001 , at the wto ministerial meetingin doha , qatar , the 142 wto members agreed to include trade remedy laws on the agenda .

 ( 17 ) .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 108th congress to the u.s. safeguard ( section201 ) and the antidumping and countervailing duty laws .

to date , no further congressional action hasbeen taken on them .

on october 28 , 2000 , president clinton signed the agriculture , rural development , foodand drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act 2001 ( p.l .

106-387 ) .

section1003 of the act contained a provision , the "continued dumping and subsidy offset act ( cdsoa ) of 2000," sometimes called the byrd amendment after its chief sponsor , senator robert byrd .

the provision amended u.s. antidumping and countervailing duty laws by requiring thatantidumping and countervailing duties be re - distributed to the domestic industries that have beeninjured by the imports that are subject to the ad and cvd orders .

the provision requires thecustoms bureau to deposit the duties into a special account rather than into the general treasury .

itthen must distribute the funds to eligible firms , farmers , or other producers that were petitioners inthe original ad or cvd cases to offset certain expenses that they incurred as a result of the dumpedor subsidized imports .

the provision was originally contained in s. 61 .

 ( dewine , et.al ) , and other bills .

the customs bureau reported that in 2001 it had distributed around $206 millionin offsets to claimants .

 ( 20 ) the "byrd amendment" is controversial because it was inserted into the legislation duringconference and had not received committee consideration in either house .

in addition , theamendment has raised concerns about whether it conforms to wto rules under the relevant wtoagreements .

eleven members of the wto - - the european union , australia , brazil , canada , chile,india , indonesia , japan , mexico , south korea , and thailand , filed a complaint with the wtocharging that the amendment violates wto obligations .

on september 2 , 2002 , the wto disputesettlement panel announced its determination that the byrd amendment violates u.s. obligationsunder the wto antidumping agreement and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing dutymeasures .

the panel furthermore recommended that the law be repealed .

the wto appellate bodyreaffirmed the decision in a january 16 , 2003 decision .

however , the law has proved very popularin the congress .

in february 4 , 2003 letter to president bush , 70 senators expressed support for thelaw and against the wto ruling .

in his proposed fy2004 budget , president bush recommended that the csdoa be repealed .

s. 1299 ( snowe ) was introduced on june 19 , 2003 , and would repeal the csdoa toput the united states in compliance with the wto rulings but would also require that revenuescollected under ad and cvd orders be directed to a new trade adjustment program for communitiesadversely affected by trade .

treatment of trade remedy laws during u.s. trade agreement negotiations became a highlycontentious subject during the 107th congress's debate on extending trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to the president .

the senate - passed version of the bill ( h.r .

3009 ) contained theso - called dayton - craig amendment .

this amendment would have required that fast - track procedurescontained in the tpa would not apply to any provision of trade agreement implementing legislationthat would change any u.s. trade remedy law .

the amendment grew out of concern by a numberof members that the inclusion of trade remedies on the agenda of the doha development agendawould result in weakening of u.s. laws .

the house version of the bill did not contain thisprovision .

the provision was not contained in the conference report that as enacted into law ( p.l.107-210 ) , although it does contain a principal negotiating objective to preserve the ability of theunited states to vigorously enforce its trade remedy laws and to avoid agreements that could weakenthose laws .

at this time , it is difficult to determined what impact the "byrd amendment" will havealthough it has already proved controversial .

trade remedy legislation generally ignites a debate overthe direction of u.s. trade policy .

trade remedy legislation is largely supported by those industries,such as steel , that are most sensitive to foreign competition .

the legislation is often opposed by thoseindustries and groups that are users of imports as inputs or consumers of final products .

increasedtrade relief would likely result in higher prices to these groups .

changes in trade remedy laws could have an impact on u.s. relations with its major tradepartners , who might challenge the legality of some changes in u.s. trade remedy laws under thewto .

along with their challenge of the "byrd amendment," the european union and japan arechallenging other u.s. antidumping laws and practices in the wto .

in 1999 , the two tradingpartners filed disputes regarding the u.s. antidumping act of 1916 , a law which allows u.s. firmsto sue foreign companies in u.s. court over dumping of imports and to collect damages if dumpingis found .

they claimed it violates the wto antidumping agreement .

the wto upheld theirclaim .

with the united states in mind , the european union and japan are advocating a review ofthe antidumping practices of wto members as part of the agenda for a new round of wtonegotiations .

the united states opposes this position .

amending u.s. trade remedy statutes is one option available to congress to cushion theimpact of import competition on american industries .

some trade specialists have suggested , forexample , that the federally funded trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs could be reformedand made more effective .

taa programs are available for workers ( through the department oflabor ) and for firms ( through the department of commerce ) .

they provide funds for training andother adjustment measures to those who can demonstrate an adverse impact from imports .

manyeconomists prefer this option over trade restrictive remedies because its directs assistance to thosemost affected and does so without distorting prices .

but taa programs as currently designed andadministered have been criticized by labor advocacy groups as ineffective in responding to workers'needs in a globalizing economy .

the congress might also require the president to halt or quantitatively restrict imports .

sucha measure would resolve the immediate problem of adverse effects on the import - sensitive workersand firms and have been proposed and in some cases enacted in the past .

but they would very likelybe challenged by other wto members as violating wto rules .

they would also reducecompetitive pressures on a u.s. industry ( ies ) which might encourage inefficiency , higher costs anda decline in the general economic welfare .

