it is surprisingly difficult to measure marriage penalties and bonuses .

the measure of the marriage penaltyrequires a counterfactual: what would the combinedtaxes of the two spouses be if they were not married ? .

unfortunately , there is no simple answer to this questionbecause marriage itself tends to be a life - changingevent .

indeed , the answer may be different if the question is: "what would the tax be if the spouses had nevermarried ? .

rather than "what would the tax be if thecouple divorced ? .

these issues become much more important for certain types of married couples .

most coupleswould not have had children without marriage,and having children can dramatically reduce tax liability .

in divorce , who gets custody of children can alter taxliability .

never marrying would probably alsohave altered career paths ( and thus the amount of earned income of each partner ) , savings behavior ( and thus theamount of unearned income ) , the allocation ofsavings and consumption into different types ( including tax exempt forms such as owner occupied housing that alsotend to affect the choices of itemizingdeductions ) .

getting divorced would probably also alter these effects , unless the divorce were solely for purposesof tax minimization .

the decision about how to measure the marriage penalty does not alter the effects of the two proposals ( which are still determined with reference to the marriedcouple's joint circumstances ) , but rather the original magnitude and remaining magnitude .

in the next section we calculate the marriage penalty in general for couples without considering the effects of children , where there is much less uncertainty abouthow to measure the penalty .

the following section discusses the issues surrounding marriage penalties for couples .

despite all of the attention focused on marriage penalties , it may be surprising to know that for the middle class,marriage penalties are small or nonexistent,particularly in cases where the penalty is well - defined .

according to data from the internal revenue servicestatistics of income , about 60% of joint returns thathave tax liability before credits paid taxes at the 15% rate in 1997 ; for these taxpayers , the marriage penalty can beno larger than $225 ( measured at 2001 incomelevels ) .

for taxpayers who itemize and whose itemized deductions are at least as large as the combined standarddeduction for two singles , no penalty exists at all .

as noted in the previous section , couples with children present serious problems in modeling marriage penaltiesand bonuses .

the presence of children in ahousehold can dramatically alter tax liabilities .

children justify a head of household rate schedule which has widerbrackets than the single return , implying alarger penalty and smaller bonus as compared to joint return than would be the case in comparing single and jointreturns .

children increase personal exemptionsand , if under 17 , make the taxpayer eligible for a child credit .

earned income credits , which reach much further upthe income brackets and are much larger,accrue with children .

thus , how children are divided between the spouses can have profound consequences for taxliability .

this analysis of the effects of legislative proposals on the marriage penalty indicates that for the middle class,the marriage penalty , which is already relativelysmall , will be essentially removed by the rate reductions and second earner exemptions in the administrationproposal , capturing essentially the same penaltyelimination objective of the original marriage penalty legislative proposals in the previous congress .

the proposalwill also reduce marriage penalties in thehigher brackets by a larger amount than h.r .

6 standing alone .

this result is a natural outcome of the ratereduction and flattening in the president'sproposal , and explains why marriage penalty relief in the form of a second earner deduction was eliminated whenrate were flattened in 1986 .

h.r .

6 , the congressional marriage penalty proposal , would , however , increase existing marriage bonuses , while the administration proposal wouldreduce them .

h.r .

6 combined with the rate cuts and credits portion of the proposal passed by the house as h.r .

3 would increasemarriage bonuses compared to the administration proposal with the second earner deduction , and in many caseswould increase bonuses compared with currentlaw .

since the final bill included rates cuts similar to those in h.r .

3 , there will be some increase in marriagebonuses , but since the top rates werenot cut as much there will be less reduction in the bonuses at higher income levels .

