questions often have arisen over the years about ( 1 ) whether sufficient workers are available domestically to meet the seasonal employment demand of perishable crop producers in the u.s. agricultural industry and ( 2 ) how , if at all , the congress should change immigration policy with respect to farm workers .

immigration policy has long been intertwined with the labor needs of crop ( eg , fruit and vegetable ) growers , who rely more than most farmers on hand labor ( eg , for harvesting ) and consequently "are the largest users of hired and contract workers on a per - farm basis. .

since world war i , the congress has allowed the use of temporary foreign workers to perform agricultural labor of a seasonal nature as a means of augmenting the supply of domestic farm workers .

in addition , a sizeable fraction of immigrants historically have found employment on the nation's farms .

more recently , attention has focused on the growing share of the domestic supply of farm workers that is composed of aliens who are not authorized to work in the united states .

the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) estimated that foreign - born persons in the country illegally accounted for 37% of the domestic crop workforce in fy1994-fy1995 .

shortly thereafter ( fy1997-fy1998 ) , unauthorized aliens' share of workers employed on crop farms reached 52% .

by fy1999-fy2000 , their proportion peaked at 55% before retreating somewhat to 53% in the first half of the current decade .

although a number of studies found that no nationwide shortage of domestic farm labor existed in the past decade , a case has been made that the considerable presence of unauthorized foreign - born workers in seasonal agriculture implies a lack of legal workers relative to employer demand .

arguably , the purported imbalance between authorized - to - work farm labor and employer demand would become more apparent were the supply of unauthorized workers curtailed sufficiently — a fear that has plagued growers for some time .

crop producers and their advocates have testified at congressional hearings and asserted in other venues that they believe the latest risk of losing much of their labor force comes from efforts by the bureau of citizenship and immigration services and the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to step - up employment verification and enforcement activities , in concert with mailings of no - match letters by the social security administration ( ssa ) .

growers have asserted that these activities disrupt their workforces by increasing employee turnover and therefore , decreasing the stability of their labor supply .

the perception that government actions negatively affect u.s. agriculture has prompted a legislative response in the past .

this report first examines the composition of the seasonal agricultural labor force and presents the arguments of grower and farm worker advocates concerning its adequacy relative to employer demand .

the report next analyzes trends in employment , unemployment , time worked , and wages of authorized and unauthorized farm workers to determine whether they are consistent with the existence of a nationwide shortage of domestically available farm workers .

the farm labor supply - demand situation by geographic area at peak harvest time is examined as well , to ascertain whether spot shortages might exist .

immigration legislation sometimes has been crafted to take into account the purported labor requirements of u.s. crop growers .

in 1986 , for example , congress passed the immigration reform and control act ( irca , p.l .

99-603 ) to curb the presence of unauthorized aliens in the united states by imposing sanctions on employers who knowingly hire individuals who lack permission to work in the country .

in addition to a general legalization program , p.l .

99-603 included two industry - specific legalization programs — the special agricultural worker ( saw ) program and the replenishment agricultural worker ( raw ) program — that were intended to compensate for the act's expected impact on the farm labor supply and encourage the development of a legal crop workforce .

these provisions of the act have not operated in the offsetting manner that was intended , however , as substantial numbers of unauthorized aliens have continued to join legal farm workers in performing seasonal agricultural services ( sas ) .

on the basis of case studies that it sponsored , the commission on agricultural workers concluded in its 1992 report that individuals legalized under the saw program and other farm workers planned to remain in the agricultural labor force "indefinitely , or for as long as they are physically able. .

according to the dol's national agricultural workers survey , two - thirds of so - called saws stated that they intended to engage in field work until the end of their working lives .

for many saws , the end of their worklives — at least their worklives in farming — may now be near at hand .

the diminished physical ability generally associated with aging in combination with the taxing nature of crop tasks could well be prompting greater numbers of saws to leave the fields .

the commission on agricultural workers noted that the typical saw in 1990 was a 30-year - old male who "is likely to remain in farm work well into the 21 st century," but dol estimated the average age of saw - legalized workers in 2007 was 47 .

because relatively few farm workers are involved in crop production beyond the age of 44 , and even fewer beyond the age of 54 , it appears that the 1986 legalization program has become less useful over time in fulfilling the labor requirements of crop producers .

a combination of factors likely has contributed to the decrease in saws' share of agricultural employment .

while the share of irca - legalized farm workers has been falling over time due to aging and the availability of nonfarm jobs , the leading factor probably is the substantially increased presence of illegal aliens .

in the first half of the 1990s , unauthorized workers rose from 7% to 37% of the sas labor force .

their share climbed to 55% by fy1999-fy2000 , before settling at 53% in fy2005-fy2006 .

moreover , the number of sas workdays performed by unauthorized aliens more than tripled between fy1989 and fy2002 .

in addition , of the many foreign - born newcomers to the sector in fy2000-fy2002 , 99% were employed without authorization .

unauthorized aliens , arguably , have been displacing legal workers from jobs in the agricultural industry .

farm worker advocates assert that crop producers prefer unauthorized employees because they have less bargaining power with regard to wages and working conditions than other employees .

growers counter that they would rather not employ unauthorized workers because doing so puts them at risk of incurring penalties .

they argue that the considerable presence of unauthorized aliens in the u.s. farm labor force implies a shortage of legal workers .

farm worker groups and some policy analysts contend that even if the previously mentioned dhs and ssa activities were to deprive farmers of many of their unauthorized workers , the industry could adjust to a smaller supply of legal workers by ( 1 ) introducing labor - efficient technologies and management practices , and ( 2 ) raising wages which , in turn , would entice more authorized workers into the farm labor force .

grower advocates respond that further mechanization would be difficult to develop for many crops and that , even at higher wages , not many u.s. workers would want to perform physically demanding , seasonal farm labor under variable climactic conditions .

moreover , employer representatives and some policy analysts maintain that growers cannot raise wages substantially without making the u.s. industry uncompetitive in world markets which , in turn , would reduce farm employment .

in response , farm worker supporters note that wages are a small part of the price consumers pay for fresh fruits and vegetables and accordingly , higher wages would result in only a slight rise in retail prices .

these remain untested arguments as perishable crop growers have rarely , if ever , had to operate without unauthorized aliens in their workforces .

trends in the farm labor market generally do not suggest the existence of a nationwide shortage of domestically available farm workers , in part because the government's statistical series cover authorized and unauthorized workers .

this overall finding does not preclude the possibility of spot shortages of farm labor in certain areas of the country at various times of the year .

caution should be exercised when reviewing the statistics on farm workers' employment , unemployment , time worked and wages that follow .

the surveys from which the data are derived cover somewhat different groups within the farm labor force ( eg , all hired farm workers as opposed to those engaged only in crop production or workers employed directly by growers as opposed to those supplied to growers by farm labor contractors ) , and they have different sample sizes .

a household survey such as the current population survey ( cps ) could well understate the presence of farm workers because they are more likely to live in less traditional quarters ( eg , labor camps ) and of unauthorized workers generally because they may be reluctant to respond to government enumerators .

and , some of the surveys have individuals as respondents ( eg , the cps and dol's national agricultural workers survey ) while others have employers as respondents ( eg , the u.s. department of agriculture's national agricultural statistics service farm labor survey , fls ) .

surveys that query employers are more likely to pickup unauthorized employment than are surveys that query individuals .

in summary , indicators of supply - demand conditions generally are inconsistent with the existence of a nationwide shortage of domestically available farm workers in part because the measures include both authorized and unauthorized employment .

this finding does not preclude the possibility of farm worker shortages in certain parts of the country at various times during the year .

the analysis does not address the adequacy of authorized workers in the seasonal farm labor supply relative to grower demand .

whether there would be an adequate supply of authorized u.s. farm workers if new technologies were developed or different labor - management practices were implemented continues to be an unanswered question .

whether more u.s. workers would be willing to become farm workers if wages were raised and whether the size of the wage increase would make the industry uncompetitive in the world marketplace also remain open issues .

these matters remain unresolved because perishable crop growers have rarely , if ever , had to operate without unauthorized aliens being present in the domestic farm workforce .

