in the early 1990s the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) asked congress for legislation to assist law enforcement agencies to continue conducting electronic surveillance .

the fbi argued that the deployment of digital technologies in public telephone systems was making it increasingly difficult for law enforcement agencies to conduct electronic surveillance of communications over public telephone networks .

as a result of these arguments and concerns from the telecommunications industry , as well as issues raised by groups advocating protection of privacy rights , the communications assistance for law enforcement act ( calea ) was enacted on october 25 , 1994 ( 47 u.s.c .

1001-1021 ) , in the final days of the 103 rd congress .

calea is intended to preserve the ability of law enforcement officials to conduct electronic surveillance effectively and efficiently , despite the deployment of new digital technologies and wireless services by the telecommunications industry .

calea requires telecommunications carriers to modify their equipment , facilities , and services to ensure that they are able to comply with authorized electronic surveillance .

these modifications were originally planned to be completed by october 25 , 1998 .

since that time , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) issued two additional orders establishing june 30 , 2002 , as the date by which telecommunications carries must have upgraded all their systems .

equipment manufacturers have fulfilled their obligation to provide calea solutions and carriers are implementing them .

the fbi and fcc continue to monitor and review the implementation of this program .

calea requires telecommunications carriers to assist law enforcement in performing electronic surveillance on their digital networks pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization .

the telecommunications industry , privacy rights groups , and law enforcement agencies agree that calea was not intended to expand law enforcement's authority to conduct electronic surveillance .

on the contrary , calea was intended only to ensure that after law enforcement obtains the appropriate legal authority , carriers will have the necessary capabilities and sufficient capacity to assist law enforcement in conducting digital electronic surveillance regardless of the specific telecommunications systems or services deployed .

calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1002 ) directs the telecommunications industry to design , develop , and deploy solutions that meet certain assistance capability requirements for telecommunications carriers to support law enforcement in the conduct of lawfully - authorized electronic surveillance .

pursuant to a court order or other lawful authorization , carriers must be able , within certain limitations , to: ( 1 ) expeditiously isolate all wire and electronic communications of a target transmitted by the carrier within its service area ; ( 2 ) expeditiously isolate call - identifying information that is reasonably available on a target ; ( 3 ) provide intercepted communications and call - identifying information to law enforcement ; and ( 4 ) carry out intercepts unobtrusively , so targets are not made aware of the electronic surveillance , and in a manner that does not compromise the privacy and security of other communications .

to allow carriers to give law enforcement the means to conduct its wiretaps , calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1003 ) requires the attorney general to determine the number of simultaneous interceptions ( law enforcement agencies' estimate of their maximum capacity requirements ) that telecommunications carriers must be able to support .

to maintain privacy rights of individuals , calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1004 ) requires telecommunications carriers to ensure that any interception of communications or access to call - identifying information that is conducted within their premises can only be done with a court order .

it also requires the specific intervention of an officer or employee of the carrier acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) .

calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1005 ) directs telecommunications carriers to consult with telecommunications equipment manufacturers to develop equipment necessary to comply with the capability and capacity requirements identified by the fbi .

for efficient industry - wide implementation of the above requirements , calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1006 ) directs the law enforcement community to coordinate with the telecommunications industry and state utility commissions to develop suitable technical standards and establish compliance dates for equipment .

in its eighth annual report , the fbi stated that , "to date , most manufacturers have either complete , or nearly complete , calea solutions available for their carrier customers. .

calea ( 47 u.s.c .

1008 ) gives the attorney general , subject to the availability of appropriations , authority to pay telecommunications carriers for all reasonable costs directly associated with the modifications performed by carriers in connection with equipment , facilities , and services installed or deployed on or before january 1 , 1995 ( known as the "grandfather" date ) .

the fbi and other law enforcement agencies , the fcc , and congress are all concerned with calea - related issues , particularly with respect to packet - based services ( i.e. , voice over internet protocol [voip] ) and "push - to - talk" services offered by wireless providers .

the fbi has remained active in promoting its positions related to its calea powers .

on april 22 , 2005 , the department of justice ( doj ) filed comments on the fcc's wireless broadband task force report , requesting that the fcc "continue to preserve the vital national security and criminal law enforcement capabilities of calea as it develops a deregulatory framework for wireless broadband internet access services. .

reply comments in the proceeding were due may 23 , 2005 .

on april 13 , 2005 , the fbi published a 60-day notice of information collection under review .

the notice announced a calea readiness survey program , which seeks to evaluate the effectiveness of ciu programs for implementing calea solutions in the public switched telephone network .

comments in this proceeding were accepted until june 13 , 2005 .

on march 10 , 2004 , the fbi , the doj , and the drug enforcement administration petitioned the fcc to identify additional telecommunications services not identified specifically within calea that should be subject to it .

the services named in the fbi petition include some now considered beyond the scope of calea by many observers , including services that fall under the fcc's definition of "information services" under the communications act of 1934 .

however , calea provides the fcc a broader framework to determine that a service is a "telecommunications service. .

comments and replies to the petition were due april 12 and april 27 , 2004 , respectively .

the fcc ruled on this petition on august 5 , 2005 , discussed below ( see "fcc action," page 10 ) .

the fbi's inspector general issued a report in april 2004 on calea implementation .

in its report , the ig expressed concern over the cost estimates for obtaining calea compliance , which have varied widely .

industry has stated it believes estimates full compliance will cost approximately $1.3 billion ; the fbi has estimated costs in the range of $500 million to $1 billion .

further , in december 2003 , the fbi estimated that an additional $204 million would be necessary to complete deployment of calea .

the ig stated in its report that it did not believe implementation costs could be determined with any degree of specificity , but that it was unlikely calea could be implemented with the $49.5 million that remains unobligated from current funding .

in response to law enforcement's petition and after considering the comments and replies from interested parties , the fcc released an nprm and declaratory ruling on august 4 , 2004 .

additionally , the fcc has issued two orders in this matter .

in the declaratory ruling accompanying the nprm , the fcc clarified that commercial wireless "push - to - talk" services are subject to calea , regardless of the technologies that wireless providers choose to apply in offering them .

on august 5 , 2005 , the fcc ruled that providers of certain broadband and interconnected voip services must accommodate law enforcement wiretaps .

the fcc found that these services can be considered replacements for conventional telecommunications services currently subject to wiretap rules , including circuit - switched voice service and dial - up internet access .

as such , the new services are covered by calea , which requires the fcc to preserve the ability of law enforcement to conduct wiretaps as technology evolves .

the rules are limited to facilities - based broadband internet access service providers and voip providers that offer services permitting users to receive calls from , and place calls to , the public switched telephone network — these providers are called interconnected voip providers .

in making its ruling , the fcc found that the definition of "telecommunications carrier" in calea is broader than the definition of that term in the communications act and can , therefore , include providers of services that are not classified as telecommunications services under the communications act .

calea contains a broader definition of telecommunications provider that authorizes the fcc to classify an entity a telecommunications carrier if it finds that such service is a replacement for a substantial portion of the local telephone exchange .

the fcc established a deadline of 18 months from the effective date of the order for providers to achieve full compliance and adopted a further notice of proposed rulemaking to seek more information about whether specific classes of facilities - based broadband internet access providers should be exempt from calea ( i.e. , small and rural providers and providers of broadband networks for educational and research institutions ) .

a coalition of organizations filed a petition for review with the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit on october 25 , 2005 .

specifically , the "petitioners seek relief from the order on the grounds that it exceeds the commission's statutory authority and is arbitrary , capricious , unsupported by substantial evidence , and contrary to law .

petitioners request that this court vacate the order and the final rules adopted therein and grant such other relief as may be appropriate. .

on may 3 , 2006 , the fcc addressed several issues regarding calea implementation , specifically , the order: affirms the may 14 , 2007 , calea compliance deadline for facilities - based broadband internet access and interconnected voip services ( as established by the first report and order ) and clarifies that the date will apply to all such providers .

explains that the fcc does not plan , at this time , to intervene in the standards - setting process in this matter .

permits telecommunications carriers the option of using trusted third parties ( ttps ) to assist in meeting their calea obligations .

restricts the availability of compliance extensions to equipment , facilities , and services deployed prior to october 25 , 1998 .

finds that the commission may , in addition to law enforcement remedies available through the courts , take separate enforcement action under section 229 ( a ) of the communications act against carriers that fail to comply with calea .

concludes that carriers are responsible for calea development and implementation costs for post - january 1 , 1995 , equipment and facilities , and declines to adopt a national surcharge to recover calea costs .

requires all carriers providing facilities - based broadband internet access and interconnected voip service to submit interim reports to the fcc to ensure that they will be calea - compliant by may 14 , 2007 , and also requires all such providers to which calea obligations were applied in the first report and order to come into compliance with the system security requirements in the commission's rules within 90 days of the effective date of this second report and order .

in june 2006 , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit affirmed the fcc's decision concluding that voip and facilities - based broadband internet access providers have calea obligations similar to those of telephone companies .

no bills were introduced in the 110 th congress that would have amended the calea statute and no bills have been introduced in the 111 th congress .

