on october 26 , 2001 , president george w. bush signed p.l .

107-56 , the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act or the usa patriot act .

among its provisions are a number which impacted or amended the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 et seq .

 , an act which provides a statutory structure for the use of electronic surveillance , physical searches , pen registers , trap and trace devices , and orders requiring production of tangible things within the united states to gather foreign intelligence information or to assist in specified types of investigations .

the changes made to fisa by p.l .

107-56 were far reaching .

for example , the law expanded the number of united states district court judges on the foreign intelligence surveillance court and provided for roving or multipoint electronic surveillance authority under fisa .

it amended fisa provisions with respect to pen registers and trap and trace devices , and substantially expanded the reach of the business records provisions to provide a mechanism for production of any tangible thing pursuant to a fisa court order .

the amended language changed the certification demanded of a federal officer applying for a fisa order for electronic surveillance or a physical search from requiring a certification that the purpose of the surveillance or physical search is to obtain foreign intelligence information to requiring certification that a significant purpose of the surveillance or search is to obtain foreign intelligence information .

as implemented , this has made it possible for fisa to be used where the primary purpose of the investigation is criminal investigation , so long as a significant foreign intelligence purpose is also present .

fisa , as amended , also affords a private right of action to persons aggrieved by inappropriate use or disclosure of information gathered in or derived from a fisa surveillance or physical search or through the use of a pen register or trap and trace device .

of the amendments made by the usa patriot act , all but the section which increased the number of judges on the foreign intelligence surveillance court were set by that act to sunset on december 31 , 2005 .

p.l .

109-160 and p.l .

109-170 extended the sunset of certain fisa provisions , among others , to february 3 , 2006 , and march 10 , 2006 , respectively .

the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 , p.l .

109-177 , replaced the sunset provisions of p.l .

107-56 , as amended , with new provisions extending the application of the affected amendments to december 31 , 2009 .

amendments to fisa were also made by the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2003 , p.l .

107-108 ; the homeland security act of 2002 , p.l .

107-296 ; and the intelligence reform and terrorism protection act of 2004 , p.l .

108-458 .

in the 109 th congress , two measures , the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 , p.l .

109-177 , and the usa patriot act additional reauthorizing amendments act of 2006 , p.l .

109-178 , made significant changes to fisa .

p.l .

109-177 extended the duration of fisa electronic surveillance , physical searches , and pen register and trap and trace devices .

it also added requirements to applications for production of certain sensitive types of records , and expanded the requirements for applications for fisa orders for production of tangible things and for orders authorizing such production .

this act created a new petition review pool within the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) to address challenges to such production orders or to related nondisclosure orders , and established a detailed procedure for review of such orders .

further , it directed the inspector general of the u.s. department of justice to perform a comprehensive audit of the effectiveness and use , including improper or illegal use , of the investigative authority under title v of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 et seq .

 , for fiscal years 2002-2006 .

the measure modified the requirements for multipoint electronic surveillance under fisa .

it also expanded congressional oversight of fisa electronic surveillance , physical searches , and use of pen registers and trap and trace devices .

p.l .

109-178 amends the procedures for judicial review of production and nondisclosure orders under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 .

on may 17 , 2002 , the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court issued an opinion and order written by the then presiding judge of the court , u.s. district judge royce c. lamberth .

all of the other judges then on the fisc concurred in the order .

the opinion was provided by the current presiding judge of the fisc , u.s. district judge colleen kollar - kotelly , to the senate judiciary committee in response to a july 31 letter from senator leahy , senator grassley and senator specter .

on august 22 , 2002 , the unclassified opinion was released to the public by senator leahy , senator grassley and senator specter .

in the memorandum opinion and order , the fisc considered a motion by the u.s. department of justice "to vacate the minimization and 'wall' procedures in all cases now or ever before the court , including this court's adoption of the attorney general's july 1995 intelligence sharing procedures , which are not consistent with new intelligence sharing procedures submitted for approval with this motion. .

in its memorandum and accompanying order , the fisc granted the department of justice's motion , but modified the second and third paragraphs of section ii.b of the proposed minimization procedures .

the fisc's may 17 th memorandum opinion and order were not appealed directly .

however , the justice department sought review in the u.s. foreign intelligence court of review ( court of review ) of an fisc order authorizing electronic surveillance of an agent of a foreign power , subject to restrictions flowing from the may 17 th decision , and of an fisc order renewing that surveillance subject to the same restrictions .

the court of review reversed and remanded the fisc orders .

this opinion , the first issued by the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillancecourt of review since its creation in 1978 , was also released to the public .

this report will provide background on the foreign intelligence surveillance act , discuss its statutory framework , and review these two decisions .

executive order 12333 , 46 fed .

reg .

59,941 ( december 4 , 1981 ) , as amended , 50 u.s.c .

§ 401 note , deals with "united states intelligence activities. .

under section 2.3 of e.o .

12333 , the agencies within the intelligence community are to "collect , retain or disseminate information concerning united states persons only in accordance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by the attorney general , consistent with the authorities provided by part 1 of this order...." among the types of information that can be collected , retained or disseminated under this section are: ( a ) information that is publicly available or collected with the consent of the person concerned ; ( b ) information constituting foreign intelligence or counterintelligence , including such information concerning corporations or other commercial organizations .

collection within the united states of foreign intelligence not otherwise obtainable shall be undertaken by the fbi or , when significant foreign intelligence is sought , by other authorized agencies of the intelligence community , provided that no foreign intelligence collection by such agencies may be undertaken for the purpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activities of united states persons ; ( c ) information obtained in the course of a lawful foreign intelligence , counterintelligence , international narcotics or international terrorism investigation ; ( d ) information needed to protect the safety of any persons or organizations , including those who are targets , victims or hostages of international terrorist organizations ; ( e ) information needed to protect foreign intelligence or counterintelligence sources or methods from unauthorized disclosure .

collection within the united states shall be undertaken by the fbi except that other agencies of the intelligence community may also collect such information concerning present or former employees , present or former intelligence agency contractors or their present or former employees , or applicants for any such employment or contracting ; ( f ) information concerning persons who are reasonably believed to be potential sources or contacts for the purpose of determining their suitability or credibility ; ( g ) information arising out of a lawful personnel , physical or communications security investigation ; ... ( i ) incidentally obtained information that may indicate involvement in activities that may violate federal , state , local or foreign laws ; and ( j ) information necessary for administrative purposes .

in addition , agencies within the intelligence community may disseminate information , other than information derived from signals intelligence , to each appropriate agency within the intelligence community for purposes of allowing the recipient agency to determine whether the information is relevant to its responsibilities and can be retained by it .

in discussing collections techniques , section 2.4 of e.o .

12333 indicates that agencies within the intelligence community are to use the least intrusive collection techniques feasible within the united states or directed against united states persons abroad .

agencies are not authorized to use such techniques as electronic surveillance , unconsented physical search , mail surveillance , physical surveillance , or monitoring devices unless they are in accordance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by the attorney general .

such procedures shall protect constitutional and other legal rights and limit use of such information to lawful governmental purposes... .

section 2.5 of the executive order 12333 states that: the attorney general hereby is delegated the power to approve the use for intelligence purposes , within the united states or against a united states person abroad , of any technique for which a warrant would be required if undertaken for law enforcement purposes , provided that such techniques shall not be undertaken unless the attorney general has determined in each case that there is probable cause to believe that the technique is directed against a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

electronic surveillance , as defined in the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 [section 1801 et seq .

of this title] , shall be conducted in accordance with that act , as well as this order .

the foreign intelligence surveillance act , as amended , provides a statutory structure to be followed where electronic surveillance , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 et seq .

 , physical searches , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1821 et seq .

 , or pen registers or trap and trace devices , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1841 et seq .

 , for foreign intelligence gathering purposes are contemplated .

in addition , it provides a statutory mechanism for the fbi to seek production of "any tangible things" for an investigation seeking foreign intelligence information not involving a u.s. person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence with respect to any person under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 .

fisa creates enhanced procedural protections where a united states person is involved , while setting somewhat less stringent standards where the surveillance involves foreign powers or agents of foreign powers .

with its detailed statutory structure , it appears intended to protect personal liberties safeguarded by the first and fourth amendments while providing a means to ensure national security interests .

the usa patriot act , p.l .

107-56 , increased the number of fisc judges from 7 to 11 , while expanding the availability of fisa electronic surveillance , physical searches and pen registers and trap and trace devices .

for example , under p.l .

107-56 , an application for a court order permitting electronic surveillance or a physical search under fisa is now permissible where "a significant purpose" of the surveillance or physical search , rather than "the purpose" or , as interpreted by some courts , "the primary purpose" of the surveillance or physical search , is to gather foreign intelligence information .

while the previous language withstood constitutional challenge , the supreme court has not yet determined the constitutional sufficiency of the change in the fisa procedures under the fourth amendment .

on the other hand , the u.s. foreign intelligence court of review has examined a number of constitutional issues in in re sealed case , finding that fisa orders , if not satisfying the constitutional warrant requirement , are close to doing so ; and finding that , even if a fisa order does not qualify as a warrant for fourth amendment purposes , electronic surveillance under fisa as amended by the usa patriot act is reasonable and therefore constitutional .

at the same time , however , the court of review acknowledged that the constitutional question of whether congress' disapproval of the primary purpose test is consistent with the fourth amendment "has no definitive jurisprudential answer. .

the usa patriot act also amended fisa to allow court orders permitting so - called multipoint or "roving" electronic surveillance , where the orders do not require particularity with respect to the identification of the instrument , place , or facility to be intercepted , upon a finding by the court that the actions of the target of the surveillance are likely to thwart such identification .

p.l .

107-108 further clarified this authority .

under p.l .

107-56 , pen registers and trap and trace devices may now be authorized for e - mails as well as telephone conversations .

in addition , the act expanded the previous fbi access to business records , permitting court ordered access in connection with a foreign intelligence or international terrorism investigation not just to business records held by common carriers , public accommodation facilities , physical storage facilities , and vehicle rental facilities , but to any tangible things .

while expanding the authorities available for foreign intelligence investigations , fisa , as amended by the usa patriot act and the intelligence authorization act for fy2002 , also contains broader protections for those who may be the target of the various investigative techniques involved .

for example , whether the circumstances involve electronic surveillance , physical searches , pen registers or trap and trace devices or access to business records and other tangible items , fisa , as amended by the usa patriot act , does not permit the court to grant orders based solely upon a united states person's exercise of first amendment rights .

in addition , p.l .

107-56 created a new private right of action for persons aggrieved by inappropriate disclosure or use of information gleaned or derived from electronic surveillance , physical searches or the use of pen registers or trap and trace devices .

these claims can be brought against the united states for certain willful violations by government personnel .

finally , the inclusion of a sunset provision for the fisa changes made in the usa patriot act , with the exception of the increase in the number of fisc judges , provides an opportunity for the new authorities to be utilized and considered , and an opportunity for the congress to revisit them in light of that experience .

sections 898 and 899 of the homeland security act of 2002 , p.l .

107-296 , amended fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§§1806 ( k ) ( 1 ) and 1825 ( k ) ( 1 ) respectively , to permit federal officers conducting electronic surveillance or physical searches to acquire foreign intelligence information under fisa to consult with federal law enforcement officers "or law enforcement personnel of a state or political subdivision of a state ( including the chief executive officer of that state or political subdivision who has the authority to appoint or direct the chief law enforcement officer of that state or political subdivision ) . .

such consultations are to coordinate efforts to investigate or protect against actual or potential attacks or other grave hostile acts of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ; sabotage or international terrorism by a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ; or clandestine intelligence activities by an intelligence service or network of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

these sections also state that such consultations do not preclude the assistant to the president for national security affairs or other designated executive branch officials from making the necessary certifications as part of the application process for a fisa court order under 50 u.s.c .

§§ 1804 ( a ) ( 7 ) or 1823 ( a ) ( 7 ) , nor are these consultations to preclude entry of an order under 50 u.s.c .

§§ 1805 or 1824 .

section 6001 of title vi of fisa , as added by the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , p.l .

108-458 , expanded the definition of "agent of a foreign power" in the context of non - u.s. persons to encompass those who engage in international terrorism or in activities in preparation for international terrorism , regardless of whether they have any connection or affiliation with a foreign government or other foreign organization or entity .

this new definition is included among those fisa provisions subject to the sunset provisions in section 224 of the usa patriot act , as amended .

section of the new title vi of fisa also imposed new , detailed semiannual reporting requirements to facilitate congressional oversight of the implementation of the act , which are codified at 50 u.s.c .

§ 1871 .

the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 , p.l .

109-177 ( reauthorization act ) , section 102 , adopted a sunset of december 31 , 2009 , for fisc orders for multipoint or "roving" wiretaps under section 105 ( a ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 ( a ) , for fisc orders for production of tangible things under section 501 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 , and congressional oversight requirements in section 502 of fisa , 50 u.s.c .

§ 1862 .

section 103 of p.l .

109-177 extended the sunset relating to "lone wolf" agents of foreign powers to december 31 , 2009 .

section 105 of p.l .

109-177 extended the maximum duration initial orders authorizing of electronic surveillances and physical searches under sections 105 ( e ) and 304 of fisa to 120 days , while extensions of such electronic surveillances and physical searches could be for up to one year .

the duration of both initial orders and extensions to orders authorizing installation and use of fisa pen registers or trap and trace devices is extended from 90 days to one year in cases where the government has certified that the information likely to be obtained is foreign intelligence information not concerning a u.s. person .

section 106 ( a ) of p.l .

109-177 permits the fbi director to delegate his authority to make an application for a production order regarding library circulation records , library patron lists , book sales records , book customer lists , firearms sales records , tax return records , educational records , or medical records containing information that would identify a person , to either the deputy director of the federal bureau of investigation or the executive assistant director for national security ( or any successor position ) .

neither the deputy director nor the executive assistant director may not further delegate such authority .

section 106 ( b ) of p.l .

109-177 requires an application for a fisa production order to include statement of the facts supporting a reasonable belief that the tangible things sought are relevant to an authorized investigation ( other than a threat assessment ) to obtain foreign intelligence information not concerning a united states person or to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities .

it provides that certain tangible things are "presumptively relevant" to such an investigation if the statement of facts shows that they pertain to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power , the activities of a suspected agent of a foreign power who is the subject of the authorized investigation , or an individual in contact with or known to a suspected agent of a foreign power who is the subject of the investigation .

section 106 ( c ) of p.l .

109-177 provides that an fisc judge must approve a fisa production order if he or she finds that the application meets the statutory requirements .

under section 106 ( d ) of p.l .

109-177 , such an ex parte order must include a particularized description of the tangible things sought , must allow a reasonable time for such things to be assembled , must notify the recipients of the production order of applicable nondisclosure requirements , and must be limited to things which may be subject to a grand jury subpoena or any other federal court order directing production of records or tangible things .

the order must not disclose that such order is issued for purposes of such an authorized investigation .

section 106 ( d ) of the reauthorization act prohibits the recipient of a production order from disclosing to anyone except those persons to whom disclosure is necessary to comply with such order ; an attorney to obtain legal advice or assistance with respect to the production of things in response to the order ; or other persons as permitted by the fbi director or his designee .

subsection 106 ( e ) of the measure requires the production order recipient , upon the request of the fbi director or his designee , to identify to the fbi those to whom such disclosure has been or will be made , unless the disclosure has been or is to be made to an attorney from whom legal advice or assistance is sought .

section 106 ( f ) of p.l .

109-177 amends 50 u.s.c .

§ 1803 to establish a petition review pool of fisc judges to hear challenges to fisa production or related nondisclosure orders , and sets forth a detailed judicial review process for consideration of such petitions .

section 106a of the reauthorization act directs the inspector general of the u.s. department of justice to conduct a comprehensive audit of the effectiveness and use , including any improper or illegal use , of the investigative authority provided to the fbi under 50 u.s.c .

1861 for calendar years 2002-2006 , and requires the results to be filed in two unclassified reports to the house and senate intelligence and judiciary committees .

section 108 ( a ) and ( b ) amend the requirements for an application and for an fisc order authorizing multipoint electronic surveillance under fisa .

subsection 108 ( c ) expands the list of committees to whom the attorney general's semiannual reports on fisa electronic surveillance to include not only the intelligence committees but also the senate judiciary committee ; and requires the report to include an additional category of information , that is , a description of the total number of applications made for orders approving such multipoint electronic surveillance .

section 109 ( a ) of p.l .

109-177 modifies the list of congressional committees receiving two semiannual reports from the attorney general on physical searches under fisa pursuant to 50 u.s.c .

§ 1826 , and requires the second of these reports to include , among other things , the total number of emergency physical searches authorized by the attorney general under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1824 ( e ) and the total number of subsequent orders approving or denying such physical searches .

section 109 ( b ) of p.l .

109-177 requires the attorney general , in his semiannual statistical report submitted to the house and senate judiciary committees on fisa pen registers and trap and trace devices , to include , among other things , the total number of pen registers and trap and trace devices whose installation and use was authorized by the attorney general on an emergency basis under 50 u.s.c .

§1843 , and the total number of subsequent orders approving or denying the installation and use of such pen registers and trap and trace devices .

section 109 ( d ) of p.l .

109-177 amends 50 u.s.c .

§ 1803 to permit the fisc and court of review to establish such rules and procedures , and take such actions , as are reasonably necessary to administer their responsibilities under this chapter .

any such rules and procedures are to be recorded and transmitted to all of the judges on the fisc and on the court of review , the chief justice of the united states , the house and senate judiciary committees , the house permanent select committee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence .

section 128 ( a ) ( 3 ) of p.l .

109-177 added 50 u.s.c .

§ 1842 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( c ) , which permits the fisc , in an order authorizing use of a pen register or trap and trace device , to direct a wire or communication service provider to provide the federal officer using the device specific subscriber or customer information upon request .

that information may include , with respect to a customer or subscriber using the service during the period of the order , the name of the customer or subscriber ; the address of the customer or subscriber ; the telephone or instrument number , or other subscriber number or identifier , of the customer or subscriber , including any temporarily assigned network address or associated routing or transmission information ; the length of the provision of service by such provider to the customer or subscriber and the types of services utilized by the customer or subscriber .

in the case of a provider of local or long distance telephone service , the information provided may include any local or long distance telephone records of the customer or subscriber ; if applicable , any records reflecting period of usage ( or sessions ) by the customer or subscriber ; any mechanisms and sources of payment for such service , including the number of any credit card or bank account utilized for payment for such service ; and , if available , with respect to any customer or subscriber of incoming or outgoing communications to or from the service covered by the order , the name of such customer or subscriber ; the address of such customer or subscriber ; the telephone or instrument number , or other subscriber number or identifier , of such customer or subscriber , including any temporarily assigned network address or associated routing or transmission information ; and the length of the provision of service by such provider to such customer or subscriber and the types of services utilized by such customer or subscriber .

section 128 ( b ) of p.l .

109-177 added the house and senate judiciary committees to the list of committees to be kept fully informed by the attorney general regarding all use of fisa pen registers and trap and trace devices .

section 506 of p.l .

109-177 amends the definition of "attorney general" under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 ( g ) to include the assistant attorney general for national security , so that the term includes "the attorney general of the united states ( or acting attorney general ) , the deputy attorney general , or , upon the designation of the attorney general , the assistant attorney general designated as the assistant attorney general for national security under section 507a of title 28 , united states code. .

section 3 of p.l .

109-178 amends the provisions in 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 ( f ) regarding judicial review of production orders and related nondisclosure orders .

in addition , section 4 of the measure amends 50 u.s.c .

§ 1861 ( d ) ( 2 ) to provide that , at the request of the fbi director or his designee , any person disclosing or intending to disclose that the fbi has sought or obtained tangible things under a fisa production order to someone in one of the three categories of individuals to whom such disclosure is permitted , shall identify to the director or his designee the person to whom the disclosure will be or has been made .

in so doing , the measure in effect deletes an exception to this identification requirement where the person to whom the disclosure is made is an attorney from whom the person making the disclosure is seeking legal advice or assistance .

in addition to examining the statutory structure in fisa , as amended , this report has explored two published decisions , one from the fisc in in re all matters submitted to the foreign intelligence surveillance court and one from the u.s. foreign intelligence court of review in in re sealed case .

because historically the decisions of the fisc have not been made public , and because the opinion of the u.s. foreign intelligence surveillance court of review discussed in this report was the first decision ever made by that court , the recent decisions of the fisc and the court of review provided a unique opportunity to observe the decision - making processes and differing perspectives of the two courts created by fisa .

the fisc's decision was set against a backdrop of a significant number of instances in which the department of justice had failed to maintain a "wall" between foreign intelligence gathering and criminal investigations .

all seven of the then sitting members of the fisc concurred in the may 17 , 2002 , order of the court , written by the then presiding judge of the court .

the fisc , in its may 17 th opinion and order , treated the attorney general's proposed 2002 "intelligence sharing procedures for foreign intelligence and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the fbi" as minimization procedures , and approved them as modified .

the modifications made by the court permitted the fbi , the criminal division , and oipr to consult with one another "to coordinate their efforts to investigate or protect against foreign attack or other grave hostile acts , sabotage , international terrorism , or clandestine intelligence activities by foreign powers or their agents. .

in so doing , the fisc permitted such cooperation and coordination to address , among other things , the exchange of information already acquired , identification of categories of information needed and being sought , prevention of either foreign intelligence gathering or criminal law enforcement investigation or interest from obstructing or hindering the other ; compromise of either investigation , and long term objectives and overall strategy of both investigations to insure that overlapping intelligence and criminal interests of the united states are both achieved .

while permitting direct consultation and coordination between components , the fisc required that oipr be invited to all consultations and , if oipr was unable to attend , the modified procedures required that oipr be "forthwith" informed in writing of the substance of the meeting so that the fisc could be notified promptly .

in addition , under the procedures as modified by the fisc , law enforcement officials were prohibited from making recommendations to intelligence officials regarding the initiation , operation , continuation or expansion of fisa searches or surveillances .

nor could law enforcement officials direct or control the use of fisa procedures to enhance criminal prosecution .

the fbi and the criminal division were given the responsibility to ensure that this did not occur , and were also required to make certain that advice intended to preserve the criminal prosecution option did not inadvertently result in the criminal division directing or controlling the investigation using fisa tools to further law enforcement objectives .

in addition , the fisc adopted a new rule 11 , dealing with criminal investigations in fisa cases , to facilitate monitoring of compliance with its may 17 , 2002 order .

this rule required all fisa applications to include informative descriptions of ongoing criminal investigations of fisa targets , as well as the substance of consultations between the fbi and criminal prosecutors at the department of justice or a u.s. attorney's office .

in its november 18 , 2002 opinion , the court of review took a starkly different view of the attorney general's proposed procedures and firmly rejected the fisc analysis and conclusions .

the issue came before the court of review as an appeal of two fisc orders , one granting an application to authorize electronic surveillance of an agent of a foreign power subject to restrictions stemming from the fisc may 17 th opinion and order and the other renewing the authorization for electronic surveillance subject to the same conditions .

the court of review held that the fisc's interpretation of the augmented 1995 procedures and the proposed 2002 procedures as minimization procedures under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1801 ( h ) was in error .

the court of review found that the fisc had misconstrued 50 u.s.c .

§§ 1801 ( h ) and 1805 and may have overstepped its constitutional authority by asserting authority to govern the internal organization and investigative procedures of the justice department .

it found that fisa , as originally enacted , did not create a dichotomy between foreign intelligence information gathering and law enforcement investigations , nor did it require maintenance of a "wall" between such investigations .

while fisa as enacted in 1978 required that a national security official certify that "the purpose" of the investigation was to gather foreign intelligence information , the court regarded the definition of "foreign intelligence information" as including evidence of criminal wrongdoing where a u.s. person is the target of the fisa investigation .

in light of the fact that the definition of "agent of a foreign power" applicable to u.s. persons involved criminal conduct , or , in the context of clandestine intelligence operations , the possibility of criminal conduct , the court distinguished "foreign intelligence crimes" from "ordinary crimes. .

in foreign intelligence crimes , intelligence gathering and criminal investigations may become intertwined .

the court of review reviewed past court decisions requiring that , in seeking a fisa order authorizing electronic surveillance , the government must demonstrate that the "primary purpose" of the surveillance was to gather foreign intelligence information and not to further law enforcement purposes .

rejecting the "primary purpose test" as applied by the fisc and the courts of appeals of several circuits , the court of review did not find it to be compelled by the statutory language of fisa as originally enacted or by the fourth amendment .

the court of review also held the fisc to have been in error in its refusal "to consider the legal significance of the patriot act's crucial amendments...." in particular , the court focused upon the change of the required certification by the national security official from a certification that "the purpose" of the surveillance was to obtain foreign intelligence information to a certification that "a significant purpose" of the surveillance was to obtain foreign intelligence information in 50 u.s.c .

§ 1804 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( b ) ; and the enactment of 50 u.s.c .

§ 1806 ( k ) , authorizing consultation and coordination by federal officers engaged in electronic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information with federal law enforcement officers .

finding that the "significant purpose" amendment recognized the existence of a dichotomy between intelligence gathering and law enforcement purposes , the court of review concluded that this test was satisfied if the government had "a measurable foreign intelligence purpose , other than just criminal prosecution of even foreign intelligence crimes. .

while the gathering of foreign intelligence information for the sole objective of criminal prosecution would be precluded by the "significant purpose" language , if "the government entertains a realistic option of dealing with the agent [of a foreign power] other than through criminal prosecution," the court found the "significant purpose" test satisfied .

although the court was of the view that , prior to passage of the usa patriot act , the fisc may well not have had authority under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1805 ( a ) ( 5 ) to inquire into anything other than the issue of "whether the information sought was a type of foreign intelligence information , in light of the significant purpose amendment of section 1804" the court of review concluded that "it seems section 1805 must be interpreted as giving the fisa court the authority to review the government's purpose in seeking the information. .

the court held that the government's purpose under 50 u.s.c .

§ 1804 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( b ) was "to be judged by the national security official's articulation and not by a fisa court inquiry into the origins of an investigation nor an examination of the personnel involved.... [i]f the fisa court has reason to doubt that the government has any real non - prosecutorial purpose in seeking foreign intelligence information it can demand further inquiry into the certifying officer's purpose — or perhaps even the attorney general's or deputy attorney general's reasons for approval. .

the court of review also considered whether fisa , as amended , passed constitutional muster under the fourth amendment .

it deemed the procedures and government showings required under fisa to come close to the minimum requirements for a warrant under the fourth amendment , if not meeting such requirements .

assuming arguendo that a fisa order was not a warrant for fourth amendment purposes , the court of review found fisa constitutional because the surveillances authorized thereunder were reasonable .

