on november 22 , 2000 , president clinton signed p.l .

106-522 ( formerly h.r .

5633 ) , an act appropriating funds for the district of columbia forfy2001 .

in one of the actions it took between election day on november 7 , 2000,and the thanksgiving holiday , the house and the senate approved h.r .

5633 by unanimous consent .

an earlier version of the act , h.r .

4942 ,was approved by the senate on october 27 , 2000 , and by the house on october 26,2000 .

however , the conference version of h.r .

4942 included fundingfor departments of commerce , justice , and state .

the president in a letter datedoctober 26 , 2000 , indicated that he would veto an otherwise acceptable district ofcolumbia appropriations act because of objections surrounding the inclusion ofcommerce , justice , and state appropriations to the act .

these include issuesrelating to immigration , tobacco litigation , hate crimes , the sale and display of socialsecurity numbers , violent crime reduction trust fund , and number of riderscharacterized by the administration as anti - environmental and anti - competitive .

on september 27 , 2000 , the senate passed its version of h.r .

4942 , thedistrict of columbia appropriations act forfy2001 , two - weeks after the houseapproved its version of the bill on september 14 , 2000 .

the house bill includes $414million in special federal payments to the district of columbia .

the senate billincludes $448 million in special federal payments to the district .

a significantpercentage of these payments is for court operations and criminal justice activities.the city's general fund budget , as passed by the council and approved by the controlboard , includes increased funding for public education and economic development.on june 7 , 2000 , the district of columbia financial responsibility and managementassistance authority approved a city council - passed budget for the 2001 fiscal year.the $5.5 billion operating budget , which must be approved by congress , includes$445.4 million in special federal payments to the district of columbia .

table 1 .

status of district of columbia appropriations: fy200 .

on november 29 , 1999 , the president signed the consolidated appropriationsact for fy2000 , p.l .

106-113 .

division a of this act appropriated funds for thedistrict of columbia for fy2000 .

since the passage of the act , district of columbia voters , their elected leadership , the district of columbia financial responsibility andmanagement assistance authority ( the authority ) , and congress have taken actions that will affect the structure and efficacy of the district government .

these changesinclude: improvements in the city's financial condition , including the city's third consecutive year with a budget surplus ; and proposed amendments in the city's home rule charter that would change the size and composition of the board of education ( board ) .

these changes have been accompanied by: a controversial 13-week delay incompletion of the city's annual financial report ; debate concerning structure,composition , and effectiveness of elected versus appointed school boards ; and theresignations of the city's chief financial officer ( cfo ) and the superintendent ofpublic schools .

in addition , the district government has had to address problemsrelated to special education , foster care , medicare fraud , and court operations .

during the last year , the authority's role has evolved from that of direct management of the daily operations of the city's nine largest agencies to one ofexercising oversight of the district government .

this transition has been aided by congressional support for mayor williams' government reform efforts , as evidencedby congressional passage of the district of columbia management reform act of1999 , p.l .

106-1 .

the act , which was signed march 5 , 1999 , transferred directadministrative authority for the district's nine largest agencies from the authority tothe mayor .

no additional funding for the district of columbia was requested by the clinton administration or the authority , and none was included in the house version of h.r .

3908 , emergency supplemental appropriations act for fy2000 .

on february 7 , 2000 , the clinton administration released its fy2000 budget recommendations .

the administration's proposed budget includes $445.5 millionin federal payments to the district of columbia .

an overwhelming percentage of thepresident's proposed federal payments and assistance to the district involve thecourts and criminal justice system .

this includes $103.5 million for the courtservices and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia , anindependent federal agency which has assumed management responsibility for thedistrict's pretrial services , adult probation , and parole supervision functions .

inaddition , the administration is requesting $103 million in support of courtoperations , and $134 million for the trustee appointed to oversee the districtcorrections systems , including the closing of the lorton correctional facility and thetransfer of its inmates into the federal prison system .

these four functions ( prisonadministration , court operations , defender services , and offender supervision ) represent 84% of $445.4 million of the president's proposed federal payments to thedistrict of columbia ( see table 2 ) .

on june 7 , 2000 , the authority approved a $5.5 billion budget for fy2001 .

the budget proposal includes a $150 million reserve fund mandated by the district ofcolumbia appropriations act of 1999 , p.l .

105-277 .

in addition , the budget wouldincrease funding for public education by $131 million , for economic development by$24 million , and for general government support by $135 million .

the budget mustbe approved by congress ( see table 2 ) .

table 2 .

district of columbia general and special federal payment funds: proposed and final fy2001appropriations ( in millions of dollars ) a funds would be provided under a separate heading - defender services for the district of columbia courts .

the committee's recommendation is based on thecourt's misuse of funds appropriated for such activities in previous years .

b funds would be provided under a separate heading - defender services for thedistrict of columbia courts .

the committee's recommendation is based on thecourt's misuse of funds appropriated for such activities in previous years .

c in previous years funds would be provided as part of district of columbia courtoperations .

the committee recommends creation of a separate appropriations toensure payment of attorneys representing indigent persons , guardianship , and abusedand neglected children in court proceedings .

d an additional $18 million would be transferred from interest bearing accounts heldby the authority on behalf of the district government .

note: brackets indicate amount subsumed under line immediately above .

total maybe off due to rounding .

e the $5 million made available for fy2001 is a carryover of unobligated fundsappropriated in fy2000 .

this amount is not included in total special federalpayments for fy2001 .

note: total may not add due to rounding .

general provisions for fy2001 .

unlike previous years , the administration's budget for fy2001 does not includegeneral provisions .

the administration and city leaders had hoped to eliminate anumber of provisions included in last year's appropriations act that they considerarcane , irrelevant , or inappropriate .

congress not only appropriates federal payments to the district to fund ceratin activities , but also reviews the district's entire budget including the expenditure oflocal funds .

the district subcommittees of both the house and senateappropriations committees must approve - and may modify - the district's budget .

house and senate versions of the district budget are reconciled in a joint conferencecommittee and must be passed by the house and the senate .

after this final actionby the house and he senate , the district's budget is forwarded to the president whocan sign it into law or veto it .

section 302 ( b ) of the congressional budget act requires that the house and senate pass a concurrent budget resolution establishing aggregate spending ceiling ( budget authority and outlays ) for each fiscal year .

these ceilings are used by houseand senate appropriators as a blueprint for allocating funds .

section 302 ( b ) of thecongressional budget act of 1974 requires appropriations committees in the houseand senate to subdivide their 302 ( b ) allocation of budget authority and outlaysamong the 13 appropriation subcommittees .

on may 4 , 2000 , the senate appropriations committee approved a 302 ( b ) suballocation for the district of $441 million .

this is $4 million less than the $445million requested by the administration for fy2001 .

the house appropriationscommittee approved 302 ( b ) suballocation of $414 million in budget authority forfy2001 for the district of columbia .

house appropriations committee .

on july 25 , 2000 , the house appropriations committee reported an originalmeasure , h.r .

4942 , appropriating funds for the district of columbiafor fy2001 ( h.rept .

106-786 ) .

federal funds .

the appropriations committee bill includes $414 million in special federal assistance .

the majority ofthese funds ( $384 million ) would be allocated to courts , prisons , and criminal justiceactivities including offender services .

in addition , the bill appropriates $14 millionfor college scholarship program , and $7 million for construction of a new yorkavenue metro station .

the bill directs an additional $18 million in funds held by theauthority to complete the $25 million federal contribution for construction of thenew york avenue station .

local funds .

the district's budget as approved by the house appropriations committee includes $4.842 billion ingeneral fund operating expenses and $654 million in enterprise funding for a total of$5.496 billion in total operating expenses for fy2001 .

the budget eliminates aproposed $3.360 million increase in funding for the authority for fy2001 .

theincrease was proposed to cover the cost of severance pay for the agency's staff .

theproposed severance packages were criticized as excessive by the houseappropriation's committee in its report ( h.rept .

106-786 ) accompanying h.r .

4942 .

the report notes that the authority proposed budget of $6.5million was more than double that of its fy2000 appropriation of $3.140 million , ata time when the authority is preparing to be phrased out of existence in anticipationof the district meeting the congressionally mandated requirement of four consecutiveyears of balanced budgets before the restoration of home rule .

general provisions .

the bill includes several social rider provisions that are viewed as controversial or intrusive by somedistrict officials and residents .

the house bill includes a provision barring thefederal funding of needle exchange programs aimed at reducing the spread of aidsand hiv among drug users .

the committee approved by voice vote an amendmentthat would allow city and private funds to be used to finance a needle exchangeprogram .

the amendment would prohibit the use of federal funds for a needleexchange program .

the committee rejected an amendment that would have restrictedthe distribution of hypodermic needles .

the provision would have prohibited thedistribution needles within 1,000 feet of a public or private day care center , schoolor university , public swimming pool , park , playground , video arcade , youth center,or near any event sponsored by these facilities .

the committee also included a provision in the appropriations bill that would allow the district to implement a provision in a proposed health insurance coveragefor contraceptive act of 2000 .

the proposed legislation would require employerswith employee health plans to pay for contraceptive services if they have aprescription drug plan , even if the employers may object to the use of contraceptiveson religious or moral grounds .

the chairman of the house district of columbiaappropriations subcommittee included a provision in the subcommittee draft of thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 that would have prohibited thecontraceptive provision from taking effect .

during the appropriations committeemarkup on july 20 , 2000 , the committee approved , by voice vote , an amendment thatwould allow the contraceptive parity provision to stand conditioned on the citycouncil drafting a "conscience clause" that would allow employers to opt out of therequirement based on religious or moral objections .

house floor action .

on september 14 , 2000 , the house passed h.r .

4942 , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy2001 by a vote of 217 ( yeas ) to 207 ( nays ) .

onjuly 26 , 2000 , the house considered h.r .

4942 , the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2001 .

the house , by voice vote , approved an amendmentintroduced by representative istook , that would transfer $100,000 for a study of thedistrict's tax structure to help finance construction of a new york avenue metrorailstation .

the total federal contribution for construction of a new york avenuemetrorail station would be $25 million including $7.1 million in direct federalcontribution and $17.9 million in transferred funds from interest bearing accountscontrol by the authority .

in addition , several other amendments were offered duringhouse consideration of h.r .

4942 , including amendments that would: prohibit the public funding of needle exchange programs ; prevent the exchange of needles within 1000 feet of certain public places that serve as gathering places for children such as schools , playgrounds,and day care centers ; and provide for penalties for persons under the age of 18 years who are found in possession of tobacco products .

during the july 26 , 2000 floor debate on h.r .

4942 , an amendment was introduced by delegate norton ( d - d.c. ) that would have eliminated a provision ( section 168 ( a ) ) of the bill that would prohibit the district from implementing the health insurance coverage for contraceptive act of 2000 .

the amendment wasrendered moot after mayor williams vetoed the legislation .

senate appropriations committee .

on september 13 , 2000 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3041 , a bill appropriating funds for the district of columbia forfy2001 ( s.rept .

106-409 ) .

federal funds .

the senate appropriations committee bill includes $445 million in special federal assistance .

the majority of these funds ( $390.2 million ) would be allocated to courts , prisons,and criminal justice activities including offender services .

in addition , the billappropriates $17 million for college scholarship program , and $25 million forconstruction of a new york avenue metro station .

this is the full federalcommitment to the project , which is expected to receive an additional $50 millionfrom the city and the private sector .

local funds .

the district's budget as approved by the senate appropriations committee includes $4.680 billion ingeneral fund operating expenses and $654 million in enterprise funding for a total of$5.334 billion in total operating expenses for fy2001 .

the budget supports aproposed $3.360 million increase in funding for the authority for fy2001 .

theincrease was proposed to cover the cost of severance pay for the agency's staff .

the authority is preparing to be phrased out of existence in anticipation of the districtmeeting the congressionally mandated requirement of four consecutive years ofbalanced budgets before the restoration of home rule .

general provisions .

the bill includes several social rider provisions that are viewed as controversial or intrusive by somedistrict officials and residents including a provision barring the federal and cityfunding of needle exchange programs aimed at reducing the spread of aids andhiv among drug users .

the committee bill would allow private funds to be usedto finance a needle exchange program .

the senate appropriations committee alsoincludes a provision that would prohibit legalizing the medical use of marijuana and restricting the use of federal and city funds for abortions to cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest , or threatens the health of the would - bemother .

the bill requires the chief financial officer to submit a comprehensive financial management policy comprising cash , debt , financial asset , emergency andcontingency reserve management , and real property tax exemption policies .

inaddition , it identifies the process for review and approval of these policies .

the billwould also amend the financial responsibility and management assistance actrelating to the hiring and dismissal of the cfo .

the senate bill proposes a 30-daycongressional review period following the mayor , city council's , and authority'sapproval of the appointment or dismissal of the cfo .

in addition , the bill identifies24 specific duties and responsibilities of the cfo .

earlier this year cfo valarie holtwas dismissed , in part , because of criticism of the office's tardiness in deliveringfinancial reports critical to the development of this year's budget plan .

the senate bill would eliminate or slowly phase out over several years the requirement that the city maintain a $150 million reserve fund .

instead , the senatebill would require that the city create two reserve funds: a contingency reserve fund ; and an emergency reserve fund .

the contingency cash reserve fund would set asideup to 3% of each year's operating budget for unforseen or nonrecurring needs suchas natural disasters , federal mandates , and revenue shortfalls .

the second reservefund , the emergency cash reserve fund , would require the city to maintain a 4%reserve of each year's operating budget for unanticipated and nonrecurring needssuch as a natural disaster or calamity .

in order to reach the 4% set - aside requirementfor the emergency cash reserve , the district would be required to deposit at least0.5% of each fiscal year's operating budget ending in fy2008 .

the district alsowould be required to deposit at least 0.5% of each year's operating budget in orderto meet the 3% contingency fund requirement by fy2006 .

senate floor action .

on september 27 , 2000 , the senate passed its version of h.r .

4942 ,substituting the language of s. 3041 , a bill appropriating funds for thedistrict of columbia for fy2001 ( s.rept .

106-409 ) .

the bill was approved by thefull senate by unanimous consent .

on october 11 , 2000 house and senate conferees reached agreement on a conference version of h.r .

4942 .

on october 26 , 2000 , the conferencecommittee on h.r .

4942 , release the conference report ( h.rept.106-1005 ) accompanying the bill .

the conference version of h.r .

4942 included appropriations for the departments of commerce , justice , and state .

themove was intended to expedite the consideration of appropriations for thesedepartments .

on october 26 , 2000 , the house approved h.r .

4942 despite the threat of a veto .

on october 27 , 2000 , the senate approved theconference bill by a vote of 48 to 43 .

in a october 26 , 2000 , letter to the housespeaker and majority leader of the senate , the president indicated that he wouldveto an otherwise acceptable district appropriations act because of the inclusion ofobjectionable provisions in the commerce , justice , and state portion of the bill .

upon returning from an election recess , congress considered and passed h.r .

5633 , an act appropriating funds for the district of columbia forfy2001 .

the bill did not include provisions appropriating funds for the departments of commerce,justice , and state that resulted in the threatened veto by president clinton .

thehouse and the senate quickly passed h.r .

5633 by unanimous consenton november 14 , 2000 , leaving unchanged the district of columbia appropriationsprovisions first approved in the conference report accompanying h.r .

4942 .

president clinton signed h.r .

5633 into law on november 22,2000 , as p.l .

106-522 .

federal funds .

p.l .

106-522 includes $444.975 billion in special federal payments to the district of columbia .

the majority of these funds ( $386 million ) would be allocated to corrections andcriminal justice activities .

the bill also includes $17 million for a college tuitionassistance program , $25 million for new york avenue metro station .

the act alsoincludes $100,000 for enforcement of law banning possession of tobacco productsby minors .

local funds .

p.l .

105-522 includes $5.5 billion in general and enterprise fund expenditures for fy2001 .

thisis $142 million more than the district budgeted in fy2000 .

the conference bill,which was vetoed , included $998.9 million budget for public education includingcharter schools .

this is a $132 million increase in funding for public education , thelargest increase in the district's budget .

other increases include $15 million foreconomic development and regulatory activities , and $8 million for public works .

these and other increases were balanced against cuts in other government activitiesincluding $14 million less for public safety activities and $85 million less inrepayment of loans and interest , and $7.9 million reduction in the payment of intereston short term borrowing .

general provisions .

p.l .

106-522 , the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 , also includes several socialrider provisions that are viewed as controversial or intrusive by some districtofficials and residents .

many of these provisions were included in previous districtof columbia appropriation acts .

p.l .

106-522 bars the use or district and federalfunds for needle exchange programs aimed at reducing the spread of aids and hivamong drug users , a provision that was included in the fy2000 appropriations for thecity .

the new public law , consistent with fy2000 appropriations language wouldallow private funds to be used to finance a needle exchange program .

the actincludes a provision that restricts the distribution of hypodermic needles .

this new provision prohibits the distribution of needles within 1,000 feet of a public or privateday care center , school or university , public swimming pool , park , playground , videoarcade , youth center , or near any event sponsored by these facilities .

p.l .

106-522 , also includes a provision that allows the district to pass and implement laws requiring the inclusion of health insurance coverage forcontraceptive prescriptions .

the legislation also includes a provision that wouldallow the contraceptive parity provision to stand so long such legislation included a"conscience clause" that would allow employers to opt out of the requirement basedon religious or moral objections .

the act also include provisions prohibiting thedecriminalization of marijuana for medical purposes , the use of funds for lobbyingfor statehood or voting representation in congress , and the use of district and federalfunds for abortion services except when the life of the mother is in danger or thepregnancy is the result of rape or incest .

these provisions were included in previousacts appropriating funds for the district of columbia .

the act also includes a newprovision that would phase out over several years the requirement that the citymaintain a $150 million reserve fund .

instead , the act includes a provision containedin the senate version of h.r .

4942 requiring the city to establish tworeserve funds: a contingency reserve fund ; and an emergency reserve fund .

thecontingency cash reserve fund would set aside up to 3% of each year's operatingbudget for unforseen or nonrecurring needs such as natural disasters , federalmandates , and revenue shortfalls .

the second reserve fund , the emergency cashreserve fund , requires the city to maintain a 4% reserve of each year's operatingbudget for unanticipated and nonrecurring needs .

in order to reach the 4% set - asiderequirement for the emergency cash reserve , the district would be required to depositat least 0.5% of each fiscal year's operating budget ending in fy2008 .

the districtalso would be required to deposit at least 0.5% of each year's operating budget inorder to meet the 3% contingency fund requirement by fy2006 .

table 3 .

district of columbia general funds: proposed and final appropriations for fy2001 ( in millions ofdollars ) a brackets indicate projected saving to be achieved and not actual expenditure .

b conference and senate versions of the bill would establish two reserve funds: a"contingency reserve fund" into which the mayor may deposit at least 3% of the totalfiscal year operating budget ; and a "emergency cash reserve fund" into which themayor may deposit at least 4% of the total fiscal year operating budget .

thesereserve funds would be established over a multi - year period and would replace thepresent reserve fund of $150 million .

