medicaid is a joint federal - state entitlement program that pays for medical assistanceprimarily for low - income persons who are aged , blind , disabled , members of families with dependentchildren , and certain other pregnant women and children .

within broad federal guidelines , each statedesigns and administers its own program .

total program outlays in fy1999 were $180.9 billion .

federal outlays were $102.5 billion and state outlays were approximately $78.4 billion .

the federalgovernment shares in a state's medicaid costs by means of a statutory formula designed to providea higher federal matching rate to states with lower per capita incomes .

in fy1999 , federal matchingrates ranged from 50% to 76% of a state's expenditures for medicaid items and services .

overall,the federal government finances about 57% of all medicaid costs .

the 105th congress made important changes to the medicaid program through the balancedbudget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) .

 ( 1 ) that legislation included provisions to achieve net medicaidsavings of about $13 billion between fy1998 and fy2002 , largely from reductions in supplementalpayments to hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of medicaid and low - income patients .

bba 97 also significantly increased the flexibility that states have to manage their medicaidprograms .

in particular , it gave states the option of requiring most beneficiaries to enroll in managedcare plans without seeking a federal waiver , and replaced federal reimbursement requirementsimposed by the boren amendments with a public notice process for setting payment rates forinstitutional services .

the act also required that the previously existing cost - based reimbursementsystem for federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) and rural health clinics ( rhcs ) be phasedout over a 6-year period .

spending items in the act included medicaid coverage for additionalchildren , and increased assistance for low - income individuals to pay medicare part b premiums .

the 106th congress made additional changes to medicaid in 1999 .

on november 29 of thatyear , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act for fy2000 ( p.l .

106-113 ) .

includedin that bill by reference was the medicare , medicaid , and schip balanced budget refinement actof 1999 ( bbra 99 ) , a bill largely comprised of medicare provisions , but which also included anumber of changes to medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ; described below ) .

in addition to technical amendments to bba 97 , bbra 99 included provisions allowing forincreased medicaid disproportionate share payments to hospitals for certain states and the districtof columbia , and for extended access to a special $500 million fund to pay for medicaid eligibilitydeterminations resulting from welfare reform for a longer period of time than allowed under previouslaw .

bbra 99 also modified the schedule for phasing out cost - based reimbursement for fqhcsand rhcs that had been included in the bba 97 .

schip , enacted in bba 97 , is targeted at uninsured children who live in families withincome below twice the federal poverty level and who would not otherwise be eligible for medicaid .

the program began in october 1997 with total federal funding of nearly $40 billion for the periodfy1998 through fy2007 .

states may use schip funds to provide coverage through healthinsurance that meets specific standards for benefits and cost - sharing ( known as separate stateprograms ) , or through expansions of eligibility under medicaid , or through a combination of bothoptions .

schip entitles states with approved schip plans to pre - determined , annual federalallotments based on a distribution formula set in law .

each state has flexibility to define the groupof targeted , low - income children who are eligible for its schip .

eligibility criteria may include , forexample , geography , age , income and resources , residency , disability status , access to other healthinsurance , and duration of eligibility for schip .

all 50 states , the district of columbia and fiveterritories had approved schip plans .

among these , 22 are medicaid expansions , 16 are new orexpanded separate state programs , and 17 will use both a medicaid expansion and a separate stateprogram .

changes to schip in bbra 99 included provisions to improve state - level data collection ; to evaluate the schip ( and medicaid ) programs with respect to outreach and enrollment practices ; and to create a clearinghouse to coordinate and consolidate federal databases and reports onchildren's health .

in addition , bbra 99 included a number of changes to the formula used todistribute federal schip funds among the states , increased the amounts available for u.s. territories,and minor technical changes .

 ( 2 ) bba 97 established the program of all - inclusive care for the elderly ( pace ) as apermanent provider under medicare and as a special optional benefit under medicaid .

individualseligible for pace are those over age 55 who require a nursing facility level of care covered in a statemedicaid program , and who meet other eligibility requirements imposed under the programagreement .

pace providers include public entities or private , not - for - profit organizations providinghealth and long - term services on a capitated basis to eligible beneficiaries .

they must provide allitems and services covered under medicare and medicaid .

there are no limits on amount , durationor scope of services and there are no cost - sharing requirements for pace enrollees .

the maternal and child health ( mch ) services block grant program ( title v of the socialsecurity act ) has three components - - formula block grants to 56 states and territories for primarycare services to mothers and children , special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) , and community integrated service systems ( ciss ) grants .

the formula grant programuses appropriated funds for a wide variety of activities , including but not limited to , capacity andsystems building , public information and education , outreach and program linkage , technicalassistance , and direct health care services where no services are available .

sprans activitiesinclude maternal and child health research , training , genetic services , hemophilia diagnostic andtreatment centers , and maternal and child health improvement projects .

ciss grants seek to reduceinfant mortality and improve the health of mothers and children through development and expansionof integrated services at the community level .

the block grant requires that states match $3 in fundsor resources for every $4 in federal funds received , and that a minimum of 30% of block grant fundsbe used to support programs for children with special health care needs .

for fy1994 forward , titlev authorizes to be appropriated $705 million annually .

bba 97 created two diabetes grant programs under the public health service act .

one grantprogram supports research into the prevention and cure of type i diabetes , or insulin - dependentdiabetes .

the second grant program supports prevention and treatment of diabetes in indians .

forfy1998 through fy2002 , each program receives $30 million annually through funds transferredfrom the schip appropriation .

bba 97 also required evaluations of these grant programs with aninterim and final report due to congress on january 1 , 2000 and january 1 , 2002 , respectively .

the ricky ray hemophilia relief fund act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-369 ) established a 5-year trustfund to make compassionate payments of $100,000 to certain individuals with blood clottingdisorders , such as hemophilia , who contracted hiv ( human immunodeficiency virus ) through theuse of anti - hemophiliac factor between july 1 , 1982 and december 31 , 1987 .

the act authorizedappropriations to the trust fund totaling $750 million .

the fund received an initial appropriation of$75 million in fy2000 .

h.r .

5661 provides a direct appropriation of $475 million forfy2001 , in addition to $105 million appropriated in the fy2001 miscellaneous appropriations act ( h.r .

5666 ) .

the trust fund has , therefore , received a total of $655 million , which isestimated to be sufficient to pay all the eligible claims .

