this crs report discusses u.s. security assistance for taiwan , formally called the republic of china ( roc ) , particularly policy issues for congress .

it also lists sales of major defense articles and services to taiwan , as approved by the president and notified to congress since 1990 .

this report uses a variety of unclassified consultations and citations in the united states and taiwan .

the following table provides information on u.s. sales ( not deliveries ) of major defense articles and services to taiwan , as approved by the president and formally notified to congress since 1990 .

based on unclassified notices and news reports , this list includes the date of notification , major item or service proposed for sale , and estimated value of the arms sales program .

the list was compiled based on unclassified notifications to congress or announcements by the administration as well as press reports .

these were primarily government - to - government foreign military sales ( fms ) programs .

before the defense department may issue letters of offer and acceptance , the president must notify major fms to congress as required by section 36 ( b ) of the arms export control act ( aeca ) , p.l .

90-629 .

if 30 calendar days pass after the formal notification and congress does not pass a joint resolution of disapproval , the executive branch is allowed to proceed with the proposed arms sales to taiwan .

not all of these approved sales were necessarily purchased by taiwan .

there have been other transfers of u.s. defense articles and services not included in this list ( that amounted to billions of dollars ) , including sales and technical assistance with smaller individual values not required to be notified to congress , those with classified notifications , and direct commercial sales ( dcs ) licensed for export by the state department and notified to congress under section 36 ( c ) of the aeca ( subject to the commercial confidentiality requirements of section 38 ( e ) ) .

there have been leases of naval vessels and other equipment .

moreover , each year , hundreds of taiwan's military personnel at different levels receive training and education at u.s. military academies , colleges , and other institutions or units .

