the nature of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions ( particularly carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions ) makes their control difficult to integrate with the u.s economy and traditional u.s. energy policy .

there is a strong linkage between industrialization and ghg emissions , particularly between energy consumption and ghg emissions .

in 2008 , energy - related activities contributed 86% of u.s. greenhouse gases .

despite the obvious interrelationship between energy policy and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , the united states has struggled to integrate the two .

for a country that has traditionally used its cheap supply of energy to substitute for more expensive labor and capital costs to compete internationally , this linkage is particularly strong , as witnessed by the nation's high ghg emissions per capita .

the country continues to increase how efficiently it uses energy to create economic goods and services , thus reducing energy - related emissions per unit of output .

two factors contributing to this trend are a two - decade preference for using natural gas ( rather than coal ) for new electric generating facilities and a steady structural change in the economy away from heavy manufacturing and toward high technology and services .

overall , however , u.s. ghg emissions rose from about 6 billion metric tons in 1990 , to about 7 billion metric tons in 2008 .

in the face of this economic reality , along with continuing scientific uncertainty , debate over a greenhouse gas ( ghg ) reduction program can be categorized by three inter - related cs: c ost , c ompetitiveness , and c omprehensiveness .

in the debate each of these terms frequently represents a "sound - bite" for a concern ; but in program development , each represents an interwoven complex of issues .

cost , as a sound - bite , commonly refers to some monetary estimate of what a ghg reduction program would require , typically expressed as a gross dollar amount or as a percentage reduction in gross domestic product for some period of time .

costs most often are cited by a number or percentage , but costs actually embrace a multifaceted set of changes in economic relationships , involving producers , consumers , and government entities .

at a program level , "costs" have many ramifications: federal outlays for research and monitoring ; regulatory program operation and oversight ; potential public and private sector increases in expenses — for example if energy prices rise ; and so on .

furthermore , in a nuanced view , net costs / benefits would be considered , as opposed to looking at costs ( or benefits ) in isolation .

but direct benefits from ghg reductions , as well as secondary benefits such as commercialization of breakthrough technologies and reductions in related more conventional pollutants ( eg , sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and mercury ) , can be difficult to quantify ( and are frequently ignored ) .

competitiveness , at the simplest level , most typically reflects concerns about what firms would be disadvantaged by cost increases as a result of ghg reduction requirements .

more broadly , however , competitiveness reflects changes in the competitive relationships of producers of goods and services — some facing serious product cost and product substitution issues , others seeking to capitalize on new markets or new cost advantages resulting from legislation .

moreover , competitiveness concerns arise at both the domestic and international levels , depending on the details of the proposed legislation .

comprehensiveness , in the debating arena , relates to the disconnect between individual national responses and a problem that is global in nature — particularly as an individual country's action or inaction affects international competitiveness and growth in ghg emissions .

specifically , if the united states were to require ghg reductions that impose costs on its industry while some other countries do not , domestic firms might be competitively disadvantaged , perhaps substantially , and global ghg emissions would not be significantly affected .

only a "comprehensive" ghg reduction requirement — all nations having to meet comparable ghg reduction requirements — would result in a "level playing field" in which no nation would be at a competitive disadvantage in world markets .

however , what would represent "comparable" ghg reduction requirements is problematic , given the diverse resource endowments and disparate economic conditions of the world's nations .

the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) specifically provides for "differentiated" responsibilities between designated developed nations and developing nations with the developing countries taking the lead .

the complexity involved in developing a fair and effective comprehensive approach to reducing ghg emissions that encompasses these features has stymied the international community for almost two decades .

because cost , competitiveness , and comprehensiveness are inter - related , c ost frequently becomes the overriding soundbite .

nevertheless , it should be recognized that the term cost alone may embody many ramifications .

costs have been a major concern in ghg policy deliberations , beginning with the united states' negotiations on , and 1992 ratification of , the united nations framework convention on climate change , and continuing to the current debate in congress .

during the protracted deliberations on the unfccc , the national academy of sciences ( nas ) released a report , policy implications of greenhouse warming , in which the expert panel stated that "the united states could reduce or offset its greenhouse gas emissions by between 10 and 40 percent of 1990 levels at low cost , or at some net savings , if proper policies are implemented. .

the nas's energy policy recommendations focused on increasing energy conservation and efficiency , incorporating greenhouse warming as a factor in future energy planning , and studying and eventually implementing "full social cost pricing" of energy .

although widely publicized and promoted , this premise was not sufficient for the u.s. to commit to firm targets and time frames for carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) reductions , as witnessed by the u.s. negotiation and ratification of the unfccc .

driven by concerns about scientific uncertainty with respect to global climate , the george h. w. bush administration — against the wishes of most environmentalists and some vocal members of congress — refused to commit to a binding agreement to reduce the nation's co 2 emissions by a specific date .

the unfccc reflects this negotiating position of the united states and some other countries in that it calls for voluntary control measures .

senate floor debate on ratification of the treaty brought out concerns by some senators about the cost of compliance , its impact on the country's competitiveness , and the comprehensiveness with respect to the developing countries — concerns that were overcome because of the non - binding nature of the reduction goals .

those arguing for more binding commitments argued that emissions controls could create jobs and enhance economic health , and that emissions were an indicator of inefficiency .

as finally negotiated , the objective of the convention is to: ... achieve ... stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system .

such a level should be achieved with a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change to ensure that food production is not threatened , and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner .

arguing that "the developed country parties should take the lead" in reducing emissions , the convention set the goal that developed countries aim toward returning their greenhouse gas emissions to their 1990 levels by the year 2000 .

in line with this goal , developed countries were to adopt national plans and policy options to mitigate climate change by reducing anthropogenic emissions and enhancing sinks .

the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact ) , p.l .

102-486 , was the principal statutory basis for programs making up the u.s. response to the unfccc .

primarily crafted as an energy policy response to the iraqi takeover of kuwait and the u.s. - led response , its energy conservation , renewable energy , and other titles were also seen as having a beneficial effect on global climate change concerns being debated at this time in international circles .

in its 1992 unfccc national action plan submission to the unfccc , the george h. w. bush administration listed 11 different titles of epact as "extremely important" to its overall strategy of reducing greenhouse gases .

the aforementioned recommendations of the nas were embodied in several sections of epact .

these sections included provisions to establish energy - efficiency standards , promote dissemination of energy - saving information , establish several national research and development programs related to deployment of energy - efficiency technologies , and authorize the department of energy ( doe ) to evaluate cost - effective energy efficiency technologies .

in addition to these activities to improve energy efficiency , epact included a separate title to incorporate global warming concerns in energy policy planning .

title xvi was designed to assist the government in making informed decisions on global warming by collecting , analyzing , and reporting information on climate change through doe .

activities included a report on the various economic , energy , social , environmental , and competitive implications of reducing greenhouse gas emissions ; developing a least - cost energy strategy designed to achieve "the stabilization and eventual reduction in the generation of greenhouse gases" ; creating a director of climate change ; and developing an inventory of greenhouse gases and early reductions in such gases .

indeed , the passage of epact was anticipated by its authors to stabilize or even reduce emissions of greenhouse gases at little cost , in line with the 1991 nas report .

as stated by the house report: the committee expects that , if fully implemented , h.r .

776 will result in a substantial reduction in u.s. greenhouse gas emissions relative to forecasted levels .

the bulk of these reductions result from the programs that will demonstrate and transfer advanced clean coal and renewable technologies abroad , and from the domestic energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives .

the provisions on electric utilities , alternatives fuels and coalbed methane are also significant .

epact's portfolio of domestic strategies and program options — technology development / transfer , financial assistance to developing countries , and least - cost solutions — closely track the provisions of the unfccc .

with the authorization of these programs and activities , epact effectively constitutes implementing legislation for the u.s. commitment made in signing and ratifying the unfccc .

it should be noted , however , that typically the programs are relatively specific , not broad authorizations ; that for many the benefit of reducing greenhouse gases is a "bonus" in achieving other goals ( eg , "substantially reduce environmental pollutants , including greenhouse gases...." [sec .

1608] ) ; and that in at least one case the act explicitly denies new authority ( i.e. , "this subsection does not provide any new data collection authority" [sec .

1605 ( a ) ] ) .

to meet the obligation of the unfccc , the george h. w. bush administration issued in december 1992 , the first u.s. plan , national action plan for global climate change .

this plan consisted primarily of ( 1 ) estimating u.s. emissions of greenhouse gases and ( 2 ) describing then - existing activities affecting them .

these activities were dominated by research initiatives supplemented by programs proposed in the national energy strategy or anticipated as resulting from the recent passage of epact , along with the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) various pollution prevention , "green" initiatives begun in 1991 .

these mostly voluntary initiatives , led by epa's "green lights" program , formed the core of the george h. w. bush administration's "no regrets" policy and followed the recommendations of the 1991 intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) report for countries to consider taking actions on global climate change that were: beneficial for reasons other than climate change and justifiable in their own right — for example , increased energy efficiency... .

economically efficient and cost - effective , in particular those that use market - based mechanisms .

able to serve multiple social , economic and environmental purposes .

flexible and phased , so that they can be easily modified to respond to increased understanding of ... climate change .

compatible with economic growth and the concept of sustainable development .

administratively practical and effective in terms of application , monitoring , and enforcement .

mindful of the obligations of both industrialized and developing countries in addressing this issue , while aware of the special needs of developing countries , in particular in the areas of financing and technology .

as codified by the national action plan , the combination of epa and doe programs were forecasted to hold u.s. greenhouse gas emissions at near their 1990 levels in the year 2000 .

emissions were projected to rise by only 1.4% - 6% over that time period , compared to a projected rise of 13% under a "business as usual" scenario .

the clinton administration followed a june 1993 white house conference on global climate change by issuing a new plan , the climate change action plan , in october 1993 .

this plan explicitly set a goal of reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels in the year 2000 ; and laid out of series of nearly 50 program activities to achieve the goal , including both enhancement of earlier programs and new , mostly voluntary , initiatives .

it was not submitted to the unfccc , but was described as the core of a forthcoming submission to meet the obligations of the convention .

in march 1994 , the clinton administration issued a technical supplement that documented the assumptions and parameters used in developing the supporting analysis for the plan .

also in 1994 the clinton administration submitted its climate action report to the convention , and a revised version was submitted in 1997 .

philosophically , the clinton action plans were similar to that developed under the george h. w. bush administration .

they were designed to foster market choices that would conserve energy , increase energy efficiency , and encourage natural gas use .

they were also designed to strengthen selected regulatory standards that concomitantly also reduced greenhouse gas emissions — such as landfill regulations that curtail methane releases .

several actions in the 1993 clinton plan expanded programs listed in the george h. w. bush administration's plan by augmenting funding or technical support to increase anticipated reductions .

other clinton proposals were new ; examples included a "golden carrot" program to induce efficiency improvements of industrial equipment , a renewable energy consortium , a program to encourage employers to replace parking subsidies with cash incentives for non - solo commuting , and a program to promote more efficient nitrogen fertilizer use .

under the 1993 clinton plan , total greenhouse gas emissions were projected to return to their 1990 levels by the year 2000 , although co 2 emissions alone would rise about 2% .

by 1997 , revisions both to the reductions expected and to the baseline being used resulted in the projection that rather than emissions returning to their 1990 levels in the year 2000 , emissions would in fact increase about 13% above 1990 levels .

the clinton administration blamed this failure to reduce emissions in 2000 to the 1990 level primarily on unanticipated economic growth and on congress not fully funding the programs .

despite this , the basic rationale of the clinton plan remained: the plan "combines an array of public - private partnerships to stimulate the deployment of existing energy - efficient technologies and accelerate the introduction of innovative technologies .

the goal of these programs was to cut co 2 emissions , while enhancing productivity domestically and u.s. competitiveness abroad. .

the echo of the 1991 nas report was clear: the cost to control greenhouse gas emissions would net out to zero , or even save money , depending on how the benefits from increased efficiency were estimated .

a central component of the unfccc was its establishment of a conference of parties ( cop ) to negotiate further agreements to counter global climate change .

the first two cops were held in berlin in 1995 and 1996 .

at cop - 1 , several industrialized countries , including the united states , expressed concern about the lack of comprehensiveness of reduction expections: that newly industrializing countries , such as brazil and china , would continue to be classified as non - annex i countries ( i.e. , developing countries , exempt from possible future legally binding reduction requirements ) despite their projected large increases in greenhouse gas emissions in the future .

this issue of exempting such countries from future binding reduction requirements took on heightened importance when ministerial participants at cop - 2 signed a declaration calling for "legally binding mid - term targets. .

such targets were the subject of cop - 3 , held in kyoto in december 1997 .

in anticipation of the kyoto negotiations , the u.s. senate debated the appropriate u.s. position vis - à - vis any legally binding agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .

on july 25 , 1997 , the senate voted 95-0 to approve senate resolution 98 ( s.res .

98 ) , expressing the sense of the senate regarding the conditions under which the united states should become a signatory to any international agreement on greenhouse gases under the unfccc .

specifically , the resolution states that the u.s. should not sign any agreement limiting developed countries' greenhouse gas emission ( eg , the united states ) unless that agreement also includes specific schedules to limit developing countries' greenhouse gas emissions over the same period .

in addition , no agreement should be signed that would "result in serious harm to the economy of the united states. .

s.res .

98 also states that any agreement sent to the senate for advice and consent should include a detailed discussion of required legislative and regulatory actions to implement the treaty and a cost analysis of an implementation strategy .

these conditions for senate consideration of a treaty illustrate the senate's concern about the cost of any agreement to the u.s. economy and consumers , the competitive effects on u.s. trade , and the environmental effectiveness of a treaty that is not comprehensive , exempting increasingly important greenhouse emitting developing countries .

by requiring re - analysis of the costs of implementing binding reduction requirements , the senate was in effect calling for a reexamination of the nas report's argument that greenhouse gas emissions could be reduced at modest cost .

that the kyoto protocol did not meet the conditions of s.res .

98 is not in dispute: it does not bind developing countries to any schedule of reductions .

for many critics , no commitment may be comprehensive until the developing world's largest emitters , china and india , sign on .

although the clinton administration signed the kyoto protocol , it did not submit it to the senate for ratification .

subsequently , the george w. bush administration abandoned both the kyoto protocol and its negotiation process .

in a june 11 , 2001 speech on global climate change , the president stated that the kyoto protocol was "fatally flawed in fundamental ways. .

a primary flaw outlined by the president was the exemption of china and other developing countries from its provisions .

this "comprehensiveness" concern was closely followed by "cost" and "competitiveness" concerns: kyoto is , in many ways , unrealistic .

many countries cannot meet their kyoto targets .

the targets themselves are arbitrary and not based upon science .

for america , complying with those mandates would have a negative economic impact with layoffs of workers and price increases for consumers .

and when you evaluate all these flaws , most reasonable people will understand that it's not sound public policy .

to respond to global climate change , president bush called for a new approach focused on the science and with flexible control mechanisms that employ market - based incentives .

among the principles that the president argued should guide such a program were the following: we must always act to ensure continued economic growth in prosperity for our citizens and for citizen throughout the world.... and finally , our approach must be based on global participation , including that of developing countries whose net greenhouse gas emissions now exceed those in the developed countries .

in its 2006 action plan submitted under unfccc , the george w. bush administration outlined six principles in building a climate change policy: be consistent with the long - term goal of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations ; be measured and continually build on new scientific data ; ensure continued economic growth and prosperity ; pursue market - based incentives and spur technological innovation ; be flexible to adjust to new information and take advantage of new technology ; and promote global participation , including developing countries .

these are principles that follow closely those that underlay the "no regrets" policy of the george h. w. bush administration and the initiatives of the clinton administration .

however , unlike the action plans developed by the george h.w .

bush and the clinton administrations , the george w. bush administration's plan made no attempt to suggest that it would achieve the unfccc goal of returning greenhouse gas emissions to their 1990 levels .

in fact , the administration's voluntary program shifted the focus from reducing greenhouse gas emissions per se to reducing the intensity of emissions per unit of economic activity .

as announced by president george w. bush in february 2002 , his voluntary plan would reduce greenhouse gas intensity in the u.s. by 18% in 2012 ( three - quarters of which would occur from projected business - as - usual trends ) ; concomitantly , greenhouse gas emissions were projected to increase .

in addition , on july 27 , 2005 , the bush administration announced formation of a six - nation asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate ( app ) .

the members are the united states , china , india , japan , australia , and south korea .

the purposes of the partnership are to create a voluntary , non - legally binding framework for international cooperation to facilitate the development , diffusion , deployment , and transfer of existing , emerging and longer term cost - effective , cleaner , more efficient technologies and practices among the partners through concrete and substantial cooperation so as to achieve practical results .

it has the goal of meeting "national pollution reduction , energy security and climate change concerns , consistent with the principles of the u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) . .

notably , unlike the kyoto protocol requirements , the partnership engages both developed and developing nations as equals .

also notably , consistent with the bush administration's rejection of the kyoto protocol's mandatory reduction requirements , the partnership's initiatives are voluntary — and as such removes any perception that costs would be imposed .

while global climate change had been an important element in the legislative drafting and debates that led to energy policy act of 1992 , global climate change was largely peripheral during the drafting of and deliberating on the bills ( predominately , h.r .

6 in both the 108 th and 109 th congresses ) that ultimately became the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) — indeed , the drafters and managers of the legislation focused on energy security and energy supply and preferred to avoid engaging in debate on climate implications .

nevertheless , some members did seek to inject explicit consideration of climate change into the debate on energy policy , and as a result , the issue of mandatory versus voluntary efforts to address global climate change was again debated .

in 2003 , a senate bill ( s. 139 ) that would have imposed a mandatory cap - and - trade greenhouse gas reduction program failed on a 43-55 vote .

in 2005 , a similar initiative was considered as an amendment during the senate debate on the energy policy act of 2005 and defeated on a 38-60 vote .

however , concern that global climate change should be addressed explicitly during the debate on energy policy in the 109 th congress led 13 senators to introduce s.amdt .

866 — a sense of the senate resolution on climate change .

the resolution finds that ( 1 ) greenhouse gases are accumulating in the atmosphere , increasing average temperatures ; ( 2 ) there is a growing scientific consensus that human activity is a substantial cause of this accumulation ; and ( 3 ) mandatory steps will be required to slow or stop the growth of greenhouse gas emissions .

based on these findings , the resolution states it is the sense of the senate that the congress should enact a comprehensive and effective national program of mandatory , market - based limits and incentives on greenhouse gases that slow , stop , and reverse the growth of such emissions .

this should be done in a manner that will not significantly harm the u.s. economy and will encourage comparable action by other countries that are our major trading partners and contributors to global emissions .

the resolution passed by voice vote after a motion to table it failed on a 43-54 vote .

as with the energy policy act of 2005 , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) included floor debates about climate change .

but also as with the earlier enactment , direct climate change initiatives were omitted in the final bill , although such provisions as those promoting energy conservation and more stringent auto efficiency standards were seen as consistent with climate change initiatives .

explicit climate change legislation progressed in the 110 th congress , however: consistent with senate amendment 866 , the committee on environment and public works reported out a revised version of s. 2191 — america's climate security act of 2007 — by an 11 to 8 vote on december 5 , 2007 .

as reported , s. 2191 was estimated to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 19% below 2005 levels by 2020 and 63% below 2005 levels by 2050 .

the bill would have capped greenhouse gas emissions from the electric generation , industrial , transportation , and natural gas sectors .

the program would have been implemented through an expansive allowance trading program to maximize opportunities for cost - effective reductions .

however , an attempt to proceed to the bill and amendments on the senate floor failed on a procedural vote .

three fundamental policy assumptions changed between the u.s. ratification of the 1992 unfccc and key events of the first decade of the 21 st century — the george w. bush administration's 2001 decision to abandon the kyoto protocol process and the 2009 negotiations at copenhagen .

first , the ratification of the unfccc was based at least partially on the premise that significant reductions could be achieved at little or no cost .

this assumption helped to reduce concern some had ( including those of the former george h.w .

bush administration ) that the treaty could have deleterious effects on u.s. competitiveness — a significant consideration because developing countries are treated differently from developed countries under the unfccc .

further ameliorating this concern , compliance with the treaty was voluntary .

while the united states could "aim" to reduce its emissions in line with the unfccc's goal , if the effort indeed involved substantial costs , the united states could fail to reach the goal ( as has happened ) without incurring any penalty under the treaty .

this flexibility would have been eliminated under the kyoto protocol with its mandatory reduction requirements .

the possibility of failure to comply with a binding commitment intensifies one's perspective on potential costs: how confident can one be in the claim that carbon reductions can be achieved at little or no costs ? .

the george w. bush administration was sufficiently concerned about potential co 2 control costs to reverse a campaign pledge to seek co 2 emissions reductions from power plants , in addition to its decision to abandon the kyoto protocol process .

while the obama administration is moving ahead on climate change initiatives , at the same time its has recognized the cost issue — for example by addressing them through efficiency gains , through a cap and trade approach , and through the voluntary goals agreed to at copenhagen .

but the technological breakthroughs on which the "low cost" presumption relies remain difficult to confirm ; for many energy alternatives the actual experience is of continuing high costs and / or limited commercialization .

but the presumption has never lacked critics ; and their views — and to some extent , experience based on alternative energy costs — have rendered the "low cost" assumption tenuous in the eyes of many .

second , theunfccc was debated and ratified at a time when salient competitiveness issues were as much focused on japan and europe as on developing nations .

these countries ratified the kyoto protocol , and the european union ( eu ) in particular has begun implementing reduction policies .

thus , the issue with u.s. competitiveness among annex i nations has been addressed .

indeed , it is the eu that has raised the prospect of a trade barrier with the united states because of the lack of u.s. carbon policies , not the other way around .

instead , those concerns about international competitiveness have refocused on rapidly growing economies in the developing world , particuarly those of india and china .

in response to these concerns , competitiveness has received specific attention in legislation introduced in both the house and senate ; legislation that contains provisions providing financial assistance to firms that might be adversely affected by climate change mandates , and requirements that could affect imports from nations without comparable climate change mandates .

and third , the unfccc was debated and ratified at a time when the developed , annex i nations dominated ghg emissions ; at that point , it was assumed comprehensiveness could be delayed as non - annex i nations pursued greater economic development and while more environmentally friendly technologies were commercialized and transfered to them .

however , time has begun to overtake this strategy .

in 2005 china passed the united states to become the world's largest emitter , and 9 of the 20 largest ghg emitting countries were non - annex i countries .

without a comprehensive approach , any reductions in emissions from developed countries could be offset by emission increases by developing countries .

the unfccc's twin goals of reducing ghg emissions and preserving the right for non - annex i nations to pursue traditional economic policies is increasingly challenged .

annex i countries' promises to provide financial and technical assistance have yet to produce the desired results , and the situation may require more fundamental changes in the relationship between annex i and non - annex i countries .

copenhagen tried to preserve the twin goals by allowing each nation to set its own emissions reduction ( annex i ) or mitigation action ( non - annex i ) goal — thereby allowing each nation to determine the costs it would accept ; and also by establishing a mechanism by which the developed nations would provide funds for ghg reduction actions by non - annex i nations .

what remains to be seen is whether any voluntary program can successfully reduce ghg emissions sufficiently to meet the goal of holding the increase in global temperatures to 2 degrees c. what also remains to be seen is whether the agreement's provision by which annex i countries set actual reduction targets , while non - annex i countries establish nationally appropriate mitigation actions , will be enough to lessen the competitiveness and comprehensiveness concerns — given that some mitigation actions , such as china's , may not necessarily actually reduce emissions .

the kyoto protocol is now being implemented , and as a policy initiative it represents an effort to resolve the failure of developed nations to voluntarily reduce emissions , as agreed to in the original unfccc .

also , the kyoto process is providing experience in programs for reducing emissions , such as the european emissions trading scheme .

the question is whether the lessons learned will inform a truly global effort beyond 2012 .

likewise , it remains to be seen what the copenhagen agreement will lead to ; just as it remains to be seen what the world's two largest emitters , china and the united states , will do — whether the goals that they have submitted under the copenhagen agreement will be met .

in ratifiying the unfccc , the united states committed itself to lead , along with other developed countries , in reducing emissions of greenhouse gases .

meeting that commitment while addressing the cost , competitiveness , and comprehensiveness issues that commitment raises has proven elusive over the past two decades .

success may depend on not only crafting appropriate domestic responses , but also on the attitudes and actions of other major greenhouse gas emitters and whether they reinforce or detract from domestic initiatives .

