there are more than 30 types of tax - exempt organizations described in the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

most tax - exempt organizations fall into one of five types: the organizations described in irc â§â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) , 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) , 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) , and 527 .

this report was developed to answer frequently asked questions about the differences among these organizations: how they are defined ; what they can and cannot do ; how they obtain exempt status ; and what kind of information they must disclose to the irs and the public .

as will be seen , the same rules often apply to the four organizations described in irc â§ 501 ( c ) , while different ones apply to 527 organizations .

for purposes of this report , the term "501 ( c ) organizations" refers to the organizations described in irc â§â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) , 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) and 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) .

it should be noted that there are many other organizations described in irc â§ 501 ( c ) and that the rules described in this report do not necessarily apply to them .

organizations that qualify for tax - exempt status may receive various types of benefits from the federal government .

these include tax and non - tax benefits .

there are some disadvantages to having tax - exempt status .

organizations may be restricted in their activities , such as their ability to participate in lobbying or political campaign activity .

additionally , organizations will have to comply with annual reporting requirements and disclose certain information to the public [see "reporting requirements" and " public disclosure of returns " sections , below] .

it is not unusual for different types of exempt organizations to form affiliates or related organizations to more effectively perform their missions .

for example , labor unions often have a related 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) scholarship fund , which is eligible to receive tax - deductible contributions , and a 527 political action committee , which can conduct campaign / endorsement activities that the union cannot legally carry on inside the union itself .

similarly , a trade association might have a lobbying affiliate , a charitable affiliate , and a political action committee .

so long as the entities carefully observe the requirements that the organizations be separate , these types of relationships are not prohibited .

in general , the organizations described in irc â§â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) , ( c ) ( 4 ) , ( c ) ( 5 ) and ( c ) ( 6 ) must apply to the irs to be recognized as tax - exempt , while 527 organizations must notify the irs of their existence .

in general , tax - exempt organizations must report information to the irs by filing information and tax returns .

while the reporting requirements are similar for 501 ( c ) organizations and 527 organizations , 527 organizations have an additional requirement to report information on their expenditures and contributions .

under irc â§ 6104 , all the 501 ( c ) organizations discussed in this report are required to make available for public inspection a copy of their three most recent information returns [form 990] and any materials relating to their applications for exempt status .

in addition , the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) added a requirement that 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations also disclose their unrelated business tax returns ( form 990-t ) .

527 organizations must meet the same requirement for their forms 990 , notification of 527 status ( form 8871 ) , and returns for disclosing contributions and expenditures ( forms 8872 ) .

with respect to form 990's schedule b , although 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations disclose the names and addresses of their substantial contributors to the irs , they are not required to disclose any identifying information to the general public unless the organization is a private foundation .

527 organizations must disclose the names and address of their substantial contributors to the irs and the public .

the other 501 ( c ) organizations do not have to disclose the information about substantial contributors to the public .

there are two parts to the public disclosure requirements .

first , the organization must make the forms and application available for public inspection during regular business hours at its principal , regional , and district offices .

if an individual makes a request to inspect the returns or application , an inspection copy must generally be provided immediately .

second , the organization must provide copies of the forms and application upon request , whether the request is made in person or in writing .

the copies must be free , but the organization is permitted to charge for copying and mailing .

if the request is made in person , the organization must generally provide the copies on the same day ; if the request is made in writing , the organization must generally respond withing 30 days .

if the organization has made its documents widely available ( eg , published them on a website ) , it is not required to respond to written requests for copies .

it must , however , still keep the information available for inspection during business hours .

an organization that fails to comply with the public inspection requirements is subject to a penalty that equals $20 per day for each day the failure continues , which is limited to $10,000 for failures relating to forms 990 and 8872 .

with the exception of the new requirement that 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations disclose their unrelated business income tax returns , an organization's income and employment tax returns are not subject to the public disclosure requirements .

any return or application that must be disclosed to the public by the organization must also be made publicly available by the irs .

all publically - available information may be obtained from the irs by using form 4506-a , request for public inspection or copy of exempt or political organization .

additionally , some of the information for 527 organizations is available on the irs website at http: / / www.irs.gov .

the irs must post electronically submitted forms 8871 and 8872 in an online database within 48 hours of their filing .

the irs also posts some 527 organizations' forms 8871 , 8872 and 990 that were submitted on paper .

the information contained in this report is summarized in the following chart .

