this report provides a brief overview of federal statutes and where to find them , in print format and on the internet .

when congress passes a law , it may amend or repeal earlier enactments or it may create new law .

newly enacted laws are published chronologically , first as separate statutes in "slip law" form and later cumulatively in the bound volumes of the statutes at large .

additionally , most statutes are also incorporated into the united states code ( u.s.c .

 ) .

the u.s.c .

and its commercial counterparts , united states code service ( u.s.c.s. ) .

and united states code annotated ( u.s.c.a. ) .

 , take the federal statutes that are of a general and permanent nature and arrange them by subject into 51 separate titles .

as the statutes that underlie the code are revised , superseded , or repealed , the provisions of the code are updated to reflect these changes .

when a piece of legislation is enacted under the procedures set forth in article 1 , section 7 of the constitution , it is characterized as a "public law" or a "private law. .

each new statute is assigned a number according to its order of enactment within a particular congress ( eg , the 10 th public law enacted in the 112 th congress was numbered as p.l .

112-10 ; the 10 th private law was numbered priv .

l. 112-10 ) .

private laws are enacted for the benefit of a named individual or entity ( eg , due to exceptional individual circumstances , congress enacts a law providing a government reimbursement to a named person who would not otherwise be eligible under general law ) .

in contrast , public laws are of general applicability and permanent and continuing in nature .

public laws form the basis of the code .

the first official publication of the law is called the slip law .

the government printing office's ( gpo's ) federal digital system ( fdsys ) provides free online access to official federal government publications .

individual slip laws in printed pamphlet form can be obtained from the gpo .

federal depository libraries , located throughout the united states , also provide free public access to federal publications and other information .

a list of federal depository libraries and their locations is accessible on the internet at http: / / catalog.gpo.gov / fdlpdir / fdlpdir.jsp .

some private and public libraries compile the laws in looseleaf binders or in microfiche collections .

slip laws ( both public laws and private laws ) are accumulated , corrected , and published at the end of each session of congress in a series of bound volumes entitled statutes at large .

the laws are cited by volume and page number ( eg , 96 stat .

1259 refers to page 1259 of volume 96 of the statutes at large ) .

researchers are most likely to resort to this publication when they are interested in the original language of a statute or in statutes that are not codified in the code , such as appropriations or private laws .

most statutes do not initiate new programs .

rather , most statutes revise , repeal , or add to existing statutes .

consider the following sequence of enactments .

in 1952 , congress passed the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( p.l .

82-414 , 66 stat .

163 ) .

this law generally consolidated and amended federal statutory law on the admission and stay of aliens in the united states and how they may become citizens .

the immigration and nationality act of 1952 was codified at title 8 of the u.s.c .

§§1 et seq .

in 1986 , congress passed the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-603 , 100 stat .

3359 ) .

section 101 of this act amended section 274 of the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( codified at 8 u.s.c §1324 ) by adding section 274a ( codified at 8 usc §1324a ) .

this new section ( section 274a ) made it unlawful for a person to hire for employment in the united states an illegal alien .

in 1996 , congress passed the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-208 , division c , 110 stat .

3009 ) .

section 412 of the 1996 act amended the employer sanctions process by requiring an employer to verify that a new employee is not an illegal alien .

as with the 1986 act , the 1996 act expressly amended the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( section 274a in this case ) and section 1324a in title 8 of the u.s.c .

 ( 8 u.s.c .

§1324a ) .

as the above sequence illustrates , the canvas upon which congress works is often an updated , stand - alone version of an earlier public law ( eg , immigration and nationality act of 1952 , as amended ) , and not the u.s. code .

on the "titles of united states code " page of the code an asterisk appears next to some of the titles .

the asterisks refer to a note that states: "this title has been enacted as positive law. .

if the title is asterisked , the code provides the authoritative version of the public law , as amended .

for example , there is no asterisk beside title 42 of the u.s.c .

thus , the provisions codified in title 42 are not authoritative .

should there be a discrepancy , a court will accept the language in the statutes at large as the authoritative source and not the code .

it should be noted that there is no substantive difference between the language of the public law as published in the statutes at large and that of the code .

it is often difficult to find current , updated versions of frequently amended public laws .

many congressional committees periodically issue committee prints containing the major public laws within their respective jurisdictions .

alternatively , the various commercial publishers , discussed herein , print updated versions of major public laws .

in addition , the amended versions of some major public laws can be found on the internet .

the united states code ( u.s.c. ) .

is the official government codification of federal legislation .

this resource has been printed by the gpo every six years since 1926 and supplemented by annual cumulative bound volumes .

the latest edition is dated 2006 .

the office of the law revision counsel of the u.s. house of representatives and fdsys provide authoritative and current online access to the u.s.c .

in the u.s.c .

 , statutes are grouped by subject into 51 titles .

each title is further organized into chapters and sections .

a listing of the titles is provided in each volume .

unlike the statutes , the code is cited by title and section number ( eg , 28 u.s.c .

§534 refers to section 534 of title 28 ) .

notes at the end of each section provide additional information , including statutory origin of the code provision ( both by public law number and statutes at large citation ) , the effective date ( s ) , a brief citation and discussion of any amendments , and cross references to related provisions .

legal resources , including federal statutes , are widely available to both scholars and the general public through the internet .

several considerations should be taken into account when using internet materials .

materials on internet sites may not be up - to - date , and it may be difficult to discern how current the material is or whether it has been revised .

it may be difficult to find current federal statutes , especially in the case of "popular name" statutes that are amended frequently .

on their websites , federal agencies do not always include the current versions of the statutes they administer , however , they may provide useful summaries and discussions of the statutes .

websites are constantly changing .

the inclusion and location of information may differ from time to time .

the address or url of a website may also change .

in addition , each website has its own search capabilities and format .

with the foregoing caveats in mind , the following are public resources for the selected statutory materials described in this report .

public laws library of congress - american memory http: / / memory.loc.gov / ammem / amlaw / lwsllink.html this page provides access to the statutes a t large from the 1 st congress ( 1789 - 1790 ) to the 43 rd congress ( 1873 - 1874 ) .

an index is also available for the first eight volumes of the statutes a t large .

library of congress: thomas http: / / thomas.loc.gov / this page provides access to the full - text of public laws from the 101 st congress ( 1989 – 1990 ) to present .

gpo's federal digital system http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / search / advanced / advsearchpage.action this page provides access to the statutes at large and public and private laws from the 104 th congress ( 1995 - 1996 ) to the present .

the "advanced search" capability enables more than one collection to be searched at a time by adding "more search criteria. .

united states code office of the law revision counsel u.s.c .

http: / / uscode.house.gov / search / criteria.shtml this page provides access to the 2006 edition and its supplements .

the page also links to the previous editions and supplements .

gpo's federal digital system http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / search / advanced / advsearchpage.action this page provides access to the 1994 through 2006 editions and their supplements .

the "advanced search" capability enables more than one collection to be searched at a time by adding "more search criteria. .

popular name index office of the law revision counsel http: / / uscode.house.gov / popularnames / popularnames.htm#lettere this page provides a list of the popular and statutory names of acts in alphabetical order .

other resources u.s. code classification tables http: / / uscode.house.gov / classification / tables.shtml this page shows where recently enacted laws will appear in the united states code and which sections of the code have been amended by those laws .

the tables only include those provisions of law that have been classified to the code .

