i n its sex discrimination decisions , the united states supreme court not only has defined the applicability of the equal protection guarantees of the constitution and the nondiscriminatory policies of federal statutes , but also has rejected the use of gender stereotypes and has continued to recognize the discriminatory effect of gender hostility in the workplace and in schools .

this report focuses on sex discrimination challenges based on the equal protection guarantees of the fourteenth and fifth amendments ; the prohibition against employment discrimination contained in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 ; and the prohibition against sex discrimination in education contained in title ix of the education amendments of 1972 .

although this report focuses on recent legal developments in each of these areas , this report also provides historical context by discussing selected landmark sex discrimination cases .

constitutional challenges that allege discrimination on the basis of sex are premised either on the equal protection guarantees of the fourteenth amendment or the equal protection component of the fifth amendment .

to maintain an equal protection challenge , government action must be established ; that is , it must be shown that the government , and not a private actor , has acted in a discriminatory manner .

while the fourteenth amendment prohibits discriminatory conduct by the states , the fifth amendment forbids such action by the federal government .

the fourteenth amendment provides , in relevant part: "no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of the citizens of the united states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws . .

although the fourteenth amendment requires equal protection , it does not preclude the classification of individuals .

the court has noted that the constitution does not require things which are "different in fact or opinion to be treated in law as though they were the same. .

a classification will not offend the constitution unless it is characterized by invidious discrimination .

the court has adopted three levels of review to establish the presence of invidious discrimination: 1 .

strict scrutiny .

this most active form of judicial review has been applied where there is either a suspect classification , such as race , national origin , or alienage , or a burdening of a fundamental interest such as privacy or marriage .

a classification will survive strict scrutiny if the government can show that it is necessary to achieving a compelling interest .

generally , statutory classifications subject to strict scrutiny are invalidated .

2 .

intermediate scrutiny .

this level of review is not as rigorous as strict scrutiny .

a classification will survive intermediate scrutiny if it is substantially related to achieving an important government objective .

sex classifications are subject to intermediate scrutiny .

3 .

rational basis review .

this least active form of judicial review allows a classification to survive an equal protection challenge if the classification is rationally related to a legitimate government interest .

this level of review is characterized by its deference to legislative judgment .

most economic regulations are subject to rational basis review .

the court's adoption of intermediate scrutiny for sex classifications did not occur until 1976 .

in craig v. boren , the court declared unconstitutional an oklahoma statute that prohibited the sale of "nonintoxicating" 3.2% beer to males under the age of 21 and to females under the age of 18 .

females between the ages of 18 and 21 , however , were allowed to purchase 3.2% beer .

although the court agreed with the state's argument that the protection of public health and safety is an important government interest , it found that the gender classification employed by the statute was not substantially related to achieving that goal .

the statistical evidence presented by the state to show that more 18 to 20-year - old males were arrested for drunk driving and that males between the ages of 17 and 21 were overrepresented among those injured in traffic accidents could not establish that the statute's gender classification was substantially related to ensuring public health and safety .

in establishing an intermediate level of review for sex classifications , the craig court identified what has been a common theme in sex discrimination cases under the fourteenth amendment: stereotypes and generalizations about the sexes .

in craig , the court acknowledged its previous invalidation of statutes that premised their classifications on misconceptions concerning the role of females .

the court's rejection of the use of stereotypes may be seen in many of the cases in this area .

the court's more recent decisions similarly allude to the use of stereotypes and generalizations .

for example , in j.e.b .

v. alabama , the court determined that the state could not use its peremptory challenges to exclude male jurors in a paternity and child support action .

in reaching its conclusion , the court reviewed the historical exclusion of women from juries because of the belief that women were "too fragile and virginal to withstand the polluted courtroom atmosphere. .

in j.e.b .

 , the court questioned the state's generalizations of male jurors being more sympathetic to the arguments of a father in a paternity action and female jurors being more receptive to the mother .

the court maintained that state actors who exercise peremptory challenges in reliance on gender stereotypes "ratify and reinforce prejudicial views of the relative abilities of men and women. .

the court feared that this discriminatory use of peremptory challenges not only would raise questions about the fairness of the entire proceeding , but also would create the impression that the judicial system had acquiesced in the denial of participation by one gender .

in u.s. v. virginia , the court conducted a more searching form of intermediate scrutiny to find unconstitutional the exclusion of women from the virginia military institute ( vmi ) .

although the court reiterated that a classification must be substantially related to an important government interest , the court also required the state to establish an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for its actions .

virginia advanced two arguments in support of vmi's exclusion of women: first , the single - sex education offered by vmi contributed to a diversity of educational approaches in virginia ; second , vmi employed a unique adversative method of training that would be destroyed if women were admitted .

after reviewing the history of virginia's educational system , the court concluded that vmi was not established or maintained to promote educational diversity .

in fact , vmi's "historic and constant plan" was to offer a unique educational benefit to only men , rather than to complement other virginia institutions by providing a single - sex educational option .

further , the court recognized virginia's historic reluctance to allow women to pursue higher education .

any interest virginia had in maintaining educational diversity seemed to be "proffered in response to litigation. .

in addressing virginia's second argument , the court expressed concern over the exclusion of women from vmi because of generalizations about their ability .

while acknowledging that most women would probably not choose the adversative method , the court maintained that some women had the will and capacity to succeed at vmi .

following j.e.b .

 , the court cautioned state actors not to rely on overbroad generalizations to perpetuate patterns of discrimination .

while the court believed that the adversative method did promote important goals , it concluded that the exclusion of women was not substantially related to achieving those goals .

after determining that vmi's exclusion of women violated the fourteenth amendment , the court reviewed the state's remedy , a separate program for women .

virginia established the virginia women's institute for leadership ( vwil ) following the adverse decision of the court of appeals .

unlike vmi , vwil did not use the adversative method because it was believed to be inappropriate for most women , and vwil lacked the faculty , facilities , and course offerings available at vmi .

because vwil was not a comparable single - sex institution for women , the court concluded that it was an inadequate remedy for the state's equal protection violations .

vmi subsequently became coeducational .

the court's most recent equal protection pronouncements with respect to sex discrimination both involved immigration issues .

in miller v. albright , the court considered a challenge to §309 of the immigration and nationality act .

the petitioner , the child of an american father and a filipino mother , contended that §309 imposed additional requirements for establishing american citizenship when a child is fathered by an american citizen outside of the united states .

for children born of a citizen mother and an alien father , citizenship is established at birth .

however , for children born of a citizen father and an alien mother , citizenship is not established until the father or the child takes affirmative steps to confirm their relationship by the child's eighteenth birthday .

in this case , the petitioner's father did not attempt to establish his relationship with his daughter until after her eighteenth birthday .

thus , the petitioner's application for citizenship was denied .

the case produced five different opinions .

while six justices agreed that the petitioner's complaint should be dismissed , they provided different reasons for this conclusion .

justices stevens and rehnquist contended that the petitioner's complaint lacked merit , maintaining that §309's distinction between "illegitimate" children of u.s. citizen mothers and "illegitimate" children of u.s. citizen fathers is permissible under heightened scrutiny because it is "eminently reasonable and justified by important government policies. .

justices o'connor and kennedy contended , however , that the distinction could withstand only rational basis review and should not satisfy the kind of heightened scrutiny justice stevens seemed to conduct .

setting aside the issue of §309's constitutionality , justices o'connor and kennedy believed that the petitioner lacked the standing necessary to even pursue her claim .

finally , justices scalia and thomas contended that the petitioner's complaint should be dismissed because the court lacks the power to confer citizenship .

having acknowledged that congress has the exclusive authority to grant citizenship , justices scalia and thomas believed that there was no need to address the constitutionality of §309 .

justices ginsburg , breyer , and souter dissented in opinions written by justices ginsburg and breyer .

in their separate opinions , justices stevens , o'connor , ginsburg , and breyer each addressed the petitioner's argument that §309 invokes gender stereotypes .

the petitioner contended that §309 relies on the belief that an american father "remains aloof from day - to - day child rearing duties," and will not be as close to his child .

justice stevens , however , maintained that the statute has a non - stereotypical purpose of ensuring the existence of a blood relationship between father and child .

justice stevens recognized that the distinction is reasonable because mothers have the opportunity to establish parentage at birth , while fathers do not always have that opportunity .

further , he contended that the distinction encourages the development of a healthy relationship between the citizen father and the foreign - born child , and fosters ties between the child and the united states .

thus , §309's additional requirements are appropriate for fathers , but unnecessary for mothers .

in their dissenting opinions , justices ginsburg and breyer contended that §309 relies on generalizations about men and women and the ties they maintain with their children .

justice ginsburg argued that §309's goals of assuring ties between the citizen father and the foreign - born child , and between the child and the united states can be achieved without reference to gender , while justice breyer argued similarly , positing a distinction between caretaker and non - caretaker parents , rather than mother and father .

in nguyen v. ins , the court considered a second challenge to §309 .

the facts in nguyen closely resembled those in miller .

nguyen , the child of a citizen father and a non - citizen mother , born out of wedlock , challenged §309 on the grounds that its differing requirements for acquiring citizenship , based on the sex of the citizen parent , violated the fifth amendment's guarantee of equal protection .

a majority of the court concluded that §309's differing requirements were justified by two important government objectives .

first , the court found that the government has an important interest in assuring that a biological parent - child relationship exists .

while a mother's relationship to a child may be established at birth or from hospital records , a father may not be present at the birth and may not be included on such records .

in this way , the court maintained , fathers and mothers are not similarly situated with regard to establishing biological parenthood .

thus , a "different set of rules ... is neither surprising nor troublesome from a constitutional perspective. .

second , the court found that the government has an important government interest in ensuring that the child and the citizen parent have some demonstrated opportunity or potential to develop a relationship "that consists of the real , everyday ties that provide a connection between child and citizen parent and , in turn , the united states. .

the opportunity for a meaningful relationship is presented to the mother at birth .

however , the father is not assured of a similar opportunity .

the court concluded that §309 ensures that an opportunity for a meaningful relationship is presented to the father before citizenship is conferred upon his child .

as a result , the court found that §309's differing requirements were substantially related to the important government interests .

the court noted that by linking citizenship to the child's youth , congress promoted an opportunity for a parent - child relationship during the formative years of the child's life .

alluding to its decision in vmi , the court maintained that the fit between the §309 requirements and the important government interests was "exceedingly persuasive. .

like the petitioner in miller , nguyen argued that §309 embodied a gender - based stereotype .

however , the court found that §309 addresses an "undeniable difference in the circumstance of the parents at the time a child is born. .

this difference is not the result of a stereotype or "a frame of mind resulting from irrational or uncritical analysis. .

rather , §309 recognizes simply that at the moment of birth , the mother's knowledge of the child is established in a way not guaranteed to the unwed father .

while the court's decisions involving sex and equal protection illustrate that it is concerned with the stereotyping of men and women , it is unclear whether it will continue to subject sex classifications and any related stereotypes to a traditional form of intermediate scrutiny .

the court's requirement of an "exceedingly persuasive justification" in vmi suggests that it may be interested in conducting a more exacting form of judicial review for sex classifications .

in his miller dissent , justice breyer emphasized the need to apply the standard established in vmi .

however , in nguyen , both the majority and the dissenting justices , in discussing an "exceeding persuasive justification," simply reiterated the traditional test that is used when applying intermediate scrutiny .

thus , it is not clear whether sex classifications in future cases will be subject to a traditional form of intermediate scrutiny or some form of heightened scrutiny .

title vii prohibits an employer from discriminating against any individual with respect to hiring or the terms and conditions of employment because of such individual's race , color , religion , sex , or national origin .

title vii applies to a broad range of employment practices , including discrimination because of sex in hiring , placement , promotion , demotion , transfer , termination , and discipline .

because the statute prohibits sex discrimination with respect to all terms and conditions of employment , discrimination regarding salary , leave , and other benefits may also violate the act .

moreover , the statute's prohibition against sex discrimination extends to cover discrimination on the basis of pregnancy .

this intention was clarified by congress when it amended title vii by enacting the pregnancy discrimination act ( pda ) .

in addition , the statute prohibits discrimination in referrals by employment agencies , actions by unions , and retaliation against employees for filing or participating in a title vii claim or for opposing an employer's discriminatory practices .

title vii contains several exceptions to the prohibition against sex discrimination , the most important of which permits otherwise discriminatory conduct that satisfies a bona fide occupational qualification ( bfoq ) .

under §703 ( e ) ( 1 ) of title vii , an employer may discriminate on the basis of "religion , sex , or national origin in those certain instances where religion , sex , or national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise. .

although a wide variety of title vii sex discrimination claims have been litigated in the courts , the major supreme court sex discrimination cases under title vii have primarily focused on the following issues: pregnancy discrimination , gender stereotypes , mixed motives , sexual harassment , employer liability , retaliation , and class action status .

these issues , as well as a discussion of the two different types of discrimination recognized under title vii , are described below .

this report , however , does not address pay discrimination claims brought under title vii or the equal pay act .

for more information on pay discrimination issues , see crs report rl31867 , pay equity: legislative and legal developments , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

title ix of the education amendments of 1972 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in educational programs and activities that receive federal funding .

until recently , title ix claims have been most common among women and girls challenging inequities in sports programs , but title ix also provides a basis for challenging sexual harassment in classrooms and on campuses .

title ix provides , in relevant part , that "[n]o person in the united states shall , on the basis of sex , be excluded from participation in , be denied the benefits of , or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.... " the court's recent decisions involving title ix address various issues , including the availability of damages , the parties that are subject to liability , the scope of retaliation claims , and the availability of other statutory remedies .

in an early title ix case , the supreme court held that the statute provides student victims with an avenue of judicial relief .

in cannon v. university of chicago , the court ruled that an implied right of action exists under title ix for student victims of sex discrimination who need not exhaust their administrative remedies before filing suit .

however , the availability of monetary damages under title ix remained uncertain until franklin v. gwinnett county public schools .

in franklin , a female high school student brought an action for damages under title ix against her school district alleging that she had been subjected to sexual harassment and abuse by a teacher .

although the harassment became known and an investigation was conducted , teachers and administrators did not act and the petitioner was subsequently discouraged from pressing charges .

the court , which found that sexual harassment by a teacher constituted discrimination on the basis of sex , held that damages were available to the sexual harassment victim if she could prove that the school district had intentionally violated title ix .

after franklin , it was clear that sexual harassment by a teacher constituted sex discrimination , but the extent to which school districts could be held liable for misconduct by its employees was less clear .

the appropriate standard for measuring a school district's liability for sexual abuse of a student by a teacher remained unsettled until the supreme court ruling in gebser v. lago vista independent school district .

in gebser , the court determined that a school district will not be held liable under title ix for a teacher's sexual harassment of a student if the school district did not have actual notice of the harassment and did not exhibit deliberate indifference to the misconduct .

the petitioner , a female high school student , was involved in a sexual relationship with one of her teachers .

unlike the situation in franklin , the school district did not have actual notice of any sexual relationship between the petitioner and the teacher until they were discovered by a police officer .

the principal of the petitioner's school did learn of inappropriate comments made by the teacher prior to the discovery , but he cautioned the teacher about such comments .

after the sexual relationship became known , the school district quickly terminated the teacher .

despite the school district's actions , the petitioner argued that the school district should be found liable on the basis of vicarious liability or constructive notice .

in requiring the school district to have actual notice of the harassment , the court discussed the absence of an express cause of action under title ix .

unlike title vii , title ix does not address damages or the particular situations in which damages are available .

while title ix does address a denial of funds for noncompliance with its provisions , it does not provide for a private right of action .

instead , a private right of action has been judicially implied .

because title ix does not contain any reference to the recovery of damages in private actions , the court reasoned that its recognition of theories of vicarious liability and constructive notice would allow an unlimited recovery where congress has not spoken .

stated differently , the court was reluctant to expand the availability of damages for such theories when title ix failed to provide initially for a private cause of action .

in this way , the court sought to refine its holding in franklin and limit those situations in which a remedy for damages would lie .

the court believed that title ix's remedial scheme would be undermined if it did not require that a school district have actual notice of a teacher's sexual harassment .

under title ix , financial assistance will not be denied until the "appropriate person or persons" have been advised of the discrimination and have failed to end the discrimination voluntarily .

an "appropriate person" is an official of the entity receiving funds who has the authority to take corrective action .

because the school district in gebser did not have actual notice of the sexual relationship , it could not have taken any steps to end the alleged discrimination .

in addition , the court stated that damages will not be available unless it is shown that a response exhibits a deliberate indifference to the discrimination ; that is , there must be "an official decision by the recipient not to remedy the violation. .

in gebser , the school district responded to the situation by first cautioning the teacher , and then terminating him once the relationship was discovered .

thus , the court concluded that the school district did not act with deliberate indifference .

davis v. monroe county board of education , decided in 1999 , addressed the standard of liability that should be imposed on school districts to remedy student - on - student harassment .

the plaintiff in davis alleged that her fifth - grade daughter had been harassed by another student over a prolonged period — a fact reported to teachers on several occasions — but that school officials had failed to take corrective action .

justice o'connor , writing for a sharply divided court , determined that the plaintiff had stated a title ix claim .

because the statute restricts the actions of federal grant recipients , however , and not the conduct of third parties , the court again refused to impose vicarious liability on the school district .

instead , "a recipient of federal funds may be liable in damages under title ix only for its own misconduct. .

school authorities' own "deliberate indifference" to student - on - student harassment could violate title ix in certain cases .

thus , the court held , where officials have "actual knowledge" of the harassment , where the "harasser is under the school's disciplinary authority," and where the harassment is so severe "that it can be said to deprive the victims of access to the educational opportunities or benefits provided by the school," the district may be held liable for damages under title ix .

while the development of sex discrimination law under title ix owes much to title vii , the davis court's recognition of student - on - student harassment highlights dramatic differences between the two statutes .

indeed , in qualifying the davis standard , the court suggested that student harassment may be far more difficult to prove than sexual harassment in employment .

beyond requiring "actual knowledge," justice o'connor cautioned that "schools are unlike adult workplaces" and disciplinary decisions of school administrators are not to be "second guess[ed]" by lower courts unless "clearly unreasonable" under the circumstances .

additionally , the majority emphasized that "[d]amages are not available for simple acts of teasing and name - calling among school children , even where these comments target differences in gender. .

in effect , davis left to school administrators the task of drawing the line between innocent teasing and actionable sexual harassment — a difficult and legally perilous task at best .

in a separate decision the same year , the court found that a private organization is not subject to title ix simply because it receives payments from entities that receive federal financial assistance .

in national collegiate athletic association v. smith , the respondent , a female graduate student , alleged that the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) discriminated against her on the basis of sex by denying her permission to play intercollegiate volleyball at two federally assisted institutions .

under ncaa rules , a graduate student is permitted to participate in intercollegiate athletics only at the institution that awarded her undergraduate degree .

the respondent , who was enrolled at two different universities for her graduate degree , argued that the ncaa granted more waivers from eligibility restrictions to male graduate students than to female graduate students .

the court concluded that the ncaa was not a recipient of title ix funds because the ncaa did not receive federal assistance either directly or through an intermediary .

instead , it received dues payments from member institutions .

the court stated , "[a]t most , the association's receipt of dues demonstrates that it indirectly benefits from the federal assistance afforded its members .

this showing , without more , is insufficient to trigger title ix coverage. .

because the court found that the ncaa was not amenable to suit , it did not address the respondent's substantive allegations of discrimination .

in 2005 , the court handed down its decision in jackson v. birmingham board of education , a case that further broadened the scope of title ix to include protection against retaliation .

in this case , which involved a girls' basketball coach who claimed that he was removed from his coaching position in retaliation for his complaints about unequal treatment of the girl's team , the court held that title ix not only encompasses retaliation claims , but also is available to individuals who complain about sex discrimination , even if such individuals themselves are not the direct victims of sex discrimination .

reasoning that "title ix's enforcement scheme would unravel" "if retaliation were not prohibited," the court concluded that "when a funding recipient retaliates against a person because he complains of sex discrimination , this constitutes intentional discrimination on the basis of sex in violation of title ix. .

more recently , the court issued a decision in fitzgerald v. barnstable school committee , a case in which the court considered whether title ix provides the exclusive statutory remedy for unlawful sex discrimination in the education context .

the lower court , concluding that title ix was the exclusive statutory remedy , had rejected a claim that the original plaintiffs filed under 42 u.s.c .

§1983 for violations of title ix and the equal protection clause of the constitution .

in a unanimous decision , the court reversed , holding that "title ix was not meant to be an exclusive mechanism for addressing gender discri mination in schools , or a substitute for § 1983 suits as a means of enforcing constitutional rights. .

as a result , plaintiffs may file claims related to sex discrimination in education under both statutes in the future .

