the conference committee for military construction appropriations printed itsconference report ( h.rept .

106-266 ) on july 27 , 1999 .

the conference report agreedto a total $8.4 billion military construction appropriation , which is $776 million lessthan current fy1999 funding .

the conference split the difference between thesenate - approved $8.3 billion and house - approved $8.5 billion amounts .

the housepassed the conference report on july 29 , 1999 , by a vote of 412-8 .

the senatepassed the conference report on august 3 , 1999 , by voice vote .

the bill became law ( p.l .

106-52 ) on august 17 , 1999 .

the department of defense ( dod ) manages the world's largest dedicatedinfrastructure , covering over 40,000 square miles of land and a physical plant worthover $500 billion .

the military construction appropriations bill provides a large partof the funding to maintain this infrastructure .

the bill funds construction projectsand real property maintenance of the active army , navy & marine corps , air force,and their reserve components ; defense - wide construction ; u.s. contributions to thenato security investment program ( formerly called the nato infrastructureprogram ) ; and military family housing operations and construction .

the bill alsoprovides funding for the base realignment and closure ( brac ) account , whichfinances most base realignment and closure costs , including construction of newfacilities for transferred personnel and functions , and environmental cleanup atclosing sites .

the military construction appropriations bill is only one of several annual pieces of legislation that provide funding for national defense .

other major legislationincludes ( 1 ) the defense appropriations bill , that provides funds for all militaryactivities of the department of defense , except for military construction ; ( 2 ) thenational defense authorization bill , that authorizes appropriations for nationaldefense ( 1 ) , and ( 3 ) the energy and water developmentappropriations bill , that providesfunding for atomic energy defense activities of the department of energy .

two otherappropriations bills , va - hud - independent agencies and commerce - justice - state,also include small amounts for national defense .

in addition , the energy and waterdevelopment appropriations bill provides funds for civil projects carried out by theu.s .

army corps of engineers .

the annual defense authorization bill authorizes all the activities in the defense appropriation measures described above .

therefore , major debates over defensepolicy and funding issues , including military construction can be also found in theauthorization bill .

since issues in the defense authorization and appropriations billsintertwine , this report highlights salient parts of the authorization bill , along with themilitary construction appropriation process .

the separate military construction appropriations bill dates to the late 1950s when a large defense build - up occurred in response to intercontinental ballisticmissile threats and the soviet launch of sputnik .

defense construction spendingsoared , as facilities were hardened , missile silos were constructed , and otherinfrastructure was built .

the appropriations committees established militaryconstruction subcommittees to deal with this new level of activity .

consequently , theseparate military construction bill was created .

the first stand - alone militaryconstruction bill was in fy1959 , p.l .

85-852 .

previously , military constructionfunding was provided through annual defense appropriations or supplementalappropriations bills .

military construction appropriations are the major , but not the sole , source of funds for facility investments by the military services and defense agencies .

thedefense appropriations bill provides some funds for real property maintenance inoperation and maintenance accounts .

in addition , funds for construction andmaintenance of morale , welfare , and recreation - related facilities are partiallyprovided through proceeds of commissaries , recreation user fees , and other income .

most funds appropriated by congress each year must be obligated in that fiscal year .

military construction appropriations are an exception , since these funds aremade available for obligation for five fiscal years .

consideration of the military construction budget starts when the president's budget is delivered to the congress in february .

for fy2000 , the presidentrequested $5.4 billion in funding for the military construction program and advanceappropriations ( 2 ) request of $3.1 billion to be scoredin fy2001 .

table 1 shows the key legislative steps necessary for the enactment of thefy2000 military construction appropriation .

table 1 .

status of military construction appropriations,fy200 .

the administration has proposed to split funding for fy2000 militaryconstruction projects between the fy2000 and the fy2001 budgets .

the budgetrequest for fy2000 is $5.4 billion , with an additional $3.1 billion in an advanceappropriations for future costs in fy2001 .

adding the fy2000 request with theadvance appropriations request brings the total value of the proposed fy2000military construction program to $8.5 billion .

this total continues a downward trendfrom the fy1996 level of $11.2 billion , the fy1997 level of $9.8 billion , the fy1998level of $9.3 billion and the fy1999 level of $8.7 billion .

the fy2000 conferencereport recommends $8.4 billion .

table 2 shows overall military construction program funding since fy1996 .

table 3 breaks down the fy2000 request and fy2000 program value byappropriations account and compares it to fy1998 and fy1999 levels .

table 4 shows congressional military construction add - ons for guard and reserve projectsfrom fy1985-1999 .

crs issue brief ib96022 .

defense acquisition reform: status and current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30002 ( pdf ) .

a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30205 .

appropriations for fy2000: defense , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30061 .

defense budget for fy2000: data summary , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 91-669 .

military construction: current controversies and long - termissues , by martin cohen and [author name scrubbed] .

u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , fy 2000 budget materials http: / / www.dtic.mil / comptroller / fy2000budget / house committee on appropriations http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations senate committee on appropriations http: / / www.senate.gov / ~appropriations / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.loc.gov / crs / products / apppage.html#la congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov general accounting office http: / / www.gao.gov office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / .

