the north slope is home to the two largest developed oil fields in north america ; and it has the largest oil field discovered in the united states in the last decade .

logistical barriers posed by harsh environmental conditions — such as extremely low temperatures , freezing and thawing of the tundra , and remoteness — have limited but not prevented exploration , drilling , and production in this region .

production facilities are necessary to extract hydrocarbons through the life of a field .

they consist of airstrips , power plants , production pads , access roads , flowlines , and crew offices and living quarters .

new developments in production field facility construction and maintenance and in production drilling techniques have reduced the footprint of oil and gas operations and should reduce environmental impacts .

a by - product of both drilling and production advances has been the reduction in oilfield solid and fluid waste volumes .

thirty years of development experience on the north slope have led to considerable advances in exploration , drilling , and production operations , and a reduction in the size of the footprint of petroleum operations in arctic environments .

these advances , many of which are used at the alpine field , would be available for use in the 1002 area of anwr , should it be opened by congress .

exploration success rates have improved dramatically , which probably would mean fewer exploration wells .

the use of 3-d seismic technology during the exploration for hydrocarbon fields and the production stages of fields on the north slope enables geologists and geophysicists to be more proficient in interpreting seismic data and in identifying the type of hydrocarbon .

and the use of computer - aided models results in fewer and better - placed wells .

partly to protect the north slope's tundra , exploration operations are conducted exclusively in the winter with extensive use of ice roads and all - terrain vehicles .

advances in seismic acquisition and processing techniques allow for permafrost exploration using vibrating instead of explosive techniques .

reductions in the size of production facilities have decreased the footprint of more recent north slope operations .

the minimum spacing between onshore wells has been reduced by about 80% , from 160 feet to 35 feet .

an average production drill site has shrunk about 85% , from 65 acres to fewer than 9 acres , and fewer dril sites are needed with new high performance drilling techniques and production drilling technology ; and reserve pits have been eliminated or used on insulated ice pads only temporarily .

north slope operators are using advanced technology to manage drilling wastes more effectively .

cleaned well cuttings can be used for construction material in roads and other gravel structures .

grind - and - inject technology can enable 100% of all drilling solid and fluid wastes to be injected into the subsurface , which eliminates the need for reserve pits .

additionally , fewer wells drilled means that less solid and fluid waste is generated .

there are supportable grounds for proponents of opening anwr to energy development to assert that the advanced technologies for oil and gas development in the arctic might significantly mitigate the effects on the environment of oil and gas operations .

but opponents assert that , notwithstanding technological improvements , facilities of any size would be an industrial site and an intrusion on the ecosystem that would use the area's natural resources , interfere with wildlife , risk spills of hazardous materials , and result in a permanent loss of wilderness .

in the final analysis , the issue of whether to open anwr to energy development remains a policy decision .

exploration within anwr section 1002 ( a ) of , the alaska national interest lands conservation act of 1980 ( anilca ) directed the department of the interior ( doi ) to assess the plant and animal resources and the hydrocarbon potential in 1.5 million acres of the coastal plain portion of anwr , referred to as the 1002 area .

this assessment included surface geological and geophysical work , but no exploration drilling .

1983-1985 oil and gas exploration programs exploration crews from 15 companies visited the 1002 area during the summers of 1983-1985 .

access by helicopter was allowed , but no ground vehicles were permitted .

the work was monitored by the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , which observed no adverse effects on fish and wildlife from geological field operations such as collection of rock samples and mapping .

the goal of the field work was to collect rock or outcrop data to better understand the rocks that could be potential reservoir and source rocks .

however , the data to determine rock type and distribution in the area were from outcrops covering only 4.0% of the 1002 area .

seismic operations were permitted during the winters of 1983-1984 and 1984-1985 , when most wildlife species were absent or present in smaller numbers .

as seismic surveys are the only exploration technique involving mechanized surface transportation , it posed the greatest possibility of adverse environmental effects .

to avoid significant adverse impacts , access was limited to one seismic contractor and activities in acutely environmentally sensitive areas were restricted .

the total distance in straight and parallel tracks called line - miles in the 2-d seismic survey was restricted to approximately 1,300 line - miles , which the fws believed was sufficient to identify potential areas for the purpose of the fleis report .

full - time fws monitors accompanied each seismic crew .

the fws effectively limited short - term adverse environmental effects , but followup studies were planned to determine the long - term impacts .

it is unclear if such studies were carried out or published .

petroleum geology anwr's 1002 area is between two known petroleum provinces , the u.s. north slope to the west and the canadian beaufort sea and mackenzie delta province to the east .

interpretation of the regional geological data collected during the summers of 1983-1985 and more recent nearby well data by the bureau of land management ( blm ) in 1991 and the u.s. geological survey in 1998 indicate that the rocks of both provinces may extend into the 1002 area ( figure 2 ) .

the approximate 1,300 line - miles of seismic data were reprocessed and reinterpreted between 1987 and 1998 .

these data , in addition to the geological data , were used in the 1991 petroleum assessments of anwr by blm and by the usgs in 1998 .

in its 1998 study , the usgs divided the 1002 area into two areas based on the type of geological structures or potential hydrocarbon traps .

the first is a structurally simple area called the undeformed area , and the second a more structurally complex , more stressed area called the deformed area .

the geological sequence in the northwestern portion of the 1002 area , the undeformed area , is similar to the sequence encountered within the north slope , which includes the prudhoe bay , kuparuk river , and alpine fields .

the southeastern deformed region of the 1002 area is more like the canadian beaufort and mackenzie delta , which include more than 36 hydrocarbon fields totaling 740 million barrels of oil and 10 trillion cubic feet of gas .

because of the geologic complexity , selection , acquisition , and interpretation of data in the deformed area is difficult compared with acquiring and interpreting data from the undeformed area .

if anwr were opened , drilling and production techniques in the deformed area would be different than in the undeformed area because of this complexity .

the determination of the existence of a source rock that can generate petroleum is important before active exploration begins in a new area .

the potential for rocks to generate hydrocarbons is determined by the organic geochemistry of the rocks on the surface or in the subsurface .

the geochemistry of the outcrops , analyzed from the outcrop samples taken in 1983-1985 , indicate that five rock sequences sampled in the 1002 area have the potential to generate oil and gas .

gas can be generated from the same rocks that produce oil , but the rocks need to have been buried to greater depths and higher temperatures .

gas can also be generated from rocks with a different organic content than the oil - generating rocks .

only one of the five rock sequences in the 1002 area is more prone to producing oil than gas .

the other four identified rock sequences are more likely to produce gas .

