the attorney general announced on june 10 , 2002 , that an american citizen , jose padilla,also known as abdullah muhajir , was arrested may 8 , 2002 upon his return from pakistan , allegedlywith the intent of participating in a plot to use a radiological bomb against unknown targets withinthe united states .

padilla was detained under a court order as a material witness until thedepartment of justice faced a court deadline to either bring charges or release him .

afterprosecutors reportedly either lacked the physical evidence or were unwilling to disclose classifiedevidence necessary to bring charges against padilla , president bush signed an unspecified orderdeclaring him to be an "enemy combatant," and transferred him to the custody of the department ofdefense .

 ( 9 ) theadministration takes the position that the law of war allows the united states to detain indefinitelymembers , agents or associates of al qaeda and other terrorist organizations , without charging themwith a crime under either criminal statutes or the international law of war , notwithstanding theiramerican citizenship .

 ( 10 ) the administration also initially denied padilla access to his attorney , ( 11 ) arguing that he has noconstitutional right to an attorney because he has not been charged with a crime .

 ( 12 ) after a federal judge ruledthat padilla has a right to challenge his detention and the concomitant right to consult with anattorney , ( 13 ) the government moved for a reconsideration of the order based on its assertion that no conditions werepossible that would permit padilla to communicate with his lawyer without endangering nationalsecurity , which the judge considered but rejected .

 ( 14 ) the judge certified the case for interlocutory appeal to the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit , including the issue of the president's authority to orderpadilla's detention as an enemy combatant .

 ( 15 ) the second circuit held that the president does not have theinherent authority , nor has congress authorized him to declare u.s. citizens captured on u.s.territory in non - combat circumstances to be enemy combatants and place them under militaryjurisdiction .

 ( 16 ) thegovernment granted padilla a limited right to meet with his attorney under government monitoringand appealed the decision to the supreme court , which heard the case on expedited appeal .

thecourt disposed of the case without deciding the merits , in a 5-4 order vacating the decision belowand holding that the petition should have been brought in the fourth circuit , where padilla is beingheld , rather than new york .

the supreme court decided the petition of another american citizen who was detainedwithout charges as an "enemy combatant" on the same day .

 ( 17 ) yaser eser hamdi , whohad been captured in afghanistan , was initially detained at the u.s .

naval station in guantã¡namobay , cuba with other detainees captured in afghanistan and other countries , until it was discoveredthat he was born in baton rouge and thus had a colorable claim to u.s. citizenship .

he was thentransferred to a high - security naval brig in south carolina , where he was held in military custodywithout criminal charge .

after an attorney filed a petition for habeas corpus on his behalf , thegovernment asserted it had the unreviewable prerogative to detain him without trial and withoutproviding him access to an attorney , as a necessary exercise of the president's authority ascommander - in - chief to provide for national security and defense .

 ( 18 ) the fourth circuit largelyagreed with the government's position , reversing two orders issued by the district court and orderingthe case dismissed .

 ( 19 ) the supreme court reversed in part , affirming the president's authority to detain hamdi as an"enemy combatant" under the aumf , but ruling that hamdi was entitled to a hearing to challengehis status .

 ( 20 ) thegovernment subsequently negotiated an agreement that would allow hamdi to return to saudiarabia , obviating the need for a hearing and a determination of whether hamdi was entitled to theassistance of counsel .

the government interprets the decision in hamdi to apply to padilla as wellas the detainees at guantã¡namo bay .

these two cases are distinguishable because the government reportedly captured hamdi onthe battlefield , possibly creating a presumption that he is a combatant .

 ( 21 ) unlike padilla , hamdi wasnot alleged to have committed specific acts which could violate the law of war if committed by alawful soldier .

padilla , even if he were a legitimate enemy combatant , would not likely be entitledto combat immunity for his alleged involvement in an enemy plot to commit acts of terrorism onamerican soil .

 ( 22 ) inboth cases , the government invoked its authority under the international law of war , and thepresident's authority as commander - in - chief , to justify the detention .

 ( 23 ) the administration alsoargued that if congressional authorization were necessary , it could be found in the authorization touse force ( "aumf" ) ( 24 ) and other statutes .

the supreme court agreed that the aumf authorizes the detention ofcombatants captured during hostilities , but did not elaborate on the scope of that authority , nor didit decide whether the president has inherent authority to order detentions or if other statutoryauthority also applied .

the law of war divides persons in the midst of an armed conflict into two broad categories:combatants and civilians .

 ( 25 ) this fundamental distinction determines the international legalstatus of persons participating in or affected by combat , and determines the legal protections affordedto such persons as well as the legal consequences of their conduct .

 ( 26 ) combatants are thosepersons who are authorized by international law to fight in accordance with the law of war on behalfof a party to the conflict .

 ( 27 ) civilians are not authorized to fight , but are protected fromdeliberate targeting by combatants as long as they do not take up arms .

in order to protect civilians,the law of war requires combatants to conduct military operations in a manner designed to minimizecivilian casualties and to limit the amount of damage and suffering to that which can be justified bymilitary necessity .

to limit exposure of civilians to military attacks , combatants are required , as ageneral rule , to distinguish themselves from civilians .

combatants who fail to distinguishthemselves from civilians run the risk of being denied the privilege to be treated as prisoners of warif captured by the enemy .

the treatment of all persons who fall into the hands of the enemy during an internationalarmed conflict depends upon the status of the person as determined under the four genevaconventions of 1949 .

under these conventions , parties to an armed conflict have the right to captureand intern enemy soldiers ( 28 ) as well as civilians who pose a danger to the security of thestate , ( 29 ) at least for theduration of hostilities .

 ( 30 ) the right to detain enemy combatants is not based on the supposition that the prisoner is "guilty" asan enemy for any crimes against the detaining power , either as an individual or as an agent of theopposing state .

pows are detained for security purposes , to remove those soldiers as a threat fromthe battlefield .

the law of war encourages capture and detention of enemy combatants as a morehumane alternative to accomplish the same purpose than by wounding or killing them .

enemy civilians may be interned for similar reasons , although the law of war does not permitthem to be treated as lawful military targets .

as citizens of an enemy country , they may be presumedto owe allegiance to the enemy .

the law of war traditionally allowed for their internment and theconfiscation of their property , not because they are suspected of having committed a crime or evenof harboring ill will toward the host or occupying power ; but rather , they are held in order to preventtheir acting on behalf of the enemy and to deprive the enemy of resources it might use in its warefforts .

congress has delegated to the president the authority , during a declared war or byproclamation , to provide for the restriction , internment or removal of enemy aliens deemeddangerous .

 ( 31 ) thesupreme court has upheld internment programs promulgated under the alien enemy act .

 ( 32 ) this form of detention,like the detention of pows , is administrative rather than punitive , and thus no criminal trial isrequired .

 ( 33 ) the detaining power may punish enemy soldiers and civilians for crimes committed priorto their capture as well as during captivity , but only after a fair trial in accordance with the relevantconvention and other applicable international law .

however , it is unclear whether a person who isneither a pow nor an enemy alien may be detained without criminal charges , ( 34 ) and if such detention islawful , what process is due the detainee under the constitution or international law .

the conditionsof detention may also give rise to the question of whether they amount to punishment , in this case,notwithstanding dod's recognition that the purpose for detaining "enemy combatants" is not punitivein nature .

 ( 35 ) .

the department of justice reads the hamdi decision as supporting its reliance primarily ontwo cases to support its contention that the constitution permits the detention without criminalcharge of american citizens under certain circumstances .

the government argues that the 1942supreme court decision in ex parte quirin ( the german saboteurs case ) and the 9th circuit case inre territo , read together , permit the government to hold american citizens as "enemy combatants,"regardless of their membership in any legitimate military organization .

others , however , distinguishthose cases as dealing with occurrences during a war declared by congress and involving membersof the armed forces of hostile enemy states , and further argue that the civil war case ex partemilligan forecloses this theory .

the following sections give a brief treatment of the twentieth - century history of theinternment of individuals who are deemed "enemies" or determined to be too dangerous to remainat liberty during a national emergency .

a survey of the history reveals that persons who areconsidered likely to act as an enemy agent on u.s. territory traditionally have been treated as alienenemies rather than prisoners of war or "enemy combatants" by the military , even when theindividuals were members of the armed forces of enemy nations , although in the latter case theymight also be tried by military commission or court - martial , if accused of a crime .

persons actingwithin the territory of the united states on behalf of an enemy state who were not members of thearmed forces of that state , including american citizens accused of spying or sabotage , have beentried in federal court .

individuals captured on the battlefield abroad have been handled in accordancewith government regulations interpreting the law of war .

 ( 80 ) .

one u.s. citizen is known to remain in custody in the united states as an enemy combatant ; the other has been released .

it was reported that one canadian citizen was being held in u.s. militarycustody in the united states after his arrest by the canadian security intelligence service .

 ( 178 ) it is unclear whetherthe man , mohamed mansour jabarah , is considered an "enemy combatant," but he reportedly washeld for interrogation and not charged with any offense .

a qatari national who was lawfully presentin the united states has also been declared an "enemy combatant" and turned over to militarycustody .

the man , ali saleh kahlah al - marri , was originally detained as a material witness ondecember 12 , 2001 , in connection with the investigation into the attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

he was later charged with credit card fraud and scheduled to stand trial beginning july 21 , 2003 .

however , on june 23 , 2003 , president bush designated him an "enemy combatant" and directed thathe be transferred to the naval consolidated brig in charleston , south carolina , where he is currentlybeing held .

his attorneys filed a petition for habeas corpus on his behalf in the district court forthe central district of illinois , which dismissed the petition for improper venue .

 ( 179 ) .

the law of war permits belligerents to seize the bodies and property of enemy aliens .

 ( 219 ) the administrationhas taken the view that the authority to detain "enemy combatants" belongs to the president alone,and that any interference in that authority by congress would thus be unconstitutional .

 ( 220 ) however , theconstitution explicitly gives to congress the power to make rules concerning captures on land andwater , ( 221 ) which haslong supported congress' authority to regulate the capture and disposition of prizes of war as wellas confiscation of property belonging to enemy aliens .

 ( 222 ) both sides point to the steel seizure case ( 223 ) to provide a framework for the courts to decide the extent ofthe president's authority .

in that korean war - era case , the supreme court declared unconstitutionala presidential order seizing control of steel mills that had ceased production due to a labor dispute,an action justified by president truman on the basis of wartime exigencies , despite the absence oflegislative authority .

justice jackson set forth the following oft - cited formula to determine whetherpresidential authority is constitutional: 1 .

when the president acts pursuant to an express orimplied authorization of congress , his authority is at its maximum , for it includes all that hepossesses in his own right plus all that congress can delegate .

 .

 .

 .

a seizure executed by thepresident pursuant to an act of congress would be supported by the strongest of presumptions andthe widest latitude of judicial interpretation , and the burden of persuasion would rest heavily uponany who might attack it .

2 .

when the president acts in absence of either acongressional grant or denial of authority , he can only rely upon his own independent powers , butthere is a zone of twilight in which he and congress may have concurrent authority , or in which itsdistribution is uncertain .

therefore , congressional inertia , indifference or quiescence maysometimes , at least as a practical matter , enable , if not invite , measures on independent presidentialresponsibility .

in this area , any actual test of power is likely to depend on the imperatives of eventsand contemporary imponderables rather than on abstract theories oflaw .

3 .

when the president takes measures incompatiblewith the expressed or implied will of congress , his power is at its lowest ebb , for then he can relyonly upon his own constitutional powers minus any constitutional powers of congress over thematter .

courts can sustain exclusive presidential control in such a case only by disabling thecongress from acting upon the subject .

presidential claim to a power at once so conclusive andpreclusive must be scrutinized with caution , for what is at stake is the equilibrium established by ourconstitutional system .

 ( 224 ) the parties disagree as to where in this formula the present actions fall .

padilla and hamdi,and their supporters generally argue that such constitutional authority , if it exists , is dependant uponspecific authorization by congress , which they argue is missing ( or even explicitly denied pursuantto 18 u.s.c .

â§ 4001 ( a ) ) in the present circumstances , placing the controversy into the second or thirdcategory above .

the government , on the other hand , sees the issue as one that falls squarely into thefirst category , asserting that congressional authority for the detentions clearly exists , although suchauthority is not strictly necessary .

congressional authority , the government argues , may be foundin the authorization to use force ( 225 ) and a provision of title 10 , u.s.c. , authorizing payment forexpenses related to detention of prisoners of war .

accordingly , the following sections examine theconstitutional authority to take prisoners in war and , if congressional authority is required , whethercongress has provided it , or , with respect to u.s. citizens , prohibited it .

congress has ample authority under article i of the constitution to regulate the capture anddetention of enemy combatants .

 ( 263 ) one bill has been introduced in the 109th congress , thedetention of enemy combatants act , h.r .

1076 , that would assert congressionalauthority to limit the detention of u.s. persons as enemy combatants to defined circumstances , aswell as address some of the due process concerns that have been raised .

while it appears thatexpress statutory authorization to detain persons arrested away from any battlefield would clarifyconstitutional separation of powers issues , some constitutional questions may remain .

the supremecourt has never expressly upheld the administrative detention or internment of u.s. citizens andnon - alien enemies during war as a preventive measure .

it appears likely that the supreme court has not issued its last word on "enemy combatants"and executive detention as a means to prosecute the war on terrorism .

 ( 287 ) lower courts that haveaddressed questions the supreme court left unanswered have not achieved a consensus , althoughit appears that the trend does not favor the expansive view of executive power urged by thegovernment .

as a consequence , the extent to which the congress has authorized the detentionwithout trial of american citizens as "enemy combatants" will likely remain an important issue fordetermining the validity of the administration's tactics .

while the broad language of theauthorization for the use of military force ( "aumf" ) ( 288 ) authorizes the use of such military force as the president deemsappropriate in order to prevent future acts of terrorism , it remains possible to argue that the aumfwas not intended to authorize the president to assert all of the war powers usually reserved forformal declarations of war .

 ( 289 ) history shows that even during declared wars , additional statutory authority has been seenas necessary to validate the detention of citizens not members of any armed forces .

courts , however,have not explicitly ruled on the point with respect to circumstances like these .

congressional activitysince the quirin decision suggests that congress did not interpret quirin as a significant departurefrom prior practice with regard to restriction of civil liberties during war .

if that is the case , it maybe that congress intended to authorize the capture and detention of individuals like hamdi - - persons captured on the battlefield during actual hostilities - - for so long as military operationsremain necessary , while withholding the authority to detain individuals like padilla - - an accusedenemy agent operating domestically - - except in accordance with regular due process of law .

ifcongress were to pass legislation authorizing the detention of persons as enemy combatants , futuredetentions would likely face fewer hurdles in court .

 ( 290 ) however , even with the express authorization of congress,constitutional due process issues seem likely to arise .

