july 1 , 2002 , marked the birth of the international criminal court ( icc ) , meaning that crimes of the appropriate caliber committed after that date could fall under the jurisdiction of the icc .

the icc is the first global permanent international court with jurisdiction to prosecute individuals for "the most serious crimes of concern to the international community. .

since its creation , the icc has received three referrals by states parties , which involved allegations of war crimes in the republic of uganda , the democratic republic of congo , and the central african republic .

the united nations security council has also referred a situation to the prosecutor — allegations of atrocities occurring in darfur , sudan .

the chief prosecutor subsequently decided to open investigations into three of the referred cases: democratic republic of the congo , republic of uganda , and darfur , sudan .

currently , five arrest warrants have been issued by the court , all in connection to the situation in northern uganda .

the united nations , many human rights organizations , and most democratic nations have expressed support for the icc .

the bush administration , however , opposes it and in may , 2002 , formally renounced any u.s. obligations under the treaty , to the dismay of the european union .

on august 2 , 2002 , president bush signed into law the american servicemembers' protection act ( aspa ) to restrict government cooperation with the icc .

the administration had earlier stressed that the united states shares the goal of the icc's supporters — promotion of the rule of law — and does not intend to take any action to undermine the icc .

while the united states initially supported the idea of creating an international criminal court and was a major participant at the rome conference , in the end , the united states voted against the statute .

nevertheless , president clinton signed the treaty december 31 , 2000 , at the same time declaring that the treaty contained "significant flaws" and that he would not submit it to the senate for its advice and consent "until our fundamental concerns are satisfied. .

the bush administration has likewise declined to submit the rome statute to the senate for ratification , and has notified the u.n. secretary general , as depositary , of the u.s. intent not to ratify the treaty .

the primary objection given by the united states in opposition to the treaty is the icc's possible assertion of jurisdiction over u.s. soldiers charged with "war crimes" resulting from legitimate uses of force , and perhaps over civilian policymakers , even if the united states does not ratify the rome statute .

the united states sought to exempt u.s. soldiers and employees from the jurisdiction of the icc based on the unique position the united states occupies with regard to international peacekeeping .

on june 30 , 2002 , the united states threatened to veto a draft u.n. resolution to extend the peacekeeping mission in bosnia because the members of the security council refused to add a guarantee of full immunity for u.s. personnel from the jurisdiction of the icc , a move that provoked strong opposition from icc supporters concerned with the viability of that institution , and that also raised some concerns about the future of united nations peacekeeping .

ultimately , however , the security council and the u.s. delegation were able to reach a compromise and adopted unanimously a resolution requesting the icc defer , for an initial period of one year , any prosecution of persons participating in u.n. peacekeeping efforts who are nationals of states not parties to the icc .

the compromise reached by the security council did not provide permanent immunity for u.s. soldiers and officials from prosecution by the icc ; rather , it invoked article 16 of the rome statute to defer potential prosecutions for one year .

some states parties to the rome statute and other supporters have argued that article 16 was meant only to apply to specific cases and was not intended to permit a blanket waiver for citizens of a specific country .

the u.n. security council adopted another resolution extending the deferral to july 1 , 2004 .

however , during the summer of 2004 , opposition to extending the deferral through 2005 eventually led the administration to drop its pursuit .

the united states continues to pursue bilateral agreements to preclude extradition by other countries of u.s. citizens to the icc .

this report outlines the main objections the united states has raised with respect to the icc and analyzes the american servicemembers' protection act ( aspa ) enacted to regulate u.s. cooperation with the icc .

the report discusses the implications for the united states , as a non - ratifying country , as the icc begins to take shape , as well as the administration's efforts to win immunity from icc jurisdiction for americans .

a description of the icc's background and a more detailed analysis of the icc's organization , jurisdiction , and procedural rules may be found in crs report rl31437 , international criminal court: overview and selected legal issues ( pdf ) .

the primary objection given by the united states in opposition to the treaty is the icc's possible assertion of jurisdiction over u.s. soldiers charged with "war crimes" resulting from legitimate uses of force , or its assertion of jurisdiction over other american officials charged for conduct related to foreign policy initiatives .

the threat of prosecution by the icc , it is argued , could impede the united states in carrying out military operations and foreign policy programs , impinging on the sovereignty of the united states .

detractors of the u.s. position depict the objection as a reluctance on the part of the united states to be held accountable for gross human rights violations or to the standard established for the rest of the world .

below , in bold type , are summarized some of the main objections voiced by u.s. officials and other critics of the rome statute .

each objection is followed by the counterpositions likely to be voiced by representatives of u.s. foreign allies that support the icc , as well as a very brief discussion of the issue .

this section is intended to familiarize the reader with the basic issues that comprise the current debate , and not to provide an exhaustive analysis of the issues .

none of the statements in the section below should be interpreted to represent the view of crs , since crs does not take positions on policy issues .

congress has passed several riders effectively precluding the use of funds to support the icc .

the 107 th congress passed the american servicemembers' protection act of 2002 ( aspa ) as title ii of the supplemental appropriations bill for 2002 , which was signed by the president on august 2 , 2002 .

the 108 th congress included a provision in the consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

108-447 , to prohibit the use of funds made available under the economic support fund heading to provide assistance to countries who are members of the icc and who have not entered into a so - called "article 98" agreement with the united states .

this provision , known as the nethercutt amendment , was reauthorized by the 109 th congress as part of the fy2006 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

3057 / p.l .

109-102 ) .

a substantially identical provision is included in h.r .

5522 , the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2007 , as passed by the house of representatives ( § 572 ) .

as a member of the preparatory commission established by the rome statute , the united states played a significant role during the drafting of rules of procedure , elements of crimes , and other documents detailing how the icc will operate .

now that the rome statute has entered into force , the preparatory commission has been replaced by the assembly of states parties ( "assembly" ) as the governing body to oversee the implementation of the rome statute .

the assembly held its first conference september 3 – 10 , 2002 , during which it adopted rules of evidence and procedure and a host of other regulations , including the methods for nominating and electing its officials .

during its subsequent session in february , the assembly elected 18 judges , who later elected canadian jurist philippe kirsch to be their president .

in april of 2003 , the assembly elected argentinian lawyer luis moreno ocampo to be the icc's first prosecutor .

the first review conference , an alternative forum for considering amendments to the statute , is to be convened in july of 2009 , seven years after the statute has entered into effect .

thereafter , review conferences may be convened from time to time by the u.n. secretary - general upon request by a majority of the states parties .

as a non - party , the united states has no vote in either body .

however , it will remain eligible to participate in both the assembly and in review conferences as an observer .

the assembly of states parties adopted procedural rules for its activities at its first conference , including rules setting forth the role of observers and other participants .

observers are entitled to participate in the deliberations of the assembly and any subsidiary bodies that might be established .

observer states will receive notifications of all meetings and records of assembly proceedings on the same basis as states parties .

they will not , however , be permitted to suggest items for the agenda or to make motions during debate , such as points of order or motions for adjournment .

thus , the united states may be able to participate substantially in assembly debates as well as proffer and respond to proposals , even if it never becomes a party to the statute .

the united states may also use its position at the united nations to communicate to the assembly of states parties .

as noted , the united states is not able to vote in these bodies so long as it does not ratify the rome statute .

it may not nominate u.s. nationals to serve as judges or cast a vote in elections for judges or the prosecutor ( or for their removal ) , or vote on the icc's budget .

it will not be able to vote on the definition of the crime of aggression or its inclusion within the jurisdiction of the icc , when the matter is considered at first review conference , or on any other amendment to the rome statute , unless it ratifies the rome statute .

the united states , as a non - party , will have no right itself to refer situations to the prosecutor for investigation ; as a permanent member of the security council , however , it could seek to influence referrals by the security council .

similarly , it may participate in security council requests to the prosecutor to defer an investigation or prosecution and to the pre - trial chamber to review a decision of the prosecutor not to investigate or prosecute .

as a non - party to the treaty , the united states is eligible , but not obligated , to cooperate with any icc investigation and prosecution ; and under the statute , the united states could , but would not be obligated to , arrest a person named in a request for provisional arrest or for arrest and surrender from the icc .

the united states also retains the right not to provide information or documents the disclosure of which would prejudice its national security interests and to refuse to consent to the disclosure by a state party of information or documents provided to that state in confidence .

finally , as a non - party , the united states is not under any obligation to contribute to the budget for the icc , except , perhaps indirectly , to the extent that the u.n. general assembly regular budget might include icc support .

perspectives differ on the impact of the icc on u.s. interests , as it begins to operate .

some see the icc as a fundamental threat to the u.s. armed forces , civilian policy makers , and u.s. defense and foreign policy .

others see it as a valuable foreign policy tool for defining and deterring crimes against humanity , a step forward in the decades - long u.s. effort to end impunity for egregious mass crimes .

debate over the icc has created a tension between enhancing the international legal justice system and encroaching on what some countries perceive as their legitimate use of force .

the review by the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia ( icty ) of allegations that nato bombing in kosovo might be deemed a war crime is illustrative of this tension .

many opponents of the icc were outraged that the issue was even considered .

they questioned the legitimacy of the tribunal's actions , and their anger was not assuaged by the tribunal's ultimate decision that there was "no basis for opening an investigation into any of those allegations or into other incidents relating to nato bombing. .

while opponents of the icc interpret this event as an indication that the icc is likely to pursue spurious and politically motivated cases against u.s. citizens , proponents of the icc see it as illustrating that similar allegations would be dismissed by the icc prosecutor .

another consideration is the practical effect that the u.s. position will have on the icc itself .

because the icc relies largely on states parties to provide mechanisms and manpower for arresting suspects and enforcing verdicts of the icc , it has been argued that the lack of u.s. participation in the icc may seriously impair the icc's ability to function .

those who believe the icc is a fundamental threat to u.s. foreign and defense policy may welcome this outcome ; while icc supporters may argue that an ineffective court could serve the interests of human rights abusers , ensuring impunity and decreasing the likelihood of future ad hoc tribunals .

the united states has enjoyed a long reputation for leadership in the struggle against impunity and the quest for universal human rights and the rule of law .

human rights organizations have expressed concern that u.s. refusal to ratify the rome statute , coupled with any actions that might undermine the icc , could cause the united states to lose the moral high ground and damage its influence world - wide , including its ability to influence the development of the law of war .

the perceived u.s. willingness to hold u.n. peacekeeping missions hostage to u.s. demands for immunity from the icc may deepen the rift between the united states and allies that support the icc .

the withholding of military assistance and other economic aid to members of the icc may also be seen as an effort to coerce countries to refuse to ratify the rome statute or to sign an article 98 agreement , which could appear to some as undermining the icc and negating the administration's stated intent to respect the decisions of other countries to join the icc .

by seemingly demanding special treatment in the form of immunity from the icc , the united states may bolster the perception of its unilateral approach to world affairs and its unwillingness to abide by the same laws that apply to other nations .

this perception could undermine u.s. efforts at coalition - building to gain international support for the present war against terrorism and operations in iraq , as well as future international endeavors .

others argue that the perception of u.s. commitment to the rule of law has little effect on countries where human rights abuses are most rampant .

despots like cambodia's pol pot or iraq's saddam hussein have not weighed possible future legal ramifications before committing massive crimes .

under this view , the establishment of the icc might have the unintended effect of hardening the resolve of ruthless tyrants who may feel they have nothing to gain by giving up their power to more democratic regimes if they fear prosecution for the crimes they committed while in power .

from this perspective , in terms of curbing human rights abuses , it does not matter whether the u.s. ratifies the rome statute , other than perhaps to provide support to an accused dictator's argument challenging the legitimacy of the icc .

according to this viewpoint , the costs to the united states appear to outweigh the benefits .

aspa § 2005 prohibits u.s. participation in peacekeeping and peace - enforcing missions established by the security council unless the president certifies and reports to the appropriate committees of congress that u.s. personnel are not placed at risk of prosecution by the icc because they are guaranteed immunity by the u.n .

resolution or because of arrangements with the host government .

the bush administration has pursued efforts in the u.n. security council and with individual states to prevent the possibility that american citizens could be prosecuted before the icc .

this effort has met with some success but also some resistance .

on july 12 , 2002 , in response to the u.s. veto of the extension of peacekeeping operations in bosnia , the u.n. security council adopted a resolution requesting a blanket deferral of prosecutions by the icc of peacekeepers from states not parties to the rome statute for a period of one year .

resolution 1422 provides , in pertinent part: acting under chapter vii of the charter of the united nations , 1 .

requests , consistent with the provisions of article 16 of the rome statute , that the icc , if a case arises involving current or former officials or personnel from a contributing state not a party to the rome statute over acts or omissions relating to a united nations established or authorized operation , shall for a twelve - month period starting 1 july 2002 not commence or proceed with investigation or prosecution of any such case , unless the security council decides otherwise ; 2 .

expresses the intention to renew the request in paragraph 1 under the same conditions each 1 july for further 12-month periods for as long as may be necessary ; 3 .

decides that member states shall take no action inconsistent with paragraph 1 and with their international obligations ; 4 .

decides to remain seized of the matter .

the resolution , which was renewed for another year under security council resolution 1487 , appeared to fall short of the president's original proposal , which would have provided permanent immunity for u.s. troops and officials from the jurisdiction of the icc .

opponents of the original proposal objected that the u.n. security council does not have the authority to "rewrite" international treaties .

the compromise invoked article 16 of the rome statute , which provides: no investigation or prosecution may be commenced or proceeded with under this statute for a period of 12 months after the security council , in a resolution adopted under chapter vii of the charter of the united nations , has requested the court to that effect ; that request may be renewed by the council under the same conditions .

although some opponents of the u.s. position had argued that article 16 was intended to be invoked only on a case - by - case basis , the language of the article does not expressly state such a requirement .

therefore , resolutions 1422 and 1487 appear to be consistent with the rome statute .

the language deferred icc action for one year ; it does not provide absolute immunity for actions occurring during the deferral period .

because the security council did not extend the deferral past july 2004 , it appears that the icc may investigate and prosecute any purported crimes under its subject matter jurisdiction that occurred at any time after the rome statute's entry into force , subject to other provisions of the rome statute .

u.s. military personnel were able to participate in the united nations mission in liberia ( unmil ) because , in authorizing the multinational force to enforce the cease - fire , the security council decided that current or former officials or personnel from a contributing state , which is not a party to the rome statute of the international criminal court , shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of that contributing state for all alleged acts or omissions arising out of or related to the multinational force or united nations stabilization force in liberia , unless such exclusive jurisdiction has been expressly waived by that contributing state .

unlike the previous arrangement with respect to the u.n. mission in bosnia , the authorization for operations in liberia appears to provide permanent immunity to u.s. participants from the jurisdiction of the icc with respect to conduct linked to the u.n. mission .

accordingly , president bush made the appropriate certification to congress under aspa § 2005 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 7424 ) .

liberia had signed the rome statute in 1998 but did not ratify it until september of 2004 .

the united states also sent troops to participate in the u.n. mission to establish peace in haiti in 2004 .

in april of 2004 , the u.n. security council established the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) .

in june of that year , president bush certified that u.s. servicemembers could safely participate because haiti had signed an article 98 agreement .

on march 31 , 2005 , the u.n. security council , acting under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , adopted resolution 1593 ( 2005 ) which refers reports about the situation in darfur , sudan ( dating back to july 1 , 2002 ) , to the icc prosecutor , luis moreno - ocampo .

this is the first time such a referral from the u.n. security council has been made .

as sudan is not a party to the icc , and has not consented to its jurisdiction , the icc jurisdiction over the case could only be established by means of a u.n.s.c .

referral .

under the icc statute , the icc is authorized , but not required , to take such a case .

the resolution , which is binding on all u.n. member states , was adopted by a vote of 11 in favor , none against and with 4 abstentions — the united states , china , algeria , and brazil .

u.s. foreign policy respecting action to address the situation in darfur was complicated by its position regarding the icc and its jurisdiction over non - member states .

in september 2004 , the united states concluded that genocide had taken place in darfur .

according to the state department , it supported the formation of the international commission of inquiry but preferred a tribunal in africa to be the mechanism of accountability for those who committed crimes in darfur .

after these proposals failed to garner sufficient support , the united states agreed to abstain from voting on the resolution ( which is not equivalent to a veto in the u.n. security council ) once language was introduced into the resolution that dealt with the sovereignty questions of concern and essentially protected u.s. nationals and other persons of non - party states outside sudan from prosecution .

the abstention did not change the fundamental objections of the united states to the icc .

although some view the decision as a sign that the administration is softening its stance with respect to the icc , it may also be seen as consistent with the u.s. support of a version of the rome statute that would have allowed the u.n. security council to refer cases involving non - states parties to the icc , but would not have allowed other states to refer cases .

at the same time , the compromise allowed the united states to show support for the need for the international community to come together and take action on the atrocities occurring in darfur .

the united states is also pursuing bilateral options for achieving protection for u.s. troops , within or outside u.n. peacekeeping arrangements , by concluding agreements similar to the status - of - forces agreements ( sofa ) routinely negotiated where u.s. troops are stationed abroad .

the united states has so far concluded 100 bilateral agreements whereby each signatory promises that it will not surrender citizens of the other signatory to the icc , unless both parties consent in advance to the surrender .

the department of state is seeking to conclude these agreements with as many states as possible , even those who are not parties to the icc and others who would not be subject to the sanctions under aspa .

the agreements are intended to make use of article 98 of the rome statute , which states: cooperation with respect to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender 1 .

the court may not proceed with a request for surrender or assistance which would require the requested state to act inconsistently with its obligations under international law with respect to the state or diplomatic immunity of a person or property of a third state , unless the court can first obtain the cooperation of that third state for the waiver of the immunity .

2 .

the court may not proceed with a request for surrender which would require the requested state to act inconsistently with its obligations under international agreements pursuant to which the consent of a sending state is required to surrender a person of that state to the court , unless the court can first obtain the cooperation of the sending state for the giving of consent for the surrender .

paragraph 1 of article 98 appears intended to retain diplomatic immunity and immunity for heads of state , while paragraph 2 seems to contemplate typical sofa arrangements , in which countries hosting members or units of the armed forces of allies agree to forego certain types of jurisdiction over the soldiers and other government officers stationed there .

the use of the term "sending state" in the second paragraph appears to indicate that it is meant to cover only persons who are sent to accomplish government business , and not citizens present in the country for personal or business reasons .

the state department reportedly sought broader application for the bilateral agreements .

in 2002 , the european council argued that parties to the icc who signed such agreements with the united states would be acting inconsistently with their obligations under the rome statute .

the european union ( eu ) , all of whose members are parties to the rome statute , initially opposed the agreements altogether , but its members reached a compromise to allow member countries to sign .

the eu issued guidelines for member countries for the acceptable terms of article 98 agreements , specifying that coverage would be limited to government representatives on official business , the united states would expressly pledge to prosecute any war crimes committed by americans , and the agreements would not contain a reciprocal promise to prevent the surrender of european citizens to the icc .

in response to the nethercutt amendment , the european council released a statement calling on president bush to make "full use of his waiver authority" and reiterated the eu stand with respect to article 98 agreements , referring to the 2002 guidelines .

despite the eu compromise , the u.s. pursuit of "immunity" has been criticized by some as unnecessary or as an outright effort to undermine the icc .

supporters of the policy note that agreements , such as sofas , that provide immunity for soldiers from prosecution in foreign courts are not unusual .

for example , the 19-member international security assistance force ( isaf ) , a joint force authorized by the u.n. security council to provide assistance to the interim government in afghanistan , included a clause providing immunity for participants in its military technical agreement with the interim government .

furthermore , supporters point out , the agreements are based on and consistent with article 98 of the rome statute , and therefore cannot be said to undermine the icc .

the practical effect of the article 98 agreements is as of yet uncertain .

the use of such agreements with host countries does not provide absolute immunity from the icc .

they would bind only countries that choose to sign , and would have the effect only of preventing the host nation from surrendering an accused to the icc for prosecution .

while the rome statute gives some discretion to states parties to honor their international obligations applicable to extradition of persons who are identified in an icc request for surrender , there does not appear to be a provision for accused persons or their states of nationality to challenge the jurisdiction of the icc based on the violation of a bilateral agreement .

therefore , states parties to the rome statute are not precluded from entering into article 98 agreements that provide for immunity of foreign troops from surrender , but if the icc were nevertheless to gain custody over the accused through other means , its jurisdiction may not be affected by the agreement .

though the administration continues to seek to conclude article 98 agreements with relevant countries , it is not clear how many more such agreements are likely to be forthcoming .

to strengthen the administration's pursuit of these agreements , congress could make more forms of aid contingent on the recipient country's agreement to protect u.s. troops from surrender to the icc , or it could enact legislation to restrict the president's discretion to grant waivers .

if further negotiations fail to garner necessary support , or in case the agreements should turn out to less effective than desired or counterproductive for other reasons , policymakers may seek alternative avenues .

one option might be to implement a policy of investigating , and if warranted , prosecuting , all crimes under the icc jurisdiction alleged to be committed by a u.s. person , thus preempting the icc through application of the complementarity principle .

such a policy , coupled with changes in u.s. statutes to broaden the jurisdiction of federal courts to cover all relevant crimes , could further insulate u.s. citizens from the reach of the icc .

the united states could seek to further enhance its reputation for conducting fair and credible investigations and trials of suspected war criminals , as well as perpetrators of crimes against humanity or genocide , through the use of consistent procedures that are as open as security considerations permit .

such a practice may help to overcome any charges that a u.s. investigation or prosecution of an accused is not "genuine" for the purposes of complementarity .

finally , some have argued that a policy of cooperation with the icc in the prosecution of persons accused of crimes that the united states agrees amount to "the most serious crimes of concern to the international community" would enhance the reputation of the united states as a promoter of human rights and the rule of law .

such a policy could take the form of passive non - interference with the icc to active assistance , including working from within the u.n. security council to refer cases to the icc .

by actively keeping the security council involved in the referral of cases , some of the predicted problems with referrals by states parties or by the prosecutor could be minimized .

on the other hand , some argue a cooperative posture with respect to the icc in the case of foreigners while pursuing immunity for u.s. citizens would be perceived as a double standard .

