a key element in u.s. policy toward africa is the potential benefit from increased trade and commercial ties between the united states and africa .

interest in increasing bilateral commerce began after the end of the apartheid era in south africa in the early 1990s .

in 1993 , congress approved the end of anti - apartheid restrictions , and later that year then - commerce secretary ron brown led a business delegation to south africa .

in subsequent years , the administration has also instituted several measures to help sub - saharan african ( ssa ) countries and increase u.s. trade and investment in the region .

at the same time , congress developed legislation that sought to improve u.s. - africa trade relations .

in the 1994 legislation to implement the uruguay round of multilateral trade agreements ( p.l .

103-465 ) , congress directed the president to develop and implement a comprehensive trade and development policy for the countries of africa , and subsequently introduced legislation to authorize a new trade and investment policy for sub - saharan africa .

in 2000 , congress approved the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ; title i , p.l .

106-200 ) .

agoa offers trade preferences and other economic benefits to ssa countries that meet certain criteria , including progress towards a market economy , respect for the rule of law , and human and worker rights .

in agoa , congress also declared that free - trade agreements should also be negotiated , where feasible , with interested ssa countries .

agoa has been amended several times since its initial enactment .

in 2002 , congress amended agoa to further increase market access for products from ssa .

in 2004 , congress passed legislation to extend agoa benefits beyond the original deadline and to clarify certain provisions .

this legislation also included directives to the president on investment initiatives and technical assistance .

congress passed legislation in 2006 to further amend agoa and extend certain provisions concerning textile and apparel imports to 2012 .

one of these provisions , the "third - country fabric provision," permits imports , subject to a cap , of apparel made in designated lesser - developed ssa countries of third - country yarns and fabrics ( meaning that the yarns and fabrics may come from any country ) .

this provision was recently extended through september 2015 .

this report examines african economic trends and u.s. trade and investment flows with ssa .

it discusses the provisions of agoa and the changes that have occurred since its enactment .

it concludes with a brief discussion of issues for congress .

the original agoa legislation , the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ; title i , trade and development act of 2000 ; p.l .

106-200 ) , was approved by congress in 2000 , to assist the economies of sub - saharan africa and to improve economic relations between the united states and the region .

the following section of this report examines the major provisions of agoa , developments since enactment , and agoa related legislation in the 112 th congress .

according to the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , over 93% of u.s. imports from ssa from agoa - eligible countries in 2010 entered the united states duty - free , either under agoa or gsp , or under zero - duty most - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariff rates .

in 2011 , u.s. imports under agoa and gsp amounted to $53.8 billion ( see table 11 ) .

in 2011 , oil and mineral fuels ( mostly crude oil ) accounted for about 93% of all u.s. imports ( by value ) under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , and about 81% of all u.s. imports from all ssa countries .

vehicles and parts were the next - largest category of agoa imports at 4% .

apparel products ( hts chapters 61 and 62 combined ) amounted to about 2% .

as shown in figure 8 , the largest portion , by far , of u.s. exports to ssa are to agoa - eligible countries .

except for decreases in 2002 and 2009-2010 , arguably due to periods of worldwide recession , these exports have increased markedly over time .

as table 13 indicates , the top destinations for u.s. products are south africa , nigeria , angola , and ghana .

section 122 of agoa directed the president to target u.s. government technical assistance and trade capacity building in agoa beneficiary countries .

this mandate includes assistance to both government and non - governmental actors .

the act directs the president to target technical assistance to governments to ( 1 ) liberalize trade and exports ; ( 2 ) harmonize laws and regulations with wto membership ; ( 3 ) engage in financial and fiscal restructuring ; and ( 4 ) promote greater agribusiness linkages .

the act also includes assistance for developing private sector business associations and networks among u.s. and sub - saharan african enterprises .

technical assistance is also to be targeted to increasing the number of reverse trade missions , increasing trade in services , addressing critical agricultural policy issues , and building capabilities of african states to participate in the world trade organization , generally , and particularly in services .

in fy2010 ( latest available data ) , the united states reported obligating approximately $588 million in trade capacity building ( tcb ) assistance to agoa countries .

of this amount , about $341 million was obligated for physical infrastructure development and $200 million on trade - related agriculture projects .

p.l .

105-200 , the original agoa legislation , contained a section encouraging exploration of new agreements to encourage trade and investment .

agoa , however , directed the president specifically toward fta negotiations , and required more concrete steps regarding potential actions to be taken to establish such an agreement .

discussion of potential partners for free trade agreements has revolved around south africa and the south african customs union ( sacu ) , but several other regional groupings are potential partners for future trade agreements with the united states .

the southern african development community ( sadc ) , the common market for eastern and southern africa ( comesa ) , the east african community ( eac ) , and the west african economic and monetary union ( waemu ) have all taken steps to begin the process of economic integration , either through trade liberalization or through steps to promote monetary union .

while these groups are being encouraged in their attempts at regional integration , they are not immediate prospects for ftas with the united states .

background on these groups appears in appendix a .

several issues may be important to congress in the oversight of agoa and in consideration of a potential renewal of the preference program .

these issues concern the diversification of beneficiary country and industry participants , the continued eligibility of certain countries for agoa benefits , the hiv / aids epidemic , and the participation of u.s. small business in agoa .

diversification of agoa exports .

while textile and manufacturing industries make up a growing part of u.s. imports under agoa , these imports are dwarfed by agoa imports from the petroleum and mining sectors .

these industries are highly capitalized and do not provide extensive employment opportunities for african workers .

agoa benefits are also concentrated in few countries .

moreover , several agoa - eligible countries export very little under the program .

increasing african economic diversification and export levels , key goals of agoa , could arguably be enhanced by continuing and potentially expanding targeted trade capacity building and technical assistance to countries in the sub - region , particularly in the sectors where economic activity and production is concentrated .

agriculture , for instance , is a crucial component of many african economies and an important source of income for african workers .

increasing agricultural exports under agoa , notably of processed goods , could help raise incomes and spur economic growth .

similarly , targeted technical assistance aimed at improving productive capacity , infrastructure , and investment policies , could also spur growth in light manufactured product exports .

eligibility standards .

a country's eligibility for agoa benefits may become a subject of controversy .

some observers feel that the president must strictly enforce eligibility requirements to ensure continued adherence to reforms .

however , others have cited the unpredictability of a country's agoa benefits from year - to - year as a source of investment risk , and have suggested minimum eligibility terms of greater than the current one - year period .

another suggestion includes allowing congress to override the president's decision to terminate agoa benefits through legislation .

several countries have been considered candidates for losing agoa eligibility .

hiv / aids .

the hiv / aids pandemic continues to destabilize the economies of africa and threatens any progress achieved by agoa as additional income is spent , not to raising living standards , but to treat a population afflicted with the disease .

due to the disease , life expectancy is falling in several agoa - eligible countries and in the region as a whole .

even with the advantages that agoa preferences confer , investors may be deterred from the region by high medical costs , by constant replacement of workers stricken with the disease and the attendant training costs , and by the destabilizing risks associated with a society containing a large , dying population .

lack of uniform trade effects reporting .

the initial agoa legislation required an annual comprehensive report on u.s. - africa trade and investment policy and on implementation of agoa .

the resulting annual report was a unique and invaluable oversight and trade trend tracking tool for policy - makers , but the reporting requirement sunsetted in 2008 .

congress may wish to consider reinstating the annual agoa reporting requirement .

small business participation .

small business accounts for about 55% of the u.s. gdp , and employs a large portion of american workers .

u.s. small businesses , however , only participate in limited trade with africa , and reportedly very few in the small business community know about agoa .

some observers have noted that u.s. small businesses may benefit from agoa , and in the process help provide avenues for diversifying african exports .

small business is also important in africa , and increased partnership may result in better participation on both continents .

there are multiple ways that u.s. agencies could become more involved in increasing awareness of agoa among the small business community , and providing opportunities for partnership .

examples include increased investment in and emphasis on the use of usaid's trade hubs as a mechanism for u.s. small business entrance into africa , or an increased small business emphasis within the mandate of the u.s. foreign commercial service .

the provision of appropriations adequate to enable greater cs compliance with the original agoa goal of deploying at least 20 cs officers in not less than 10 african countries could also further attainment of the goals laid out under agoa .

appendix a .

regional economic integration among sub - saharan africa nations southern african development community ( sadc ) this group is composed of the nations of angola , botswana , democratic republic of the congo , lesotho , madagascar , malawi , mauritius , mozambique , namibia , south africa , swaziland , tanzania , zambia , and zimbabwe .

originally formed by front - line states to lessen economic dependence on the apartheid regime in south africa , the group expanded to include south africa in 1994 .

the 1996 protocol on trade committed each signatory to remove duties and non - tariff barriers to sadc members within 12 years , to provide national treatment for each other's goods , and to bind existing tariffs at current levels .

common market for eastern and southern africa ( comesa ) founded in 1982 as the preferential trade area of eastern and southern africa , current member states of the comesa include burundi , comoros , democratic republic of the congo , eritrea , ethiopia , kenya , madagascar , malawi , mauritius , rwanda , seychelles , sudan , swaziland , uganda , zambia , and zimbabwe .

the goal of comesa is to attain a "fully integrated , competitive , regional economic community with high standards of living for all its people ready to merge into an african economic community. .

the goal of monetary union by 2025 is expected to be advanced by the introduction of limited currency convertibility and improved coordination of fiscal and monetary policy during this time period .

east african community ( eac ) comprised of burundi , kenya , rwanda , tanzania , and uganda , this organization sought to revive historic regional integration arrangements that had existed since 1917 .

this cooperation broke down in the 1970s due to widespread transshipments and the varied economic paths of its participants .

the community was established once again by the three original members ( kenya , tanzania , and uganda ) in 1999 .

on july 1 , 2010 , the community established an eac common market providing for free movement of goods , labor , services and capital within the region .

in the agreement , the partner states agreed to eliminate tariff , non - tariff , and technical barriers to trade ; harmonize and mutually recognize standards ; implement a common trade policy ; and ease cross - border movement of persons through an integrated border management system .

west african economic and monetary union ( waemu ) waemu is made up of benin , burkina faso , côte d'ivoire , mali , niger , senegal , togo , and guinea - bissau , the sole non - francophone member .

this grouping was originally created to promote economic integration among countries that share the cfa franc ( communauté financière africaine ) , a currency formerly tied to the french franc prior to its disappearance in 2000 ( but still backed by the french treasury ) .

the member states have espoused the long - term goal of a full economic union with a common market , macroeconomic convergence , regulatory harmonization , and a common investment policy .

a preferential tariff arrangement was concluded for member states in 1995 , and a customs union with a common external tariff of 22% became operational in 2000 .

waemu countries have established a common accounting system , periodic reviews of member countries' macroeconomic policies , a regional stock exchange , and the legal and regulatory framework for a regional banking system .

appendix b. u.s. – ssa trade relationshi .

