since 2001 , foreign aid spending in east asia has grown markedly , largely due to counterterrorism efforts in the philippines and indonesia .

the philippines , a major non - nato ally , and indonesia , a democratizing nation with the world's largest muslim population , are home to several insurgency movements and radical islamist organizations , some with ties to al qaeda , such as the abu sayyaf group ( philippines ) and jemaah islamiyah ( indonesia ) .

usaid's programs in east asia also aim to address the conditions that may give rise to radical ideologies and terrorism , such as poverty and unemployment , lack of education , failing governments , political disenfranchisement , and violent conflict .

in october 2003 , the bush administration launched education programs in muslim communities in the philippines and in indonesia as part of its regional counterterrorism efforts .

among east asia and the pacific ( eap ) countries ( excluding the pacific island nations ) , in fy2007 , indonesia was the largest recipient of u.s. foreign aid , particularly esf , health , and development assistance ( csh and da ) , followed by the philippines .

the philippines was the region's largest beneficiary of foreign military financing ( fmf ) and international military education and training ( imet ) .

counter - narcotics and law enforcement assistance ( incle ) were provided to indonesia , the philippines , laos , and thailand .

indonesia , cambodia , and the philippines were the largest recipients of non - proliferation , anti - terrorism , de - mining , and related programs ( nadr ) .

vietnam , as one of 15 focus countries under the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , received $118 million from the global hiv / aids initiative ( ghai ) account between 2005 and 2007 and is to receive $86 million in 2008 .

see figures 5 and 6 .

u.s. assistance also finances several eap regional programs .

estimated funding for such programs in fy2007 was $27 million , a slight decrease from that provided in fy2006 .

most of the funding — approximately 75% — supports economic growth efforts .

in addition , the united states contributes to the developing asian institutions fund as part of the establishment of a free trade area of the asia - pacific .

the second largest regional aid objective is the advancement of peace and security ( nearly 20% of regional program funding ) , including the following aid activities: counterterrorism , counternarcotics , fighting transnational crime , non - proliferation , and maritime cooperation .

the third largest aid area is democracy - building .

key u.s. foreign aid objectives in south asia include combating terrorism , developing bilateral military ties , and reducing the social and economic sources of political instability and extremist religious and political thinking .

these causes include lack of accountable governance , inter - ethnic conflict , poverty , disease , and illiteracy .

prior to september 2001 , south asia was the smallest regional recipient of u.s. non - food assistance .

since the war on terrorism began , counterterrorism and related funding for south asia , especially afghanistan and pakistan , have made the region a relatively large recipient of humanitarian , development , and economic assistance and the second - largest beneficiary of military assistance after the middle east .

before 2002 , india and bangladesh were the largest recipients of u.s. bilateral aid in south asia .

following pakistan's participation in operation enduring freedom ( oef ) in afghanistan , the country became the largest beneficiary of u.s. foreign assistance in the region after afghanistan , followed by india .

see figure 7 .

regional programs focus upon economic growth , combating terrorism , and fighting international crime .

the south asia regional fund ( $5 million in fy2007 ) promotes economic growth through addressing energy needs in south asia , such as assisting countries to find energy resources and facilitating trade in energy .

the south and central asia regional fund ( $1.5 million in fy2007 ) supports programs related to border control and education .

the aim of assistance for education is to help reduce religious and ideological extremism and regional instability .

in addition to problems related to development , corruption remains a key obstacle to social , economic , and political advancement in bangladesh .

the largest elements of the u.s. aid presence involve public health , including hiv / aids programs , and basic education .

in other areas , the u.s. government provides support for anti - corruption reforms and democratic institutions .

u.s. assistance also aims to expand economic opportunities and equitable growth in the country .

security and military assistance help to strengthen the police and military forces to counter terrorist activity , enhance border security , and fight international financial and drug crimes .

in march 2006 , the peace corps suspended its programs in bangladesh due to concerns that volunteers might become targets of terrorists .

in 2000 , the united states signed an agreement with bangladesh reducing the country's debt payments to the united states by $10 million over 18 years .

in return , bangladesh is to set aside $8.5 million to endow a tropical forest fund to protect and conserve its mangrove forests .

the united states significantly increased bilateral aid to india in fy2002 and fy2003 , largely as part of its counterterrorism efforts in the region .

the current aid program aims to further indian economic development in order to enhance the country's rise as "an influential u.s. partner in the international system. .

furthermore , u.s. assistance serves the poorest segments of the population in order to mitigate economic and social conditions that may give rise to political extremism .

for fy2008 , the largest portion of u.s. assistance to india funds public health and hiv / aids care , treatment , and prevention .

security and military assistance supports programs related to military professionalism , counterterrorism , counternarcotics , and border security .

economic support funds are to promote the private agricultural sector .

u.s. assistance to nepal aims to further the peace process between the government of nepal and maoist insurgents , establish stability , and promote development .

imet , incle , and nadr programs help the nepal military and police to restore law and order .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 allows for only expanded international military education and training ( e - imet ) for nepal .

e - imet emphasizes and teaches the military about human rights , military codes of conduct , and civilian control of the military .

other major components of united states aid programs in nepal include building the capacity of local and national governments to provide social services and improving public health .

in 2004 , the united states suspended the peace corps program in nepal after maoist rebels bombed the united states information center in kathmandu .

pakistan is a front - line state in the global war on terrorism .

most u.s. assistance programs in the country claim to directly or indirectly serve u.s. counterterrorism goals .

the united states government has pledged $600 million in economic and security assistance and $50 million in earthquake reconstruction aid on an annual basis through fy2009 .

approximately 43% of u.s. assistance to pakistan supports counterterrorism and border security efforts .

the second largest strategic objective ( 36% of funding ) is economic growth , aimed at nurturing a middle class as a foundation for democracy .

economic support funds ( 13% ) "help pakistan to improve the quality of and access to public education , primary healthcare , and water and sanitation services" in part to help provide alternatives to services provided by terrorist - linked charities and schools .

other assistance directly promotes democracy through support of legislative processes , democratic practices within political parties , free and fair elections , civil society , and the mass media .

pakistan received limited u.s. assistance during the 1990s — counter - narcotics support , food aid , and pakistan ngo initiative programs — due to congressional restrictions in response to pakistan's nuclear weapons program .

in 1985 , the pressler amendment to the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( section 620e ( e ) ) barred u.s. foreign assistance to pakistan unless the president determined that pakistan did not possess nuclear weapons and that u.s. assistance would reduce the risk of pakistan's obtaining them .

in 1990 , president george h. w. bush declined to make such determinations , thus triggering pressler amendment sanctions against pakistan .

this restriction was eased in 1995 to prohibit only military assistance .

in 1998 , following nuclear weapons tests carried out by india and pakistan , president clinton imposed restrictions on non - humanitarian aid to both countries pursuant to the arms export control act ( section 102 , the glenn amendment ) .

furthermore , pakistan became ineligible for most forms of u.s. foreign assistance due to its delinquency in servicing its debt to the united states and to a 1999 military coup .

following the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states , pakistan was designated as a front - line state in the war on terrorism and received dramatically increased u.s. aid levels .

in late september 2001 , congress enacted and the president exercised waivers to nuclear weapons sanctions that had prohibited military and economic aid to india and pakistan .

the bush administration rescheduled $379 million of pakistan's $2.7 billion debt to the united states so that pakistan would not be considered in arrears , a requirement for further foreign assistance .

the president also made $100 million in esf available before the various sanctions were eased or lifted , exercising authority afforded him under section 614 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

on october 27 , 2001 , president bush signed s. 1465 into law ( p.l .

107-57 ) , allowing the united states government to waive sanctions related to the military coup and authorizing presidential waiver authority through 2003 , provided the president determined that making foreign assistance available would facilitate democratization and help the united states in its battle against international terrorism .

p.l .

107-57 also exempted pakistan from foreign assistance restrictions related to its default on international loans .

since 2003 , president bush has annually exercised the waiver authority on coup - related sanctions against pakistan .

on march 25 , 2008 , president bush waived democracy - related aid sanctions on pakistan for fy2008 , stating that such a waiver would facilitate the transition to democratic rule in pakistan and was important to u.s. counterterrorism efforts .

following the national and provincial elections of february 2008 , which many observers considered free , fair , and credible , the bush administration issued an april 2008 determination that a democratically elected government had been restored in islamabad after a 101-month hiatus .

this determination permanently removed coup - related aid sanctions .

united states assistance programs aim to promote the peace process between the government of sri lanka and tamil separatists led by the liberation tigers of tamil eelam ( ltte ) .

in order to help pressure the ltte to return to the negotiating table , the united states provides assistance to help strengthen the capabilities of the sri lankan military .

incle and nadr programs support the police force and counterterrorism activities .

u.s. assistance also promotes economic growth , especially in less developed , conflict - ridden areas , and helps to advance democracy , human rights , and civil society .

in 2004 , sri lanka met eligibility requirements for mca funding , due in large part to positive governmental , social , and economic indicators in western provinces .

although a compact was expected in 2007 , the mcc put an agreement on hold in early 2007 pending improvements in the overall human rights and security situations , and in december 2007 the mcc decided not to reselect sri lanka for 2008 compact eligibility .

sri lanka suffered heavy human losses ( an estimated 31,000 dead , 4,100 missing , and 519,000 displaced ) and property damage worth approximately $1 billion ( or 4.4% of gdp ) in the december 2004 earthquake and tsunami .

the bush administration pledged $134.6 million for disaster relief and reconstruction to sri lanka .

in 2006 , sri lanka received transition initiative ( ti ) funding ( $1.7 million ) for the peace process and $1.1 million in disaster assistance .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 , section 699g , withheld fmf from sri lanka , with the exception of technology or equipment related to maritime and air surveillance and communications , unless the following conditions were met: the sri lankan military is suspending and the sri lankan government is bringing to justice members of the military who have been credibly alleged to have committed gross violations of human rights or international humanitarian law , including complicity in the recruitment of child soldiers ; the sri lankan government is providing access to humanitarian organizations and journalists throughout the country consistent with international humanitarian law ; and the sri lankan government has agreed to the establishment of a field presence of the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights in sri lanka with sufficient staff and mandate to conduct full and unfettered monitoring throughout the country and to publicize its findings .

