qatar , a small peninsular state bordering saudi arabia in the persian gulf ( see figure 1 ) , declared its independence on september 3 , 1971 .

it is a constitutional monarchy governed by the al thani family , and the constitution reflects the previously contested principle that successors to the throne will follow the hereditary line of the emir's male offspring .

the emir of qatar , tamim bin hamad bin khalifa al thani , began his rule in june 2013 when his father , shaykh hamad bin khalifah , abdicated , marking the first voluntary and planned transition of power in qatar since its independence .

shaykh hamad raised the global profile and influence of the small , energy - rich country after replacing his own father in a palace coup in 1995 .

emir tamim's mother , shaykha mohza , is active in leading education , health , and women's initiatives .

of the country's approximately 2.1 million people , roughly 15% are citizens ; the rest are foreign residents and temporary laborers .

qatar's small native population is not publicly restive , and members of the fluid expatriate population of more than 1.7 million have no political rights .

public debate on some issues has been encouraged , although recent u.s. state department human rights reports have noted qatar's ban on political parties and restrictions on freedom of speech , press , assembly , association , and religion for citizens and noncitizens alike .

in practice , the emir's personal authority as qatar's constitutional monarch is tempered only by the need to maintain basic consensus within the al thani family and among other influential interest groups .

most experts regard the al thani family as having some significant , if manageable , internal rivalries .

religious conservatives have considerable social influence , and qatar's military and security forces answer to the emir .

elections for a central municipal council were held in may 2011 , and planned national advisory council elections were again delayed in mid - 2013 in conjunction with the leadership transition ( see below ) .

a broad shift in government leadership accompanied the 2013 transition and suggests that changes were managed in order to accommodate the interests of others than the emir and his immediate family .

the emir appoints members of his extended family and other leading figures to a governing council of ministers , which serves as the national cabinet ( see table 1 below ) .

emir tamim has inherited the duties of leading a nation that transformed under his father's tenure from a weak satellite of saudi arabia into an ambitious , independent regional power with large financial resources and considerable global influence relative to the country's small population .

in his initial public statements and actions , the new emir suggested that elements of both continuity and change would characterize qatar's official policies under his leadership .

upon taking office , he said: ...we are people who are committed to our principles and values .

we do not live on the sidelines of life and we do not go adrift without a destination .

we are not subservient waiting for guidance from anyone .

this independent pattern of behavior has become factual in qatar and people who deal with us .

we are people with visions .

...we respect all sincere and active political trends in the region but we are not supportive of a trend against another .

we are muslims and arab ; we respect the diversity of religious schools of thoughts and respect all religions in our country and abroad .

as arabs , we reject dividing the arab communities based on sectarianism or doctrine because this affects social and economic immunity and prevents its modernization and development on the basis of citizenship regardless of religious sects or thoughts .

at a december 2013 event in london , qatari foreign minister khaled al attiyah said , "we have the same policy but it may be that our approach has changed. .

the united states opened its embassy in doha in 1973 , but u.s. relations with qatar did not blossom until after the 1991 persian gulf war .

in the late 1980s , the united states and qatar engaged in a prolonged diplomatic dispute regarding qatar's black market procurement of u.s. - made stinger anti - aircraft missiles .

the dispute froze planned economic and military cooperation , and congress approved a ban on arms sales to qatar ( §566 ( d ) , p.l .

100-461 ) until the months leading up to the 1991 gulf war , when qatar allowed coalition forces to operate from qatari territory and agreed to destroy the missiles in question .

in january 1991 , qatari armored forces helped coalition troops repel an iraqi attack on the saudi arabian town of kafji , on the coastal road leading south from kuwait into saudi arabia's oil - rich eastern province .

in june 1992 , qatar signed a defense cooperation agreement with the united states , opening a period of close coordination in military affairs that has continued to the present .

the united states promptly recognized the assumption of power by shaykh hamad in june 1995 and welcomed qatar's defense cooperation , as well as shaykh hamad's modest political , economic , and educational reform efforts .

president obama congratulated emir tamim upon his accession to the throne in june 2013 , and qatari - u.s. relations remain close , amid some differences over regional security questions .

qatari - u.s. defense relations have expanded to include cooperative defense exercises , equipment pre - positioning , and base access agreements .

u.s. concerns regarding alleged material support for terrorist groups by some qataris , including reported past support by a prominent member of the royal family , have been balanced over time by qatar's counterterrorism efforts and its broader , long - term commitment to host and support u.s. military forces active in iraq , afghanistan , and the rest of the centcom area of responsibility .

in december 2013 , u.s. secretary of defense chuck hagel visited doha , met with emir tamim , and signed a new 10-year defense cooperation agreement , followed in july 2014 by agreements for $11 billion in advanced arms sales .

qatari officials are quick to point out their commitment to the general goal of regional peace and their support for u.s. military operations , even as they maintain ties to hamas and others critical of arab - israeli peace negotiations .

in june 2009 , u.s .

ambassador to qatar joseph lebaron explained qatar's policy in the following terms: "i think of it as qatar occupying a space in the middle of the ideological spectrum in the islamic world , with the goal of having doors open to it across that ideological spectrum .

they have the resources to accomplish that vision , and that's rare. .

by all accounts , qatar's balancing strategy toward its relationship with the united states and regional powers such as iran and saudi arabia is likely to persist , which may continue to place doha and washington on opposing sides of some important issues even amid close cooperation on others .

the united states has provided limited counterterrorism assistance to qatar to support the development of its domestic security forces , and the export - import bank has provided over $2 billion in loan guarantees to support various natural gas development projects in qatar since 1996 .

the obama administration has phased out u.s. foreign assistance and has not requested military construction funds for facilities in qatar since fy2012 .

qatar donated $100 million to victims of hurricane katrina in the u.s. gulf states , and qatari state entities and private individuals continue to make large investments in the united states .

several prominent u.s. universities have established satellite campuses in doha at qatar's education city , where qatari , american , and other students pursue undergraduate and graduate coursework across a broad range of subjects .

in congress , legislative action related to qatar remains relatively limited with the exception of appropriations and authorization legislation that affects u.s. defense programs and congressional review of proposed foreign military sales to the qatari military .

qatar's foreign and domestic policies are monitored by congressional foreign affairs , defense , and intelligence committees , while qatar's resource wealth and associated economic clout fuels congressional interest in u.s. - qatari trade and investment ties .

in the 113 th congress , h.res .

297 would congratulate emir tamim "on his ascension to the throne" ; express "thanks and appreciation" to sheikh hamad bin khalifa al thani ; and recognize "the continued friendship between the united states and the people of the state of qatar. .

h.res .

682 would call on the united states government and u.s. corporations to prioritize the rights of migrant workers in dealing with qatar , and would call on the government of qatar to take added steps to protect and improve laborers' rights , particularly in light of preparations for the 2022 federation internationale de football association ( fifa ) world cup .

a congressional caucus on qatari - american economic strategic defense , cultural and educational partnership remains active .

qatar's approach to regional affairs can be described as a multi - directional balancing act .

to the chagrin of saudi arabia and other regional powers , qatar has sought in recent years to mediate regional conflicts and political disputes by engaging a wide range of parties in yemen , lebanon , sudan , libya , egypt , and gaza , some of whom are hostile to the united states .

qatari leaders responded boldly to the regional unrest that emerged in 2011 , and embraced political change that brought islamist parties to power in tunisia and egypt .

in the period since , increasing criticism of qatar by some of the sunni arab members of the gulf cooperation council ( gcc ) and growing sunni - shiite and arab - iranian tensions in the gulf region have led qatar to close ranks with its neighbors to some degree .

among the key questions for the region is whether or not qatar's official embrace of some sunni islamist movements , including the muslim brotherhood , will change significantly under the leadership of emir tamim .

several muslim brotherhood figures movement left qatar in 2014 and claim that the government asked them to do so in response to pressure from fellow gcc states saudi arabia and the united arab emirates .

qatar's approach to the conflict in syria has evolved over time .

the former emir initially took a measured approach and promoted dialogue , but he and the current emir adopted a more confrontational approach as violence continued and worsened during 2012 and 2013 .

in september 2014 , emir tamim said before the united nations general assembly that: the war of genocide being waged and the deliberate displacement carried out by the [asad] regime , remain the major crime .

…we reiterate the call for the security council to promptly shoulder its legal and humanitarian responsibility and support the syrian people against both dangers posed by terrorism of the regime and the crimes of genocide it is perpetrating , and by the terrorist forces that took advantage of the misery and bitterness and the absence of the state and the international community .

the first danger has begotten the second .

while some regional voices clearly resent qatar's assertive diplomacy , the qatari government's agility in the face of uncertainty and the soft power of its government - supported al jazeera satellite television network have made qatar a key player in regional unrest since 2011 .

some critics assert that in spite of qatar's active foreign policy , its regional diplomacy has actually yielded few tangible results , with the exception of the 2008 doha agreement that temporarily ended an 18-month long political crisis in lebanon .

reported qatari support for sunni armed groups in syria has the potential to have a more lasting impact on the region , but has challenged the traditional qatari preference for remaining engaged with all sides in regional disputes .

qatar's ability and willingness to engage directly with armed groups , as evidenced by a series of reported hostage release negotiations and prisoner exchange agreements in 2014 , appears to remain unique in the region and may complicate calculations about the relative costs and benefits of qatar's policies .

qatar has backed up its active diplomacy with growing financial resources and economic influence over the last decade — a period of "unparalleled prosperity. .

between 2000 and 2012 , qatar's nominal gdp skyrocketed from $35 billion to an estimated $185 billion .

according to a may 2014 international monetary fund ( imf ) report , gdp growth averaged 14% over the last decade and the country's per capita gdp is the highest in the world .

hydrocarbon exports have led the way , but non - oil and gas sector growth reached 9% in 2012 .

oil and natural gas export proceeds provide roughly half of the government's revenue , but the imf expects the contribution of the non - hydrocarbon sector to grow steadily over the next five years .

qatar continues to base its annual state budgets on an assumed oil price of $65 per barrel , making qatar better positioned than other producers to deal with declining oil market prices .

in recent years , government spending has exceeded budget projections , but conservative energy export price estimates have ensured large surpluses .

the imf has estimated that qatar's fiscal surpluses will continue through at least 2015 , but are likely to decrease in size .

the government continues to invest surplus revenue abroad for future generations and has increased public spending in support of domestic infrastructure , housing , and health sector improvements .

qatari press outlets feature limited criticism of domestic budget transparency , spending priorities , foreign contractors , and government efficiency .

some observers have raised questions about the long - term ability of qatar to attract private sector investment and produce employment opportunities once the current phase of large state - supported infrastructure investment is complete .

by all accounts , qatari officials remain confident in their economic prospects and appear to have used the post - 2008 downturn as an opportunity to assess lessons learned during the country's boom , to reconsider planned projects , and , where possible , to take advantage of lower input costs by delaying project start dates or renegotiating contracts .

managing the infrastructure and service needs created by the influx of laborers to the county remains an immediate challenge .

the country's population , including expatriates , more than tripled between 2000 and 2010 , growing to over 2 million in 2013 .

as such , qatar's economic successes have been accompanied by new challenges in the areas of social cohesion ; education ; labor ; national infrastructure ; and energy , water , and food supplies .

to respond to these challenges , qatari authorities have embarked on a series of parallel national development strategies based on a comprehensive national vision document that seeks balanced , sustainable growth by the year 2030 .

emir tamim bin hamad chaired the implementation oversight body for the vision 2030 project in his prior role as heir apparent .

the national development strategy for 2011 through 2016 sets ambitious infrastructure investment targets with over $65 billion in planned spending on housing , roads , water , airports , and shipping facilities .

the leadership transition in qatar signaled the opening of a new chapter in u.s. - qatari relations that already had grown increasingly close in recent years , in spite of some abiding policy differences .

emir tamim and his government appear to be taking an equally active , if quieter approach to diplomacy than that of the emir's father and his counterparts .

nevertheless , increasing scrutiny is being applied by some observers to qatar's relationships with islamists and certain armed groups .

most observers expect qatari policy makers to favor policies that will consolidate the political and economic gains that qatar has made in recent years and set the country on a sustainable path .

expanding u.s. - qatari defense relations also may signal a stronger commitment on the part of the new emir to invest in relations with the united states .

decision makers in the united states appear likely to continue to debate how best to maintain improved defense and counterterrorism relations with qatar while seeking to address more challenging issues related to regional security , human rights , political reform , and labor conditions .

