the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) , established by title xxvi of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-35 ) , is a program through which the federal government gives states , tribes , and territories annual grants to operate home energy assistance programs for low - income households .

the liheap statute provides for two primary types of program funding: regular funds ( sometimes referred to as block grant or formula funds ) and emergency contingency funds .

regular funds are allotted to states according to a formula prescribed by the liheap statute .

emergency contingency funds may be released and allotted to one or more states at the discretion of the president and the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the first section of this report discusses liheap program rules and benefits , including household eligibility and how funds may be used , and presents the most recent data available from hhs regarding household characteristics and benefit levels ( see " program rules and benefits " ) .

the second section of this report discusses each category of liheap funds and how they are distributed to states , tribes , and territories ( see " types of liheap funds " ) .

the third section discusses liheap funding and appropriations ( see " liheap appropriations " ) .

appendix a describes the legislative history of energy assistance , leading up to and including the enactment of liheap ( see " legislative history of energy assistance " ) .

finally , appendix b contains tables showing recent liheap allocations to the states , as well as appropriations for the program since its inception .

federal liheap requirements are minimal and leave most important program decisions to the states , the district of columbia , the territories , and indian tribes and tribal organizations that receive federal funds ( collectively referred to in this report as "grantees" ) .

the law governing liheap sets up most requirements as part of a list of "assurances" that grantees must make when they apply to hhs for funds .

for example , grantees must make assurances about the sorts of energy assistance they will provide , who will be served , and how funds will be administered .

the liheap statute contains 16 assurances that govern various aspects of how the program operates at the state , tribe , or territorial level .

this section discusses how grantees implement the assurances to provide energy assistance to low - income households .

the liheap statute authorizes several separate distributions of liheap funds .

the bulk of funds are distributed as "regular" funds , sometimes also referred to as formula or block grant funds .

the regular funds are distributed via formula to the states and the district of columbia .

tribes receive a share of state funding , while a percentage of regular funds is set aside for territories .

the liheap statute also authorizes emergency contingency funds , which may be distributed to one or more states , tribes , or territories at the discretion of the administration .

the statute also authorizes a smaller amount of funds for leveraging incentive grants , which are distributed to grantees that leverage nonfederal resources for their energy assistance programs .

and a portion of leveraging incentive grants may be used for competitive residential energy assistance challenge ( reach ) grants that grantees may use for various purposes that improve the energy security of vulnerable low - income families .

despite the different distribution methods , grantees may use each form of funding for the eligible activities under liheap ( eg , heating and cooling assistance , emergency crisis assistance , and weatherization ) .

in june 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report about the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) entitled low - income home energy assistance program: greater fraud prevention controls are needed .

the gao report found instances of benefit payments to ineligible applicants based on various factors , including the use of social security numbers ( ssns ) from deceased or imprisoned individuals as well as the under - reporting of income or over - reporting of household members .

in another instance , the gao set up a fake utility company and through fake applicants was able to obtain liheap benefits .

gao recommended ways in which hhs could prevent instances of fraud such as these in the future .

among the recommendations in the report were requiring applicants to provide ssns and checking applicant information against various databases ( eg , social security administration data , state vital records , and state directories of new hires ) .

hhs reacted to the gao report and its recommendations in several ways: the agency issued guidance that encouraged states to require liheap applicants to divulge their ssns .

the liheap statute and regulations do not require grantee states , tribes , and territories to collect ssns or to verify applicant eligibility against specific databases , and not all states follow such verification procedures .

further , pursuant to the privacy act , hhs cannot require states to collect ssns as part of the liheap application process .

however , the tax reform act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-455 ) authorizes states to use ssns in administering certain programs , including "general public assistance" programs , which hhs has interpreted to include liheap .

as a result , hhs released guidance that the law "authorizes states to require ssns as a condition of eligibility for use in verifying the identity of individual applicants and their household members. .

as of fy2011 , 40 states required liheap applicants to provide ssns , compared to 28 in fy2010 .

hhs released an action transmittal asking states to supplement the information they provide to hhs for fy2011 to show that they are working to prevent improper payments , fraud , waste , or abuse .

the liheap statute directs the hhs secretary to establish regulations to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse .

the regulations in turn require grantees to establish systems and procedures to prevent these activities among clients , vendors , and administering agencies .

however , the same section of the statute also states that "[t]he secretary may not prescribe the manner in which the states will comply with the provisions of this subsection. .

so while each year states must submit a plan to hhs in which they make "assurances" that they will comply with statutory requirements , there is no specific way that they must go about this .

hhs suggested that states report on compliance monitoring , fraud reporting mechanisms , verifying applicant identities , cross - checking ssns , and verifying applicant income , among others .

hhs also assembled a program integrity working group to recommend ways in which the agency could address some of the issues raised .

the working group released a report in april 2012 .

among its recommendations were that ( 1 ) grantees require applicants to provide ssns , but should provide for exceptions due to the emergency nature of liheap , ( 2 ) hhs collaborate with other agencies , such as the social security administration , to help with verification of identity and income , ( 3 ) hhs conduct a cost - benefit analysis of third party verification , and ( 4 ) grantees enter into vendor agreements that include provisions to prevent vendor fraud .

at the direction of omb , beginning in 2008 , hhs staff , together with liheap state directors , worked to arrive at a set of performance measures that would guide data collection and serve as a way of examining outcomes resulting from liheap assistance .

the performance measures are also intended to respond to some of the issues raised in the gao report described in the previous section .

states were first required to collect and report performance data for fy2016 , though the data have not been made public .

the type of performance data to be collected was published by hhs in a proposed information collection ( and request for comment ) on june 6 , 2013 , in the federal register and was amended slightly in a notice published a year later .

there are three primary performance measures proposed .

each performance measure requires collection of several types of data .

the average reduction in energy burden for households receiving fuel assistance: within this measure , data collected and reported includes the average annual income of liheap recipient households , average liheap benefits , the number of liheap recipient households that use each primary heating source , annual heating fuel consumption by liheap recipient households , and electricity consumption for cooling .

requirements in the initial 2013 federal register notice to collect consumption data were made optional in the 2014 federal register notice .

the percent of unduplicated households where liheap prevented a potential home energy crisis: among the data collected for this performance measure are the number of households receiving utility past due or disconnect notices , the number receiving a notice from a bulk fuel vendor of an unpaid balance , the number of households who deplete deliverable fuel sources , and the number of households where liheap benefits resulted in repair or replacement of heating or cooling equipment .

the percent of unduplicated households where liheap benefits restored home energy: this measure involves identifying households where liheap receipt resulted in utility reconnection , purchase of bulk fuel , or repair or replacement of heating or cooling equipment .

while liheap state grantees are the entities required to collect and report the data to hhs , information on fuel and electricity consumption requires input from fuel vendors and utility companies .

appendix a .

legislative history of energy assistance liheap was not the first federal energy assistance program created to help low - income households with their energy bills .

appropriations for home energy assistance initially came about in the 1970s at the time of the opec ( organization of the petroleum exporting countries ) oil embargo of 1973-1974 .

in the fall of that year , a number of countries in the middle east stopped exporting oil to the united states , a stoppage that continued until march of 1974 .

prices of heating oil rose , while supplies were restricted .

what followed were several years in which congress directed funds to assistance focused on lowering energy bills through weatherization and education .

later in the 1970s , assistance evolved to include crisis assistance for households facing shutoff or other emergencies , followed by a system of direct payments to subsidize the energy bills of low - income households .

when liheap was enacted , direct assistance for energy bills was the focus of the program , but all of these forms of assistance―weatherization , education , and crisis assistance―were made part of the program and continue to be eligible uses of funds .

this appendix discusses the evolution of energy assistance in the 1970s and early 1980s , culminating in the creation of liheap in 1982 .

energy assistance programs prior to liheap the first federal funds for energy assistance were the outgrowth of a program that was created in maine just after the start of the oil embargo by opec countries .

in 1973 , the maine office of economic opportunity applied to the federal office of economic opportunity ( oeo , the federal agency in charge of administering war on poverty programs in the 1960s and 1970s ) to fund a project they had conceived of called "project fuel. .

energy costs , particularly the costs of heating oil and wood , were growing in maine , and the state determined that it would assist low - income and elderly households in meeting their energy needs .

oeo approved funding for the state at the end of 1973 .

project fuel used funding primarily to help "winterize" homes , but also to provide crisis counseling , and purchase fuel for use in emergency situations such as equipment breakdown or when dealers ran out of fuel .

project fuel prompted what would become the first federal program to assist low - income households during the energy crisis , the emergency energy conservation program ( eecp , p.l .

93-644 ) enacted as part of the headstart , economic opportunity , and community partnership act at the beginning of 1975 .

the law authorized the community services administration ( csa , which replaced the oeo as part of the same bill ) to use funds primarily for weatherization and conservation purposes , but also gave the authority to use funds for fuel voucher or stamp programs .

community action agencies , community development corporations , state offices of economic opportunity , and other public or private nonprofit organizations were eligible to apply to administer the funds .

congress first appropriated funds for the eecp in fy1975 , $16.5 million , as part of a supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

94-32 ) .

funds for the emergency energy conservation program ( to be used primarily for weatherization purposes ) continued to be appropriated through fy1978 .

the eecp came to an end with the advent of the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) , created in 1976 as part of p.l .

94-385 and administered by the federal energy administration ( the predecessor to the department of energy ) .

wap was meant to be a supplement to the eecp , not to replace it .

however , the programs were similar .

community action agencies administered wap funds and weatherized homes of low - income households .

by fy1979 , the administration proposed that weatherization funds be made available only through the doe program .

in that year and thereafter , congress stopped funding the csa weatherization program and only appropriated funds to the doe weatherization assistance program .

at the same time that weatherization assistance was phased out of the csa , the agency began to administer direct assistance to low - income households to help pay their energy bills .

in fy1977 , as part of a supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

95-26 ) , $200 million was appropriated to be used through the csa for a special crisis intervention program .

p.l .

95-26 , which was debated and enacted in the spring of 1977 , came just after an unusually cold winter in which both fuel usage and prices had been high , resulting in large numbers of consumers facing utility disconnection .

unlike previous funding for the eecp , which went primarily to fund weatherization , the fy1977 supplemental funding was to be used by the states for direct payments to utilities and fuel suppliers .

the program allowed for up to $250 payments to utilities on behalf of customers whose power had been shut off or threatened with shut off , and up to $50 directly to households that could prove "dire financial need" as the result of having paid large fuel bills .

congress again appropriated funds to help households facing energy crises in fy1978 and fy1979 ( see table a - 1 ) .

in fy1980 , congress expanded energy assistance by appropriating significantly more funding than had been made available in the past , a total of $1.6 billion provided through 2 different agencies .

the impetus behind the rather dramatic increase in funding was , as in the early 1970s , the increase in energy prices , particularly heating oil .

in 1979 , the decontrol of domestic oil prices , together with an increase in opec oil prices , led to increases in the price of heating oil and kerosene .

an article in the congressional quarterly describing the environment surrounding the passage of energy assistance legislation noted the "spectacular rise in the price of home heating oil" as "the biggest factor in the problems that led congress to take action. .

in the summer and fall of 1979 , the senate committee on labor and human resources alone held 12 hearings on energy assistance legislation .

enactment of lieap , the predecessor program to liheap energy needs of low - income households continued to occupy the president and congress after the appropriation of energy assistance funding for fy1980 .

one of the proposals to fund energy assistance for fy1980 , s. 1724 , the home energy assistance act ( as reported by the senate committee on labor and human resources ) , proposed a new energy assistance program to be authorized from fy1981 through fy1984 .

the program was enacted in april 1980 as the low income energy assistance program ( lieap ) as part of the crude oil windfall profits tax act ( p.l .

96-223 ) .

lieap was to be funded by windfall profits taxes imposed as part of p.l .

96-223 and deposited in a treasury account , but the law did not provide for the account to be established , so the program was funded by an appropriation .

lieap was authorized at $3 billion for fy1981 ; $1.85 billion was appropriated for the program in that year ( p.l .

96-369 ) .

like liheap , the program that was to follow , lieap was a block grant program to states .

funds were primarily distributed to the states by formula , with a small amount ( $100 million ) reserved for crisis assistance .

states could use funds to help low - income households pay home energy costs .

while the term "home energy" included cooling assistance , states could only provide cooling assistance in cases of medical need .

eligible households were considered those at or below the bureau of labor statistics lower living standard , an income level that exceeded the poverty level in most instances .

recipients of certain means - tested benefits — aid to families with dependent children ( now tanf ) , food stamps ( now snap ) , ssi benefits , and certain veterans' benefits — were eligible for lieap benefits .

payments could be made to fuel suppliers or utilities , residents , or both , at the discretion of the state .

states had some discretion in setting up their programs , with the ability to determine the state and local agencies that would administer the program , who would receive payments , the amount of benefits , certification for eligibility , how to provide benefits to renters , and establishment of funds to emergencies ( up to 3% of total ) .

most at issue in enactment of lieap was how funds would be distributed to the states , specifically whether states would receive the same share of funds , or if colder weather states would have preference .

the formula established for lieap was complex and incorporated data that included temperatures , energy expenditures , and the number of low - income households .

for more information about the lieap formula and how it pertains to liheap , see crs report rl33275 , the liheap formula , by libby perl .

enactment of liheap in 1981 , congress enacted a new program , the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) , which replaced lieap .

liheap was similar to its predecessor program in that it was set up as a block grant to states , tribes , and territories to help low - income households meet their energy needs .

liheap maintained the same formula distribution as was set up under lieap .

unlike lieap , grantees were able to use funds for cooling expenses without a showing of medical necessity , as well as for weatherization .

grantees were given the option of setting eligibility at the higher of 150% of poverty or 60% of state median income ( rather than the bls lower living standard ) , and the program maintained eligibility for recipients of afdc ( now tanf ) , food stamps ( now snap ) , ssi benefits , and certain veterans' benefits .

the program was authorized at $1.875 billion from fy1982 through fy1984 and was funded at that level in its first year of operation .

for historic liheap funding levels , see table b - 3 .

liheap differed from lieap in that states were given more flexibility and had fewer administrative requirements in implementation .

for example , under the new liheap program , states were only required to report about households assisted annually , compared to quarterly under lieap , and hhs did not require uniform data collection or record keeping standards .

under lieap , states had to submit detailed changes in plans each time they wanted to modify benefit levels or the way in which funds were used .

in applying for liheap funds , the statute only required grantees to make assurances about the services they would provide , and hhs did not have the authority to dictate how states would accomplish program goals or to approve or disapprove state plans .

appendix b .

tables showing liheap funding levels in this appendix are two tables that show how liheap funds have been distributed to the states , tribes , and territories during recent fiscal years , and an additional table showing historical funding levels from the time the program was created to the present .

table b - 1 shows the amount of liheap regular funds distributed to states , tribes , and territories pursuant to the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

initially liheap was funded through a series of crs at fy2017 levels less an across - the - board reduction of 0.6791% .

on october 20 , 2017 , hhs announced the first distribution of fy2018 funds to states , tribes , and territories , totaling more than $3 billion .

after the final fy2018 appropriations bill was enacted , hhs announced distribution of remaining funds on april 23 , 2018 .

net allocations from the two distributions to the states are in columns ( a ) and ( c ) ( i.e. , the columns do not include funding for tribes ) and tribal allocations are in columns ( b ) and ( d ) .

allocations for the territories are in the last rows of the table , after the states .

column ( e ) shows total fy2018 funding for all grantees .

table b - 2 shows the total amount of liheap regular and emergency contingency funds distributed to each state from fy2008 through fy2017 ; the totals include funds distributed to tribes within the states .

funding for the territories is in the last rows of the table , after the states .

table b - 3 provides historic funding levels for liheap from the time the program was initially funded , in fy1982 , through proposed funding in fy2019 .

the table shows authorization levels for liheap regular funds , administration budget requests for both regular and emergency contingency funds , the total amount of regular and emergency contingency funds appropriated in each fiscal year , and the total amount of emergency contingency funds distributed .

