the september 11 , 2001 attacks reinforced the importance of efforts to stop the proliferationof weapons of mass destruction .

in particular , many analysts agree that some countries need greaterprotection against terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) on their territories .

thereport of the 9 / 11 commission called for continued support for threat reduction assistance to keepwmd away from terrorist groups .

pakistan , because of its location , the nature of its relationship to the taliban and al qaeda , and its weapons of mass destruction programs , has generated particular concern .

repeated assassinationattempts on president musharraf , aq khan's nuclear sales to north korea , iran , and libya , and acontinuous battle with terrorist elements within the country , have made pakistan the most crucialnode of the nexus of terrorism and wmd proliferation .

moreover , a combination of doctrinalpreference ( for first use of nuclear weapons ) and conventional force inferiority has given pakistanstrong incentives to forward - deploy its nuclear forces , leading many observers to conclude thatassistance to secure pakistan's nuclear warheads could be critical .

analysts inside and outsidegovernment have raised the possibility of u.s. assistance to help reduce the threat of nuclearweapons losses in india and pakistan .

 ( 1 ) suggestedmeasures have ranged from "guards and gates"around nuclear sites to permissive action links ( which act as locks ) on nuclear weapons to preventunauthorized use .

in a speech in december of 2001 , senator lugar noted that concerns had been raised immediately following september 11 , 2001 about the security of pakistan's nuclear weaponsprogram and that "similar questions will be raised about india's. .

he then noted uncertainties aboutthe wmd programs of iraq , iran , syria , libya and north korea .

 ( 2 ) in contrast to those five countries,four of which are on the state department's list of state sponsors of terrorism , senator lugar notedthat "the closer ties that have developed since september 11th with india and pakistan offer newopportunities to discuss nuclear security with both countries , including safe storage andaccountability .

we must attempt to establish programs that respect their sovereignty and go far tohelp insure their security. .

lugar also suggested that cooperative programs with iran , syria , or libyashould not be ruled out .

in an article published in july 2002 , senator lugar explained that the precise replication of the nunn - lugar program will not be possible everywhere , but the experience of nunn - lugar in russia has demonstrated that thethreat of weapons of mass destruction can lead to extraordinary outcomes based on mutualinterest...nations cooperating on securing instruments of mass destruction might also pledge to workcooperatively on measures to retrieve weapons or materials that are in danger of falling into thewrong hands , and to come to the aid of any victim of nuclear , chemical , or biological terrorism ( 3 ) in the specific case of india and pakistan , there may be key differences from the fsu that limit the program's applicability .

many of those differences stem from the fact that india and pakistanare not "legal" nuclear weapon states under the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) , as russiawas .

the united states is currently prohibited from providing many kinds of assistance to non - nuclear weaponstates , particularly those without full - scope nuclear safeguards .

 ( 4 ) most types ofassistance the united states can feasibly provide would probably focus on helping secure nuclearmaterials and providing employment for personnel , rather than on security of nuclear weapons .

extreme sensitivity in india and pakistan about their nuclear weapons and programs will also likelyrestrict access to facilities , which in turn will limit how well assistance can be tailored to potentialproblems .

also , technical measures to make weapons safer from unauthorized use may make thoseweapons more deployable or usable and thus inadvertently undermine the goal of reducing thenuclear threat .

nonetheless , some measures may be useful .

this paper takes ctr programs as a starting point and analyzes their potential application to india and pakistan .

in providing context for assessing u.s. policy options , the paper outlines theproliferation threat in south asia and u.s. nonproliferation policy .

the paper distinguishes betweenassistance oriented toward making nuclear weapons more secure , and assistance oriented towardmaking nuclear material more secure .

given the existing framework of nonproliferation - related lawsand policies , measures focused on nuclear material and personnel may be more feasible in the shortterm .

congress enacted the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program in 1991,addressing , in senator lugar's words , "the dominant international proliferation danger: the massivenuclear , chemical and biological weapons infrastructure of the former soviet union. .

 ( 6 ) the ctrprogram had four key objectives: destroy nuclear , chemical , and other weapons of mass destruction ; transport , store , disable , and safeguard these weapons in connection with theirdestruction ; establish verifiable safeguards against the proliferation of these weapons , theircomponents , and weapons - usable materials ; and prevent the diversion of scientific expertise that could contribute to weaponsprograms in other nations .

according to senator lugar , the ctr program to date has separated 6,564 russian nuclear warheads from their missiles and stored fissile material from those weapons .

over 30,000 tacticalnuclear weapons have been stored , and non - weapons employment provided for thousands of russiannuclear scientists .

 ( 7 ) ctr programs have encompassed three areas of effort: destruction and dismantlement ; chain of custody ; and demilitarization .

destruction and dismantlement activities included removingwarheads , deactivating missiles and eliminating launch facilities for strategic weapons under thestart i agreement .

efforts to improve the safety , security , and control over nuclear weapons andfissile materials have included providing storage containers , bullet - proof blankets , secure rail cars,and building a plutonium storage facility at mayak .

demilitarization projects have included defenseconversion projects and international science and technology center projects to help wmdscientists pursue work with peaceful objectives and military - to - military contacts .

ctr programs have evolved and expanded over time , adjusting to russian , nis , and u.s. priorities , as well as to changing perceptions about which threats posed the greatest risk .

theprograms have also bowed to bureaucratic intransigence and practical considerations upon occasion .

in one notable incident , the department of energy provided blankets to facility guards , because doeofficials discovered that they were leaving their posts to collect wood to build fires .

as the economyworsened in russia in the mid - 1990s , ctr projects were developed to provide alternativeemployment and sources of income for unpaid or out - of - work wmd scientists .

at the same time,more frequent reports of theft of nuclear material highlighted the need to allocate ctr resources tomaterial protection , control and accounting ( mpca ) measures for nuclear material , consolidationof nuclear weapons and material ; and secure transportation .

the united states developed a practicalapproach: "quick - fixes," like bars on windows , blast - proof doors , fences , followed by a second stagethat included more sophisticated security measures like sensors , cameras , and personnel accessmeasures .

 ( 8 ) .

simply put , there are two basic nuclear risks in south asia: first , that terrorists will acquirenuclear material or nuclear weapons , and second , that nuclear war will erupt through miscalculation,through preemption , or through sudden escalation .

the threat of terrorism calls primarily for greaterphysical security at weapons sites and sites where nuclear material is produced or stored , particularlyweapons - grade material ( highly enriched uranium or separated plutonium ) .

the threat of accidentalnuclear war calls for safer nuclear weapons , whereas reducing the risk of preemptive or sudden warwould require enhancing command and control and possibly transparency between the two states .

some observers have suggested that making nuclear weapons safer ( through insensitive highexplosives or shaping the cores so that they will not give a nuclear yield if improperly detonated ) also makes them more deployable and thus increases the risk of their use .

given the questionabledesirability of measures to enhance indian and pakistani nuclear weapons capabilities , this paperwill assume that any nuclear threat reduction measures will focus on physical security measures,rather than safety measures .

until north korea's february 2005 declaration of a nuclear weapons capability , india andpakistan were the only states outside the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons ( npt ) to declare , openly , their nuclear weapons status .

 ( 21 ) when india and pakistan tested nuclear weaponsin 1998 , a curious dilemma emerged for the international community - - was it possible toacknowledge a nuclear weapons capability without conferring nuclear weapons status ? .

severalmonths after the test , then deputy secretary of state strobe talbott stated in foreign affairs that theunited states "cannot concede , even by implication , that india and pakistan have by their testsestablished themselves as nuclear - weapons states... to relent would break faith with those states thathave forsworn a capability they could have acquired .

moreover , it might inadvertently provide anincentive for other countries to blast their way into the ranks of the nuclear - weapons states. .

 ( 22 ) theinternational community so far has sidestepped questions of nuclear weapons status , but some havesuggested that india and pakistan have become a model for new nuclear weapon states .

 ( 23 ) on the question of nuclear assistance to non - nuclear weapon states , however , consensus in the international community is strong , well - established , and embodied in the npt .

before the nuclearnonproliferation treaty entered into force in 1970 , views on sharing nuclear technology and evennuclear weapons swung wildly between sharing everything and sharing nothing .

according to onesource , the united states contemplated giving india some nuclear weapons to counter the chinesenuclear arsenal , shortly after china's first nuclear test in 1964 .

 ( 24 ) nuclear weapon states havevoluntarily shared technology among themselves and some have spied on each other .

china initiallyadvocated nuclear proliferation as an inevitable and possibly stabilizing factor in world relations ( although it joined the npt in 1992 ) .

nuclear weapon states have also shared technology with thosestates outside the npt , the most notable example being china's reported sharing of nuclear weaponsblueprints with pakistan .

and , reportedly , pakistan shared that design with libya .

 ( 25 ) negotiators of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) in the mid - 1960s realized that almost any kind of international nuclear assistance is potentially useful to a nuclear weapons program .

 ( 26 ) nuclear weapons - - more than biological or chemical weapons , or missiles - - require such precisionin design and construction that any assistance , from technical information , to hints about solvingtechnical problems ( for example , how to shape the fissile core ) , to equipment or components - - can be valuable to an aspiring nuclear weapons state .

therefore , nuclear weapon states , underarticle i of the npt , commit "not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or nuclearexplosive devices or control over such weapons or devices , directly or indirectly ; and not in any wayto assist , encourage or induce any non - nuclear weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquirenuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices. .

 ( 27 ) in contrast to the obligation of the non - nuclear - weapon states under article ii not to receive nuclear weapons orrelated assistance , this commitmentincurred no verification measures .

in part , this omission may have rested on the assumption thatholders of nuclear weapons technology would not impart the most sophisticated and directlyweapons - relevant information to non - nuclear weapons states .

clearly , however , negotiators feltcomfortable with focusing verification on the recipient states .

all states are obliged under articleiii , paragraph 2 of the treaty not to provide source or special fissionable material or equipment to anynon - nuclear - weapon state unless the material is subject to iaea safeguards .

nuclear safeguards are the primary means "to establish and clarify the peaceful purpose of most international nuclear assistance. .

 ( 28 ) not simplyan invention of the npt , safeguards existed inbilateral arrangements since the earliest nuclear trade as a way of preventing the misuse of materialwith obvious military applications .

beyond their technical importance in ensuring that states cannotdevelop nuclear weapons "the quick way," safeguards have become the acid test for a state'snonproliferation - worthiness .

u.s. export control laws , arms export control laws and nonproliferationpolicies have incorporated the distinction between those states with full - scope safeguards ( on allmaterial in their state ) and those without .

moreover , the international nuclear nonproliferationregime has taken its cues from laws and policies developed by the united states .

when , forexample , the nuclear suppliers' group adopted full - scope safeguards as a prerequisite for nuclearsupply , it was adopting a policy that the united states had implemented a decade earlier .

since thediscovery of the khan network , efforts have accelerated to make the new nonproliferation acid testthe adoption of the additional protocol .

at the same time , efforts to prevent proliferation have not blinded states to concerns about the safety and security of proliferant states' nuclear weapons .

to some observers , however , proposalsto provide security and safety measures seem to be tainted by a certain hubris - - that is , nuclearweapon states have considered themselves to be responsible with their nuclear weapons , whereaslesser industrialized states could not be as responsible .

 ( 29 ) until china's nuclear test , the only nuclearweapon states were those with large , industrial economies .

to some extent , global concern aboutterrorism might lessen sensitivities about whether or not india or pakistan "need" help .

nonetheless,repeated pakistani officials' statements to the press about the security of their arsenal appear toreflect a"hands - off" attitude , implying that pakistan is quite able to protect and secure its ownweapons .

 ( 30 ) india , for its part , has remained silenton the subject .

more importantly , however , thesensitivity surrounding nuclear weapons is such that even between the closest of allies - - forexample , the united states and the united kingdom - - proposals to share permissive action links ( pals , which only allow authorized parties to arm the warhead ) reportedly have been met withdisinterest .

 ( 31 ) .

constraints on u.s. assistance can be grouped into three categories .

the first categoryencompasses legal prohibitions , embodied in international treaties and u.s. domestic law .

whiledomestic laws can be changed , or provisions can be waived , international treaties are more difficultto amend .

the second category includes technical limitations , given what little we know aboutindian and pakistani nuclear weapons and their secret nuclear facilities .

in addition , assistanceshould be guided by the impact it would have on the technical capabilities of the indian and pakistaninuclear arsenals - - that is , assistance should not advance the nuclear weapon programs of india andpakistan , nor should it encourage testing , deployment or increased operational readiness .

the thirdcategory covers political limitations , including indian and pakistani willingness to engage incooperation and the impact of assistance on the nonproliferation regimes .

the legal , technical , and political constraints described above appear to foreclose assistance thatwould directly involve a ) access to nuclear weapons ; b ) measures that would enhance operationalcapabilities of nuclear weapons ; c ) direct access to sensitive nuclear facilities .

senator lugarsuggested in november 2004 that "we can promote exchanges between pakistani and indian securityexperts , and offer assistance on export controls , border security , and the protection , control andaccounting of nuclear arsenals .

this will require some diplomatic and administrative skill to staywithin our npt obligations. .

 ( 49 ) the measuresoutlined below are limited but feasible and could helpmitigate some aspects of the nuclear threat in india and pakistan .

india's and pakistan's nuclear programs are far smaller than russia's and unlikely to incur the kinds of costs that the ctr program has thus far incurred .

on the other hand , data are scarce on thestate of nuclear materials in india and pakistan , so it is difficult to determine the scope and timeframe of any such program .

at a minimum , however , such a program is likely to be incrementallyimplemented .

costs could be minimal if a quick - fix , low - technology , information - oriented approachis taken or they could be more substantial if a sophisticated , high - technology approach is taken thatwould incorporate cameras , encryption , remote monitoring , and other means .

in 1991 , the legislation that created the nunn - lugar program stipulated that u.s. assistance in destroying nuclear and other weapons may not be provided to the soviet union , any of its republicsor successor entities unless the president certifies to the congress that the proposed recipient iscommitted to: making a substantial investment of its resources for dismantling or destroying such weapons ; forgo any military modernization that exceeds legitimate defense requirementsor is designed to replace destroyed wmd ; forgo the use of fissile materials and other components from destroyed nuclearweapons in new nuclear weapons ; facilitate u.s. verification of weapons destruction that uses u.s.money ; comply with all relevant arms control agreements ; and observe internationally recognized human rights , including the protection ofminorities .

initially , presidents george h. w. bush and clinton certified that the recipient nations - - russia , ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan - - met those conditions .

the clinton administrationwithdrew its certification of belarus for human rights abuses in fy1998 and the george w. bushadministration withdrew its certification of russia in 2002 for its failure to comply with armscontrol agreements , namely , the chemical weapons convention and the biological weaponsconvention .

the bush administration subsequently requested a waiver from congress for thecertification .

it is not clear whether congress would opt to apply the same certification requirements to recipient states outside the former soviet union .

however , s. 2980 , which wasintroduced by senator lugar in the 108th congress , sought to remove the need for certifications , aswell as other restrictions .

the 109th congress may consider this issue more fully if legislation is oncemore introduced .

u.s. nonproliferation laws have been strengthened over the years , first to account for states that were not parties to the npt , then to target critical capabilities like enrichment and reprocessing , andfinally , to target the transfer of nuclear weapons or actual detonation of a nuclear explosive device .

once a state has exceeded the maximum prohibition ( i.e. , possession or detonation of a nucleardevice ) , a logical question to ask is whether lesser restraints ( for example , in providing nucleartechnology not directly related to nuclear weapons ) are necessary or useful .

applied more broadlyto overall nonproliferation policy , some observers have argued that the nuclear weapons "cat" is outof the bag and u.s. policy should reorient itself to "manage" the nuclear situation in south asia .

atits extreme , this approach would include accepting the nuclear weapons status of india and pakistanand relaxing all restrictions .

other observers have argued that the purpose of restraints was to inhibitproliferation and that relaxing the rules for "successful" states would set a bad precedent and resultin the collapse of the nonproliferation regime .

a broader issue is whether the united states should strive for consistency in the treatment of states' wmd programs .

although india , pakistan , and israel are not parties to the npt and thereforehave not violated any treaties , their nuclear weapons programs conflict with u.s. nonproliferationobjectives and policies .

assistance to countries outside the npt may be viewed as a "wink and anod" to nuclear weapons development .

at the same time , the use of military force to disarm iraq ofits weapons of mass destruction provides a strong counterpoint to such assistance .

as such , thiscould threaten international consensus to combat nuclear proliferation .

should the united statesmove in the direction of accepting indian and pakistani nuclear weapons status , say some observers,would there be pressure to do the same for israel ? .

if so , such action could have a significant impacton security and stability in the middle east .

other considerations include tradeoffs between nonproliferation policy and counterterrorism cooperation , as well as the promotion of democracy .

on january 24 , 2005 , senator biden introduced s. 12 , the targeting terrorists more effectively act of 2005 .

the bill identifiesproliferation of nuclear weapons and promotion of democracy as two of several issues that threatenthe united states' relationship with pakistan .

the bill would authorize $10m in thenonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining and related programs account ( state ) to be spent inpakistan , but would bar any military or economic assistance appropriated for the fiscal year "unlessthe president submits to congress for such fiscal year a certification that no military or economicassistance provided by the united states to the government of pakistan will be provided , eitherdirectly or indirectly , to a person that is opposing or undermining the efforts of the united statesgovernment to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons. .

s. 12 does not contain similar prohibitions for the lack of progress in thepromotion of democracy .

although the national intelligence reform act of 2004 ( pl 108-458 ) ,signed on december 17 , 2004 , extended the president's authority to waive coup - related sanctionsfor pakistan through fy2006 , it may be necessary for the 109th congress to revisit this issue forfy2007 .

on the same day pl 108-458 was signed , president musharraf announced he would remainchief of the army beyond the end of 2004 .

although the 9 / 11 commission report specifically notedthat keeping nuclear capabilities out of the hands of terrorists depends critically on supportingmusharraf's vision of a moderate , modernizing islamic state , president musharraf has done verylittle to move his country toward more democratic rule .

