today's security environment appears to be quite different from the environment of only tenyears ago .

major shifts in both the threat to our national security , and the technologies available tous and our potential adversaries , seem to have occurred .

in response , the military services have plansto change their isr capabilities to meet the new environment effectively .

as noted earlier , many observers believe significant transformation of isr has already occurredand has been practiced in afghanistan .

the military's ability to move data from the reconnaissanceplatform to the weapon system able to take action , the so - called "sensor to shooter" sequence,generally required at least a full day in operation desert storm , as imagery from a satellite orreconnaissance aircraft had to be analyzed , identified as a target , turned into hard - copy , andintensively studied by the aircrew before a weapon could be dropped accurately .

in operationenduring freedom , special operations forces personnel on the ground identified a taliban troopconcentration , called the target back to the combined air operations center in saudi arabia,received permission to call in an airstrike , determined the exact coordinates of the enemy usingglobal positioning system ( gps ) , and passed those coordinates to a loitering b - 52 bomber whichagain used gps to guide bombs onto the target within less than 20 minutes of the originalidentification of the target .

 ( 80 ) similarly , predatoruavs have been able to transmit live video picturesto waiting ac - 130 gunships , which were able to attack moving targets while the predator monitoredfor effectiveness , again within minutes of original target identification .

 ( 81 ) these examples highlightrecent gains in the precision and timely communication of intelligence , as well as interoperabilityamong weapon systems and even between services .

with regard to analysis , over the past ten yearsthe growth of an intelligence - community - wide secure intranet known as intelink has significantlyincreased intelligence personnel access to intelligence data , reports of all types , and other analysts,worldwide .

 ( 82 ) most members of the military intelligence community say they are continuing to work hard at interoperability - they appear to have agreed that the ability to share intelligence throughout thecommunity is essential .

in addition , there appear to be some significant departures from old waysof doing things which could support the other goals of transformation .

the most revolutionaryconcepts being developed today appear to be the army's reconnaissance , surveillance , targetingand acquisition squadron , dia's joint intelligence virtual architecture , and the large increase inthe use of unmanned vehicles already underway in all of the services .

although by no means radicalto the rest of the intelligence community , the coast guard's plan to bring classified communicationsvia siprnet onto every ship creates the possibility of a sweeping change in its use of intelligence .

some outside observers , however , believe that in addition to these changes , the military intelligence community needs to establish a whole new method for analysis .

bruce d. berkowitz andallan e. goodman , for example , note that the subject matter for most military analysts is far morefluid than during the cold war , rendering standard databases and analytical models for explainingbehavior obsolete .

 ( 83 ) indications and warning,the analysis which warns of impending attack on theunited states or its vital interests , depends on the ability to predict enemy activity , based on enemyplans , doctrine , and observed exercises and training .

many of today's potential adversaries offerlittle in the way of traditionally observable activity .

 ( 84 ) berkowitz and goodman see maintainingdatabases as a vastly more difficult problem today than it was twelve years ago ; precision - guidedmunitions , world - wide interests , adversary use of western and non - traditional weaponry , and theneed for increased information about civilian populations have significantly expanded andcomplicated military intelligence database needs .

 ( 85 ) in response to this problem , the primary solution offered , both inside and outside the defense department , is the development of better technology .

this may be artificial intelligence such asneural networks which "learn" as they are used to perform data - mining and other analytical tasks,or powerful "cookies" like those that internet marketers use to track customer responses .

 ( 86 ) however,senior analysts who have observed these tools believe they still require significant developmentbefore they can be applied to day - to - day intelligence analysis .

 ( 87 ) as noted earlier , this is an area inwhich darpa is conducting research and development .

while much effort is being placed on improving the technological tools available to analysts , several observers argue that , whereas in the cold war the vast majority of key information wasobtainable only through classified intelligence methods , today most information of value is availablethrough open sources .

they propose a more market - based or decentralized approach to intelligenceanalysis , allowing multiple groups , possibly contractors or even the general public , to makecompeting inputs to databases and analyses for the decision - maker .

 ( 88 ) another possible approach is to move more intelligence analysis from the arguably insulated world of the intelligence community directly into operations analysis .

two examples of this meldingare the air force's checkmate analysis cell which gained public attention helping plan the airoperation for desert storm , ( 89 ) and the jointwarfare analysis center , which conductsengineering - level analyses of potential target systems such as power grids to find the linkages andvulnerabilities in them .

 ( 90 ) both organizations havestrong reputations within the defense departmentfor finding new ways to defeat the enemy when "traditional" intelligence and operations centers donot .

they are not intelligence centers , although both have intelligence analysts working in them .

the intelligence analysts work side by side with operations analysts to focus all data , whether froman intelligence source or another source such as a logistics report , on the operational problem athand .

this type of analysis requires getting the intelligence community to find and produce exactlywhat a specific customer requests , working beside the customer from start to finish .

the conference report for the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2002 stated fourprimary concerns for the intelligence community ; re - vitalization of nsa , correction of humintdeficiencies , correcting a perceived imbalance between collection and analysis , and ensuringadequate research and development .

 ( 91 ) in addition,several other issues involving the cost and qualityof intelligence , as well as leadership , military intelligence's role in homeland defense and the impactof potential intelligence community reform may be considered .

ac2isrc aerospace command and control and intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance center actd advanced concept technology demonstration asd / c3i assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence asds advanced seal delivery system bda bomb damage assessment c2isr command , control , intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance cec cooperative engagement capability cia central intelligence agency darpa defense advanced research project agency dcgs distributed common ground system dci director of central intelligence dia defense intelligence agency dod department of defense gps global positioning system humint human intelligence imint imagery intelligence isr intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance jcs joint chiefs of staff jfcom joint forces command jroc joint requirements oversight council masint measurement and signatures intelligence nima national imagery and mapping agency nmci navy and marine corps intranet nro national reconnaissance office nsa national security agency oft office of force transformation osd office of the secretary of defense qdr quadrennial defense review rsta reconnaissance , surveillance , targeting and acquisition seal sea - air - land forces sigint signals intelligence siprnet secure internet protocol network socom special operations command uav unmanned aerial vehicle uuv unmanned underwater vehicl .

