even before the current crisis , afghanistan had suffered twenty - two years of war , which included a long sovietoccupation,followed by civil war , and , beginning in 1996 , harsh taliban rule in most of the country .

 ( 1 ) with a devastated infrastructureand minimal government and social services , even basic health care and education were almost nonexistent .

thetalibanleadership focused available resources largely on maintaining internal security and seeking to eliminate the lastpockets ofethnic minority opposition in the north and northeast .

during this internal conflict , the taliban placed restrictionsonwomen working outside the home , further aggravating levels of poverty .

these factors , in combination with aseveredrought over the last three years , produced enormous human suffering in afghanistan .

as of september 10 , 2001 , according to unhcr , nearly four million afghans ( out of a total population of about 26million ) were refugees - two million in pakistan , one and a half million in iran , as well as others in russia , india,thecentral asian republics , europe , and elsewhere .

in addition , as of september 10th , nearly one million otherafghans wereinternally displaced persons ( idps ) uprooted by drought and conflict .

 ( 2 ) atthat time u.n. agencies were searching for waysto help five million of the most vulnerable afghans , i.e. , those in critical need of food and shelter .

for idps thismeantproviding assistance close to where they lived to help them return to their own homes .

united nations ( u.n. ) agencies , working in coordination with the u.n. assistance mission in afghanistan ( unama ) andu.n .

organization for coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) , include the u.n. high commissioner forrefugees ( unhcr ) , u.n. development program ( undp ) , u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , world food program ( wfp ) ,u.n.food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , and u.n .

mine action service ( unmas ) .

international organizationssuch asthe international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) , and numerous international nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) such as oxfam and save the children have also provided relief inside afghanistan and in refugee camps inneighboringcountries .

 ( 3 ) the united states has been the largest provider of humanitarian assistance to the people of afghanistan through itscontributions to the unhcr , other agencies , and ngos .

from 1994 until just recently , the united states did nothave aunited states agency for international development ( usaid ) mission in afghanistan .

 ( 4 ) u.s. aid was provided mainlythrough u.n. agencies and ngos .

via the wfp , the united states provided more than 80% of all food shipmentstoafghanistan during the last fiscal year and more than 47% this year .

 ( 5 ) .

the humanitarian situation deteriorated even further following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks in theunitedstates .

the u.s. - led campaign in afghanistan against the taliban and al qaeda , "operation enduring freedom,"beganon october 7 , 2001 .

within two months , by early december , many of the taliban strongholds had collapsed .

fearsofgetting caught up in u.s. attacks against the taliban triggered afghan population flights from major cities bothtowardrural areas and the country's borders with iran and pakistan , despite the risk posed by land mines and unexplodedmunitions .

although some humanitarian efforts continued during the height of the anti - taliban war , mostinternationalrelief staff also left , making the provision of assistance more complicated .

still , food relief efforts can be creditedwithpreventing a widely - feared famine last winter .

the humanitarian needs and support required for a recovery in afghanistan must be understood in the contextof thecontinuing vast numbers of refugees and idps , the variations among the regions in which they are located , and thepoliticaland security situation throughout the country .

the collapsed infrastructure , rugged terrain , and extreme weather aresignificant factors with regard to access , food aid , logistics , and plans for reconstruction .

with another winterapproaching,the current operating environment is complex with a number of urgent challenges .

at a meeting in august , unhcrcommissioner lubbers and president karzai both recognized the need now for stronger links between humanitarianandreconstruction projects so that afghans can begin to move beyond initial reintegration to more permanentresettlement .

included in the next section are brief references to some recent initiatives under way .

if reconstruction is to be a success , most observers believe it must occur in a secure environment without threat to the newgovernment and initiatives on the ground .

as u.s. troops make headway on finishing the afghan phase of the war,thereare many questions about ensuring a secure environment for reconstruction .

extending past kabul for reasons ofsecurity,aid distribution , and reconstruction initiatives , and the credibility of the itga is critical .

can peace occur withoutu.s.involvement in the peacekeeping effort ? .

how involved will the u.s. troops be in assembling and training an afghanarmy ? .

what role should the united states play in drug enforcement and the war on terrorism inside afghanistan ? .

many believe a peacekeeping force is essential and the united states must be part of such a force .

until recently , the bushadministration has been adamant that it will not take part in a peacekeeping force in afghanistan .

however , theu.n .

hascalled for more foreign troops to disarm various groups and control warlords .

the recent upsurge in conflictsuggests thepossibility that the u.s. decision may be reconsidered .

under the current mandate , peacekeepers are in kabul andhave noimpact outside the capital .

some argue that the isaf is too small and too limited to be effective .

amid discussionaboutthe type of peacekeeping force required has been the question of how long peacekeepers will be required to stay .

there remain the twin evils of drugs and terrorism , inextricably linked , but requiring different forms of intervention andenforcement .

moreover , in addition to cracking down on the problem itself , alternative forms of livelihood arecritical,such as crop substitution , community projects , and other programs to benefit those directly involved in theseactivities .

critical to afghanistan's recovery in the short term and stability in the long term is the credibility and effective functioningof its government .

moreover , the itga is facing the critical need for economic revitalization , accounting andbankingmechanisms , and debt relief for the average afghan .

it must be able to pay regularly the salaries of its police , armyofficers,and public employees .

it is crucial that it be able to extend its governmental institutions outside kabul .

what rolewill theunited states continue to play in helping to build administrative capacity in the form of a national government andinstitutional development ? .

what is the united states currently doing to help the afghan government function andpreparefor its next phase ? .

in order to keep the support of the international community , reconstruction efforts need to demonstrate the effective use offunds and their distribution .

what is the united states doing to make sure aid is being spent wisely ? .

what role istheunited states playing to facilitate international collaboration on oversight and coordination of aid projects ? .

howis theunited states coordinating its various agencies participating in reconstruction efforts ? .

from coordination mechanisms to a system of accountability , future donations in afghanistan depend on the way in whichcurrent funds are used and whether they reach those for whom they are intended .

although the work of the u.n.,international organizations , ngos , and governments will be critical , the sheer number of actors on the ground createsomeconcerns about aid assistance and how projects will be managed and coordinated .

few rules exist about how donor money is to be spent .

moreover , the lack of experience by the itga coupled with itsmany competing priorities ( not least of which is that a financial infrastructure is not yet in place ) , mean thatassistance andguidance on monetary matters ( including agreements with lenders and contributions by donors ) by the internationalcommunity remain critical .

recently , a new structure to manage the international assistance effort was put in place .

the program secretariat structure ( pss ) is designed to replace the "lead agency" approach seen in other complex humanitarian emergencies .

it ismeant tohold u.n. agencies and international organizations accountable within their sectors of responsibility .

it is also partof abroader effort to include afghan organizations in the recovery and reconstruction effort which will be important forthetransfer of responsibilities and capabilities in the future .

a number of u.s. agencies are involved in the relief and recovery effort in afghanistan .

important to the overall understanding of the u.s. role in afghanistan are the coordination mechanisms in place for this wide range ofagencies inits day - to - day activities on the ground and in washington and the ability to track overall spending by the usg .

as nine months have passed since many of the taliban stongholds collapsed and the international community began therelief and recovery effort in earnest , what does a report card on afghanistan reveal ? .

what are the most criticalobstacles tofurthering the goals of assistance and reconstruction ? .

has the international community's assessment of what it willtake forafghanistan's recovery changed in terms of time and funding required ? .

so far , there is little development - type aid in the u.s. pledge , although some is focused on quick impact programs,long - term agriculture , women and children , and education .

is it any clearer where the united states shouldconcentrate itsaid priorities and efforts ? .

with what level and mix of assistance ? .

there have been reports that the united states is providing more than its share of the multilateral relief and reconstructioneffort .

the european allies , in particular , have been sited as not providing enough support , and even then , spendingtheirmoney directly through european ngos .

these organizations are usually outside the protection regime availablethroughmultilateral agencies such as the u.n. high commissioner for refugees .

why have foreign donors been slow tocome upwith the necessary funds ? .

is the problem related to bureaucracy in europe or are there impediments in afghanistanitselfthat make donors reluctant to give immediately ? .

the taliban treatment of women and restrictions it imposed not only severely curtailed the work force , but reducedwomen's basic rights , education , and access to health .

on december 12 , 2001 congress passed the afghan womenandchildren relief act of 2001 ( s. 1573 , p.l .

107-81 ) to address some of these concerns .

a ministry ofwomen's affairs has been established within the itga .

schools reopened in afghanistan in march 2002 and girlsreturnedto the classroom for the first time since the taliban came to power .

how much impact will this legislation have onreconstruction initiatives specifically focused on women and children ? .

to what extent will their needs be a primarypointof focus in aid distribution and the recovery effort ? .

what are the barriers to the implementation of women'sprojects ? .

extensive press coverage from the bombing campaign in afghanistan revealed that there have been a number of innocentvictims of erroneous u.s. bombings .

while the hunt for the taliban and al qaeda continues , the potential formistakentargets remains a risk .

in recent months claims of erroneous bombing targets have raised the question of victimcompensation and u.s. responsibility and also highlighted the difficulty of intelligence gathering and securityproblems onthe ground .

although statutes and legislation exist to protect victims of war , these are typically worked out on acase - by - case basis .

the issue is blurred by the recognition that the end result may not be a matter of simple humanerror,but rather a complex combination of factors for which it is more difficult to determine responsibility .

collateraldamage includes civilian losses , considered to be a by - product of war , despite efforts to minimize innocent civiliancasualties .

language in the fy2003 senate foreign operations bill refers to afghan civilians suffering injury from militaryoperationsand recommends assistance that is available under the patrick leahy war victims fund be used to provide"rehabilitationand related assistance. .

should legislation be developed specifically for afghan citizens who are victims ofcollateraldamage ? .

how should individuals be compensated either for injury or death of a family member ? .

under whatcircumstances ? .

should a separate fund be made available to these victims and who should administer it ? .

table 3. international security assistance force participatingcountries as of july 31,2002 source: un security council , monthly report on the operations of the isaf , august 16 , 2002 .

