electronic government ( e - government ) intersects many legislative issues , including privacy,digital divide ( the lack of equal access to computers , whether due to a lack of financial resources ornecessary skills ) , public access to government information , service delivery , and informationsecurity .

e - government solutions are prominently represented in efforts to improve the managementand efficiency of government information technology resources .

as such , e - government can beconsidered a process , or a means to an end , rather than an end in and of itself .

e - government is stillin the earliest stages of development and promises to evolve with advances in technology andincreased acceptance and trust in electronic communications .

 ( 1 ) the dynamic nature of e - governmentand its broad sectoral applications may sometimes contribute to a lack of a common understandingof its meaning and significance .

to help policymakers discern e - government initiatives relative totheir applications to various issues , this report identifies and defines the principal e - governmentsectors and phases of development .

this report also outlines some of the major issue opportunitiesand challenges associated with e - government .

e - government means different things to different people .

some observers define e - governmentin terms of specific actions: using a government kiosk to receive job information , applying forsocial security benefits through a web site , or creating shared databases for multiple agencies , asexamples .

other observers define e - government more generally as automating the delivery ofgovernment services .

while perceptions of e - government vary widely , some common themes canbe identified that capture its evolutionary nature .

e - government involves using information technology , and especially the internet , to improve the delivery of government services to citizens , businesses , and other government agencies .

it hasthe potential to more directly connect the federal government with its citizens in a manner that opensnew opportunities while also raising new challenges .

e - government could enable citizens to interactand receive services from the federal government ( or state and local governments ) 24 hours a day,seven days a week .

some observers of e - government initiatives suggest service delivery couldbecome more convenient , dependable , and less costly .

the gartner group describes e - governmentas "the continuous optimization of service delivery , constituency participation , and governance bytransforming internal and external relationships through technology , the internet , and new media. .

 ( 2 ) mark forman , associate director for information technology and e - government at the office ofmanagement and budget ( omb ) has defined e - government as "the use of internet technology andprotocols to transform agency effectiveness , efficiency , and service quality. .

 ( 3 ) e - government is itself a process still in the early stages of development .

initial forays into e - government initiatives have focused mostly on providing enhanced access to information and basicservices .

although the full transformative effects of e - government remain largely unrealized at thistime , the rapid growth in interest and resources dedicated to e - government initiatives may contributeto swifter changes .

one area where the implications for implementing e - government initiatives may have asignificant effect relates to the concerns of federalism .

the constitution established a federal systemof governance granting certain powers to the national government while reserving others to the statesand the people .

throughout the history of the country , the nature of american federalism hasevolved , reflecting the political , economic , and social changes that have occurred .

 ( 4 ) however , oneof the hallmarks of a federal system of governance is the emphasis on vertical divisions of power .

in contrast , e - government initiatives utilize information technologies that emphasize a horizontal,or networked , model of communication and interaction .

while e - government is designed , in part,to break down the barriers separating different agencies , it could also have a similar effect on theboundaries of federal governance .

in light of the divergent properties of federalism and e - government , the advent of e - government has the potential to effect significantly the power relationship between the national and stategovernments .

an example includes initiatives to create "one - stop - shopping" web sites to obtaingovernment services and information , such as the firstgov site .

in addition to its original role ofproviding access to all federal government web sites , firstgov has added links to most state websites as well .

 ( 5 ) one of the goals of these types of sitesis to create an experience that attenuates theagency - centric approach to providing services .

although this usually refers to agencies at the samelevel of government , it could also include services that are provided through some form of national,state , and / or local cooperation , such as welfare , transportation , or law enforcement activities .

however , these same efforts to improve the delivery of government services could also diffusepolitical responsibility and credit , making it less clear from where the funding and direction areoriginating .

discussed in greater detail below , the advent of e - government raises a number of issues .

it isimportant to stress at this point the multidimensional nature of those issues .

on the one hand,e - government provides new opportunities to enhance governance , which can include improvedefficiency , new services , increased citizen participation , and an enhanced national informationinfrastructure .

on the other hand , e - government also presents new challenges to governanceincluding information security , privacy , disparities in computer access , and management and fundingrequirements .

together , all of these issues are complicated by their combined intra - andinter - governmental nature .

they can crosscut both the various sectors and stages of e - governmentdevelopment .

however , they also share a number of recurring themes often associated withprevious , less technologically - dependent approaches to improving government such as jurisdictionalauthority , procedures for the appropriate handling of information , building and maintaininginfrastructures , providing services , and citizens' rights .

the multidimensional nature ofe - government suggests that there are no quick fixes for the concerns raised , but rather that issues willneed to be addressed with careful attention to context and precedent .

although e - government encompasses a wide range of activities and actors , three distinct sectorscan be identified .

these include government - to - government ( g2g ) , government - to - business ( g2b ) ,and government - to - citizen ( g2c ) .

some observers also identify a fourth sector,government - to - employee ( g2e ) .

however , since g2e operations are intra - agency activities , theycan be considered a subset of the g2g sector and are not addressed separately in this report .

aseparate report focusing specifically on g2e issues is forthcoming .

in addition to identifying e - government initiatives according to their sector , such projects canalso be classified according to their level or stage of development .

although different e - governmentinitiatives strive to accomplish different goals , some observers argue that one of the overarchingthemes of e - government is to fully realize the capabilities of available information technology in aneffort to transform government from an agency - centric , limited service operation into an automated,citizen - centric operation capable of delivering government services to citizens , businesses , and othergovernment agencies 24 hours a day , seven days a week .

however , for a variety of technical,economic , and political reasons , it will take time for these initiatives to evolve into their fullpotential .

for that reason , some observers use a common schema for classifying the stages ofevolution of e - government projects .

 ( 31 ) the schemais based on the degree to which the properties ofinformation technology have been utilized to enable the delivery of services electronically .

usingthis schema , there are four stages of evolution ; presence , interaction , transaction , and transformation .

it is important to note that an e - government initiative does not necessarily have to start at the firststage and work its way through all of the stages .

instead , a project can skip levels , either from itsinception or as it develops .

title i establishes new organizational structures and amends different portions of title 44ofthe united states code .

section 101 establishes the office of electronic government in omb .

thisnew office is headed by an administrator , who is to be appointed by the president .

 ( 48 ) as head of theoffice of electronic government , p.l .

107-347 tasks the administrator with assisting the directorof omb , and the deputy director of management , in coordination with the efforts of theadministrator of the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) to carry out relevantomb responsibilities for prescribing guidelines and regulations for agency implementation of theprivacy act , the clinger - cohen act , information technology acquisition pilot programs , and thegovernment paperwork elimination act .

it also requires the general services administration ( gsa ) to consult with the administrator of the office of electronic government on any efforts bygsa to promote e - government .

section 101 amends title 44 by adding chapter 36 - management and promotion of electronicgovernment services , which focuses on issues related to the functions of the administrator of theoffice of electronic government , the cio council , and the e - government fund .

this chaptermakes the administrator of the office of electronic government responsible for carrying out avariety of information resources management ( irm ) functions .

some of these responsibilities include: advising the director of omb on irm resources and strategies ; providing "overallleadership and direction on electronic government" ; promoting the effective and innovative use ofinformation technology by agencies especially through multiagency collaborative projects ; administering and distributing funds from the e - government fund ( discussed in greater detailbelow ) ; consulting with gsa "to promote electronic government and the efficient use of informationtechnologies by agencies" ; leading activities on behalf of the deputy director of management , whoserves as the chair of the cio council ; assisting the director "in establishing policies which shallset the framework for information technology standards" to be developed by the national institutefor standards and technology" ; sponsoring an ongoing dialogue with federal , state , local , and triballeaders to encourage collaboration and enhance consultation on information technology bestpractices and innovation ; promoting electronic procurement initiatives ; and implementingaccessibility standards .

section 101 also establishes the cio council by law , with the deputy director of managementof omb as chairperson , and detail its organizational structure and mandate .

in addition , section 101establishes an e - government fund for interagency information technology projects .

the fund willbe administered by the administrator of the general services administration ( gsa ) , with theassistance of the administrator of the office of electronic government .

the provision authorizesappropriations for the e - government fund in the following amounts: $45 million for fy 2003 , $50million for fy 2004 , $100 million for fy 2005 , $150 million for fy 2006 , and "such sums asnecessary for fiscal year 2007. .

the provision also allows funds to be made available until expendedand require the director of omb to submit annual reports to the president and congress regardingthe operation of the fund .

section 102 consists of conforming amendments .

title ii focuses on enhancing a variety of e - government services , establishing performance measures , and clarifying omb's role as the leader and coordinator of federal e - government services .

the responsibilities of the office of electronic government are described in greater detail .

section201 focuses on definitions used .

section 202 covers federal agency responsibilities asthey relateto the director of omb .

some of these responsibilities include participating in the cio council,developing performance measures for e - government initiatives , and submitting annual agencye - government status reports to the director of omb .

section 203 requires executive agencies to adopt electronic signature methods that would ensure acceptability and compatibility with omb standards .

section 204 directs the director of omb to work with the administrator of the general services administration ( gsa ) to "maintain and promote an integrated internet - based system ofproviding the public with access to government information and services. .

section 205 directs the federal courts to develop web sites containing information about theoperation of the court , dockets , and related materials .

similarly , section 206 directs regulatoryagencies to establish web sites containing relevant public information .

section 207 outlines the responsibilities of the director of omb for maintaining accessibility,usability , and preservation of government information .

among its provisions , this sectionestablishes an interagency committee on government information with its members drawn fromexecutive branch agencies , the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , as well asthe federal legislative and judicial branches .

the committee is tasked to conduct studies and submitrecommendations to the director of omb and congress regarding the development of interoperablecataloguing and indexing standards by federal agencies and ensuring permanent public access toinformation disseminated by the federal government online .

section 208 establishes privacy requirements regarding agency use of personally identifiable information and requires the director of omb to establish privacy guidelines for federal web sites .

section 209 allows for the development of curricula and training opportunities for federal government personnel in information technology and information resource management skills .

thissection also contains language similar to h.r .

3925 , the digital tech corps act of2002 , which allows for the exchange of mid - level information technology workers betweengovernment agencies and private sector organizations .

section 210 amends chapter 137 of title 10 , u.s.c. , by adding a new section regarding the facilitation of new incentives and procedures to encourage agencies to use share - in - savingsprocurement techniques .

the provisions of this section are similar to the language in h.r .

3832 , the services acquisition reform act of 2002 .

section 211 amends section 502 of title 40 , u.s.c .

by allowing state or local governments touse federal supply schedules to purchase information technology equipment , software , supplies , andservices .

vendor participation regarding state and local government purchases is voluntary .

section 212 requires the director of omb to conduct a feasibility study on integrating federalinformation systems across agencies and implement up to five pilot projects integrating dataelements .

section 213 mandates an interagency study on the best practices of federally - fundedcommunity technology centers .

section 214 directs the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to contract a study "onusing information technology to enhance crisis response and consequence management of naturaland manmade disasters. .

it also directs fema to conduct pilot projects based on the results of thestudy .

section 215 directs the administrator of general services to contract with the national research council to examine disparities in internet access based on demographic characteristics .

section 216 directs the administrator of the office of e - government , in consultation with thesecretary of the interior , and working with the director of omb through an interagency workinggroup , to facilitate the development of common protocols for geographic information systems .

title iii contains language similar to the proposed federal information security managementact ( fisma ) of 2002 , as it appears in p.l .

107-296 , the homeland security act of 2002 .

thelanguage of title iii permanent supersedes the fisma language in p.l .

107-296 .

fismare - authorizes and amends the government information security reform act ( gisra ) .

section 301 amends subchapter ii of chapter 35 of title 44 u.s.c .

by stipulating the general authority , functions , and responsibilities of the director of omb and individual agencies , as it relatesto developing and maintaining federal information security policies and practices .

it also requiresagencies to conduct annual independent evaluations of their information security programs andpractices .

agencies operating or controlling national security systems are also responsible formaintaining the appropriate level of information security protections for these systems .

section 302 amends the clinger - cohen act by requiring the secretary of commerce , on the basis of proposals developed by the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , topromulgate information security standards for federal information systems .

section 303 amends section 20 of the national institute of standards and technology act ( 15u.s.c .

278g - 3 ) by affirming the role of nist to develop standards , guidelines , and minimumrequirements for information systems used by federal agencies , or by contractors on behalf of anagency .

it also directs nist to carry out these activities in consultation and coordination with therelevant agencies and offices , including but not limited to , the director of omb , the nationalsecurity agency ( nsa ) , the general accounting office ( gao ) , and the secretary of homelandsecurity .

section 304 amends the national institute of standards and technology act ( 15 u.s.c .

278g - 4 ) by replacing the computer system security and privacy advisory board with theinformation security and privacy advisory board .

it also directs the information security andprivacy advisory board to advise nist and the director of omb on information security andprivacy issues as it relates to government information systems .

section 305 contains technical and conforming amendments as it relates to the computer security act , the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 , and thepaperwork reduction act .

sections 401 and 402 authorize appropriations for the bill through fiscal 2007 and has the billtake effect 120 days after it is enacted .

title v contains language from h.r .

5215 , the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002 .

section 501 cites the short title of the provision as the confidential information protection andstatistical efficiency act of 2002 .

section 502 consists of the definitions used in title v. section 503 designates the director of omb as being responsible for coordinating and overseeing the confidentiality and disclosure policies established in this title .

it also stipulates thereporting requirements agencies have to the director of omb regarding these issues .

section 504 stipulates the limitations and effects this title would have on other federal and statelaws and regulations .

subtitle a includes sections 511-513 , which covers information protection requirements .

 ( 49 ) section 511 contains the findings and purpose of the subtitle , which include to ensure that theconfidentiality of personally identifiable information , used by the federal government for statisticalpurposes , is maintained .

section 512 details the limitations on use and disclosure of data and information agencies needto follow .

this includes barring agencies from disclosing personally identifiable information foruses other than statistical purposes , without the informed consent of the respondent .

section 513 details the fines and penalties applicable if an officer , employee , or agency of anagency knowingly discloses information in a manner prohibited by this title .

subtitle b includes section 521-526 , which covers statistical efficiency requirements .

 ( 50 ) section 521 contains the findings and purposes of the subtitle , which include authorizing thesharing of business data between relevant agencies , and improving the comparability and accuracyof federal economic statistics .

section 522 stipulates that the term "designated statistical agency" includes the bureau of thecensus , the bureau of economic analysis , and the bureau of labor statistics .

section 523 stipulates the responsibilities of designated statistical agencies , which includes identifying opportunities to eliminate the duplication of reporting requirements , entering into jointstatistical projects , and protecting the confidentiality of individually identifiable information .

section 524 outlines the responsibilities of designated statistical agencies as they relate to thesharing of business data , including obligations to adhere to the requirements of other laws andlimitations regarding the disclosure of such information .

section 525 restricts the use of business data to statistical purposes and prohibit the publicationof business data in an identifiable form .

section 526 consists of conforming amendments .

crs report rl31627 ( pdf ) , computer software and open source issues: a primer , byjeffrey w.seifert .

crs report rl30153 , critical infrastructures: background , policy , and implementation , by johnd .

moteff .

crs report rs21140 , electronic congress: proposals and issues , by jeffrey w.seifert and r. ericpetersen .

crs report rl30745 , electronic government: a conceptual overview , by haroldc .

relyea .

crs report rl31088 , electronic government: major proposals and initiatives , byharold c.relyea .

crs report rs20344 , electronic signatures: technology developments and legislative issues , by[author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30914 , federal chief information officer ( cio ) : opportunities and challenges ,by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30661 ( pdf ) , government information technology management: past and future issues ( the clinger - cohen act ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31103 ( pdf ) , house of representatives information technology management issues: an overview of the effects on institutional operations , the legislative process , and futureplanning , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-67 stm , internet: an overview of key technology policy issues affecting its use and growth , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed],and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30590 ( pdf ) , paperwork reduction act reauthorization and government information management issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30824 , the privacy act: emerging issues and related legislation , by harold c.relyea .

