the constitution grants congress the power to "coin money , and regulate the value thereof...." congress has delegated responsibility for making u.s. monetary policy to the federal reserve system ( fed ) .

this latter arrangement is one that many observers have criticized .

quasi - public in structure , overseen by a board of governors whose members are appointed to long terms , and reliant on its own source of funding , the fed possesses a degree of independence that some argue is inimical to the spirit of democracy .

although this argument ( and refutations of it ) may be political or constitutional in nature , it is also rooted in certain notions about macroeconomic policy .

debates concerning the ability of the fed to control interest rates , the need for coordination of monetary policy and fiscal policy , or even the importance of monetary policy , underlie the arguments for and against independence , and are matters of economic analysis .

thus , in undertaking a discussion of whether the fed should have more or less independence or accountability , it is essential to understand how monetary policy works , and its role relative to fiscal policy .

without this knowledge , it is possible that a decision to change the structure of the fed would fail to bring about the economic effects desired , or would bring about other , adverse , effects not expected by advocates of the change .

this report gives a brief description of the structure of the fed .

it then discusses the economics of how fed independence affects monetary policy .

the report does not consider how fed independence may affect the fed's other duties , such as its oversight of the financial system .

it then examines the probable economic ramifications of proposals to curb the independence of the fed .

many recessions occur because aggregate supply exceeds aggregate demand .

in other words , total spending is lower than what the economy is capable of producing .

economists attribute this phenomenon to the presence of price stickiness .

when the demand for goods and labor falls , prices should fall to a point where adequate demand is restored .

but because price adjustment does not happen quickly — due to the presence of contracts , menus , and uncertainty — output declines .

this can lead to a vicious cycle where unemployment rises and resources fall idle — lowering aggregate demand further .

in the long run , prices will adjust and the economy will return to its full potential .

however , the examples of the great depression and the japanese economy in the 1990s suggest that the long run can be very long indeed .

if the government does not wish to wait for this long run self - adjustment to occur , it has two primary tools at its disposal to boost aggregate demand .

the favored tool at present is monetary policy .

the fed can inject newly printed money into the economy by purchasing u.s. treasuries , a process referred to as expansionary monetary policy .

since prices do not adjust instantly , this money will increase aggregate output if there are unused resources in the economy .

the channel through which this spending increase occurs is lower interest rates .

the cost of borrowing is lowered as the reserves available to the banking system expand .

thus , aggregate spending is boosted through higher investment spending on capital goods , equipment , and buildings and through higher consumption on interest - sensitive goods like automobiles , homes , and appliances .

aggregate spending is also boosted through the foreign trade sector .

lower interest rates attract less investment to the united states , and , other things being equal , this reduces demand for the dollar .

as the exchange rate depreciates , foreign spending on u.s. exports and the u.s. production of import - competing goods will rise .

in the long run , the printing of money can have no real effect on the economy — sustained inflation is a purely monetary phenomenon .

reductions in unemployment resulting from expansionary monetary policy are either temporary ( if the economy was already at full employment when policy was changed ) or would have eventually occurred anyway ( if the economy was not at full employment ) .

prices will adjust to the increase in the money supply , causing inflation to rise .

the closer the economy is to its full potential when monetary policy becomes expansionary , the more the increase in aggregate demand will be transmitted into higher inflation rather than greater output .

criticisms of the fed's structure break down to three notions .

first , some believe the fed is too independent in the sense that its decisions are too far removed from the will of the public .

second , critics say that monetary and fiscal policy are made in isolation from each other , so that there is no mechanism to guarantee their coordination .

third , others argue that as an institution , the fed is insufficiently open or accountable , with its activities shrouded in secrecy and with little external supervision or examination of its outlays , management practice , and policy decisions .

in general , both those who argue for continued broad discretion and those who argue for change emphasize the importance of monetary policy for the economy and make it the center of their arguments .

basically , one side maintains that monetary policy is too important to be put into the hands of a few appointed officials .

the other believes that it is too important not to do so .

while monetary policy is important , one must keep in mind how it is important .

the short - run effects of monetary policy differ substantially from its long - run effects .

whatever argument is advanced to support or attack independence , it should not be predicated on the belief that the fed's job is to control interest rates .

the fed's influence over the economy is short - term only .

in the long run the fed does not control real interest rates , and efforts aimed at controlling interest rates based on its short - run influence generally result in accelerating inflation or deflation .

an argument against independence cannot be predicated on the belief that interest rates can be fixed or that inflation and recession could always be avoided if interest rates were never raised .

instead , an economically valid argument against independence can be made as long as it recognizes that the positive effects interest rate reductions have on output and employment come sooner than the negative effects interest rate reductions have on inflation .

similarly , anti - inflation policies bring short - term pain and only long - term rewards .

in such circumstances , independence , or partially insulating the fed from short - term political pressures through institutional arrangements , is a way to make painful but necessary policies more likely to occur .

there are also some possible economic drawbacks to independence that merit consideration .

first , oversight is difficult in the current system , and this makes it difficult to prevent or reverse poor policy decisions by the fed .

second , potential benefits of coordinating monetary and fiscal policy cannot be secured .

while disallowing coordination means that the benefits of good policy cannot be maximized , it also means that the effects of bad policy can potentially be minimized .

if reducing or eliminating fed independence were deemed too economically costly , are there alternative reforms that could be considered to address the issues that critics have raised ? .

monetary policy rules are another way to make policy immune from detrimental short term pressures , and they do not suffer from some of the drawbacks of independence .

rules would also boost accountability and some might view them as more democratic in the sense that they reduce the discretionary power of unelected officials .

the economic tradeoff between rules and discretion is of a different nature .

it boils down to a question of how well a highly complex economy can be stabilized by a blunt and simple rule .

economists are highly divided on this point .

many of those who support rules do so because they have little faith in the ability of the fomc to make better discretionary decisions than a simple rule .

an inflation target , as it has been practiced abroad , is a modest middle path between strict policy rules and unlimited discretion , but only because it has not been implemented too literally .

congressional oversight suffers from having the fed's goals as vaguely defined as they are at present .

an inflation target would tighten those goals and increase accountability if persistently egregious policy errors were made .

it would not , however , significantly reduce the fed's independence as it attempted to devise discretionary monetary policy for a highly complex and changing economy .

the economic arguments for and against fed independence evaluated in this report apply only to the fed's monetary policy responsibilities .

arguments for and against reassigning the fed's other duties , such as bank regulation , to a less independent entity are beyond the scope of this report .

