in the first session of the 110 th congress , energy policy enters its eighth year as a major legislative issue .

the previous congress passed a massive energy bill , the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l .

109-58 ) , but subsequent developments worked to keep crude oil and gasoline prices high and interest in legislative solutions active .

epact was enacted on august 8 , 2005 .

successive hurricanes , katrina and rita , in late august and late september 2005 , brought about the shutdown of more than 5 million barrels per day of refining capacity in texas and louisiana and initially shut down the 25% of u.s. crude oil production and 20% of u.s. natural gas production that comes from the outer continental shelf in the gulf of mexico .

world and domestic demand for oil has remained strong , taking up most of the world's spare production capacity .

the phaseout of the gasoline additive methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) and a renewable fuels mandate in epact have placed additional pressure on gasoline price and deliverability in the united states .

in the summer of 2006 , gasoline prices returned to the post - katrina peaks of more than $3.00 per gallon and stayed there throughout the peak driving season .

nevertheless , u.s. gasoline demand reached a record high , averaging over 9.5 million barrels per day in july .

during early 2007 , gasoline prices were in the low - to mid - $2 range .

the passage of epact had its roots in an unexpected jump in oil prices that began in the late spring of 1999 , following a production cut by the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) .

in early 2003 , oil prices were reaching into the mid - $30s .

prices rose even higher during 2004 — exceeding $50 per barrel for a brief period — owing to growing world demand both in the united states and the far east , inadequate refining capacity , and hurricane ivan , which reduced u.s. production from the gulf of mexico for several months .

crude oil and petroleum product prices escalated further during 2005 .

these increases were initially attributable to growing international demand for oil that , domestically , put a strain on u.s. and world refining capacity .

then , in august and september , hurricanes katrina and rita caused further supply disruption .

this continuing period of volatility in fuel supplies and prices has been the fourth significant episode since 1973 to jog american awareness of the extent to which the u.s. economy and lifestyle depend on inexpensive and plentiful energy .

however , this surge in price represents a departure from historic trends because the rise in the price for oil fuels and energy products has occurred for more than five years and has been sustained .

some analysts have coined the term "demand destruction" to describe price - induced reductions in consumption , but overall demand for oil has proven resilient .

world demand for oil has grown from roughly 78 million barrels daily in 2001 to roughly 84 million barrels daily during 2005 .

an additional departure from past patterns is that , historically , increases in crude oil prices owing to supply or international issues have driven product prices as the higher cost for crude feedstock is passed on .

however , crude supply and stocks in 2005 — prior to the hurricanes — were adequate .

commitments by opec during the course of the year to maintain or boost production appeared to have little but short - term effects on crude prices .

tightness in refined products prior to the hurricanes and the accompanying rise of product prices was a function of insufficient refining capacity in the united states to meet demand for a range of summer gasoline formulations .

the pressures on product prices appeared to work backwards to support higher prices for crude .

the hurricanes exacerbated these dynamics , further tightening product supply owing to problems with pipeline distribution as well as refining capacity , and introducing at the same time an uncertainty about crude supply that had not been as strong a worry prior to the storms .

in 2006 and 2007 , a number of factors — new and old — have contributed to an especially brittle climate for energy supply and price .

whenever the united states has experienced a period marked by sharp increases in the price for energy and concern about the adequacy of essential supplies , there is widespread concern that the nation has no energy policy .

however , not only does the nation have an energy policy , it has adopted several distinct policy approaches over the years .

this report discusses those major policy approaches , provides a conceptual framework for categorizing energy policy proposals , and briefly describes energy issues that remain current in the debate after the enactment of epact .

most policymakers acknowledged that epact would provide negligible price relief in the short term , but they contended that it would encourage domestic production of oil and gas and further conservation and alternative fuel initiatives .

at issue for congress is whether there should be an additional policy response in the face of continued pressure on oil price and supply .

in the 30 years since the arab oil embargo , the united states has pursued a number of different energy policy courses .

in the course of several episodes during this period when oil price and supply became unstable , the u.s. moved from a set of policies more reliant on the federal government , to policies more dependent upon markets .

this history is briefly summarized in the section to follow .

constructing a balanced energy policy that will not undermine other competing and equally legitimate policy goals is a complex problem .

how to boost energy supply without exacting an unacceptable toll on the environment ? .

how , then , to reduce gasoline consumption , a commodity central to the nation's economy and lifestyle , when raising its price to achieve a meaningful reduction in demand could be economically disruptive and politically unappealing ? .

should federal policy encourage the use of more expensive alternative fuels and technologies that heighten efficiency , when opec has generally demonstrated a capability to adjust the price of oil to keep it far cheaper than its substitutes ? .

debate over energy policy has produced an enormous range of proposals , many of which have been adopted at one point or another over the years .

in general , it is helpful to recognize the broad categories into which most proposals fall: most energy policies are designed to affect either the supply of or the demand for energy products , and they are , at the same time , designed to have an effect either in the near term or the longer term .

traditionally , the energy debate has been the most vigorous over the balance to be struck between increasing supply and encouraging conservation .

however , energy policy turns on the additional axis of short - and long - term policies .

in the midst of high prices during the spring of 2001 , policymakers were pressed to come up with immediate policy responses that would afford consumers price relief .

however , at that time president bush was advising congress and americans that the administration's energy policy plan would focus on long - term remedies for the nation's energy problems and that there would be no immediate relief for consumers paying higher prices for gasoline , electricity , and other fuels .

the president and his supporters suggested that by setting out an action - oriented and actionable comprehensive policy , markets and consumers should feel some short - term reassurance .

this did not quell all the demands for more immediate action to reduce energy prices .

nor were they completely quelled during the protracted debate over omnibus energy legislation from 2003 until the enactment of epact in the summer of 2005 .

it is useful to clarify the differences between short - term and long - term policy initiatives .

for example , a drawdown of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) affects crude oil supply in the near term .

however , enactment of tax incentives for investment in new oil drilling technologies might add to domestic crude supply further in the future .

proponents of drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) argue it might add anywhere from 300,000 b / d ( barrels per day ) to 1.4 mbd to u.s. domestic supply , but this , too , is a longer - term policy initiative .

turning to the consumption side of the ledger , boosting the federal gasoline tax by $1.50 / gallon might be expected to reduce gasoline consumption in the near term , but increasing the corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) standards on new motor vehicles would not take full effect until older vehicles were largely replaced , a process that could take more than a decade .

the table below suggests a way in which many energy policies may be visualized along these lines: the axis of long - term / short - term , supply / demand does not capture all policy options .

for example , one of the major issues in energy policy is the price for fuels .

energy policy generally is designed to affect price indirectly — by having price follow , or reflect , current demand or supply for energy .

there are a few exceptions .

tax policy may address energy price directly to the extent that excise taxes on fuel products can be raised or lowered ( recognizing that these tax boosts or cuts may not be reflected penny - for - penny in the "pump" price for fuels ) .

short - term policies to affect supply , such as potential use of strategic reserves , have been sometimes very controversial because , in the absence of a very clear - cut and widely acknowledged physical shortage , such initiatives are perceived to be thinly disguised efforts to grant price relief .

some suggest at times that high prices — left uninterfered with — are the best policy of all , encouraging markets to provide more supply in due course , and that federal policy should address only those most adversely affected by sharply higher prices .

the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) is one such effort to provide direct assistance to families whose quality of life is especially burdened by high energy prices .

liheap is a short - term policy for addressing the impact of high prices for energy .

supply and demand may also be affected by external events , including political and diplomatic dynamics between or among the producing nations .

weather , seasonal or otherwise , will affect supply and demand ; policy cannot affect the weather , only its consequences .

lastly , congress always has the option to require study and analysis of a problem before settling on a policy course .

requirements for such studies are regularly included in appropriations bills and other legislation .

in every energy debate , one question is a constant: how extensive a federal role is appropriate in energy policy ? .

however often that question recurs , the context in which it is raised changes .

the current context has become distinctly different than in previous episodes .

u.s. energy policy was primarily market - based for roughly 20 years , but policy makers have been weighing whether problems in some sectors and with some fuels are attributable to distribution or regulatory inefficiencies interfering with markets , or whether government intervention may be necessary to protect consumers and the economy from problems to which markets cannot flexibly respond .

some critics of u.s. energy policy argue that these inefficiencies and distortions are themselves the consequence of government intervention — for example , clean air act requirements that have required the manufacture of several different regional formulations of gasoline .

strong economic growth during the mid - and late 1990s at a time of declining real energy prices resulted in growth in consumption even though efficiency of energy use is dramatically better than during the 1970s and 1980s .

growth in petroleum consumption in the united states as domestic production declines has meant a commensurate increase in oil imports .

during the second half of 2004 , growth in demand as well from the far east pressured spare oil production capacity .

in the midst of market uncertainties , increased opec production — unlike in the past — appeared unable to exert its historical effect of moderating crude oil prices .

there is recognition of the interdependence of producing and consuming nations ; however , the political balance among the opec nations is delicate and can influence oil production decisions and whether opec is able to exert market control at all .

there is growing recognition that the recent shortages and price spikes in some regions of the country have been compounded by insufficiencies in the nation's energy infrastructure — refining capacity , gas and oil pipelines , transmission lines , and electric generating facilities .

some have questioned the advisability of locating so much of the nation's refining capacity in the louisiana , alabama , and texas .

problems with gasoline supply and home heating oil stocks since 2000 imply some need to develop additional refining capacity and transport systems that will add both capacity and flexibility to distribution .

however , national and local environmental regulation and requirements , and local community sentiment , affect the speed and ease of siting and building such facilities .

because high prices tend to eventually depress demand , the industry is sometimes wary of making investment in capacity that would achieve profit targets only during short - lived periods of unusually high prices .

uncertainty about the course of the economy may also contribute to questions about the profitability of these investments .

concerns about greenhouse gas emissions add an additional measure of uncertainty .

policymakers have debated additional measures for "refinery revitalization" and streamlining the process for approval of refinery siting and construction .

the shift to a more market - oriented energy policy , additional lessons some have taken from experiences during the 1980s and 1990s , geopolitical developments and developments such as those outlined above are likely to play a part in any consideration of energy issues still pending and of interest to many policymakers in a post - epact climate .

some of these issues are broadly reviewed below .

tax policy plays a role in many of these areas .

 ( see crs report rl33578 , energy tax policy: history and current issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

as apparent as it seems to many that the nation should do "something" about energy , the preceding pages have outlined the layers of complexity that augur against easy agreement to many of the policy options that have been proposed and debated since the mid - 1970s .

a review of the history shows that every episode of instability has had its own set of unique contributing factors — and that these may be geopolitical , based in energy infrastructure or unanticipated natural disasters , or triggered by extremes of heat or cold beyond anyone's control .

making policy decisions that will anticipate unpredictable future developments , or settling on policies to mitigate the consequences when these events are before us , will remain a challenge for policymakers as the energy debate continues .

