article ii , section 2 , of the constitution provides that the president shall appoint officers of the united states "by and with the advice and consent of the senate. .

the method by which the senate provides advice and consent on presidential nominations , referred to broadly as the confirmation process , serves several purposes .

first , largely through committee investigations and hearings , the confirmation process allows the senate to examine the qualifications of nominees and any potential conflicts of interest .

second , senators can influence policy through the confirmation process , either by rejecting nominees or by extracting promises from nominees before granting consent .

also , the senate sometimes has delayed the confirmation process in order to increase its influence with the executive branch on unrelated matters .

senate confirmation is required for several categories of government officials .

military appointments and promotions make up the majority of nominations , approximately 65,000 per two - year congress , and most are confirmed routinely .

each congress , the senate also considers approximately 2,000 civilian nominations , and , again , many of them , such as appointments to or promotions in the foreign service , are routine .

civilian nominations considered by the senate also include federal judges and specified officers in executive departments , independent agencies , and regulatory boards and commissions .

many presidential appointees are confirmed routinely by the senate .

with tens of thousands of nominations each congress , the senate cannot possibly consider them all in detail .

a regularized process facilitates quick action on thousands of government positions .

the senate may approve en bloc hundreds of nominations at a time , especially military appointments and promotions .

the process also allows for close scrutiny of candidates when necessary .

each year , a few hundred nominees to high - level positions are regularly subject to senate investigations and public hearings .

most of these are routinely approved , while a small number of nominations are disputed and receive more attention from the media and congress .

judicial nominations , particularly supreme court appointees , are generally subject to greater scrutiny than nominations to executive posts , partly because judges may serve for life .

among the executive branch positions , nominees for policymaking positions are more likely to be examined closely , and are slightly less likely to be confirmed , than nominees for non - policy positions .

there are several reasons that the senate confirms a high percentage of nominations .

most nominations and promotions are not to policymaking positions and are of less interest to the senate .

in addition , some sentiment exists in the senate that the selection of persons to fill executive branch positions is largely a presidential prerogative .

historically , the president has been granted wide latitude in the selection of his cabinet and other high - ranking executive branch officials .

another important reason for the high percentage of confirmations is that senators are often involved in the nomination stage .

the president would prefer a smooth and fast confirmation process , so he may decide to consult with senators prior to choosing a nominee .

senators most likely to be consulted , typically by white house congressional relations staff , are senators from a nominee's home state , leaders of the committee of jurisdiction , and leaders of the president's party in the senate .

senators of the president's party are sometimes invited to express opinions or even propose candidates for federal appointments in their own states .

there is a long - standing custom of "senatorial courtesy," whereby the senate will sometimes decline to proceed on a nomination if a home - state senator expresses opposition .

positions subject to senatorial courtesy include u.s. attorneys , u.s. marshals , and u.s. district judges .

over the past decade , senators have expressed concerns over various aspects of the confirmation process , including the rate of confirmation for high - ranking executive branch positions and judgeships , as well as the speed of senate action on routine nominations .

when the senate is controlled by the party of the president , this concern has often been raised as a complaint that minority party senators are disputing a higher number of nominations , and have increasingly used their leverage under senate proceedings to delay or even block their consideration .

these concerns have led the senate to make several changes to the confirmation process since 2011 .

the changes are taken into account in the following description of the process and are described in detail in other crs reports .

the president customarily sends nomination messages to the senate in writing .

once received , nominations are numbered by the executive clerk and read on the floor .

the clerk actually assigns numbers to the presidential messages , not to individual nominations , so a message listing several nominations would receive a single number .

except by unanimous consent , the senate cannot vote on nominations the day they are received , and most are referred immediately to committees .

senate rule xxxi provides that nominations shall be referred to appropriate committees "unless otherwise ordered. .

a standing order of the senate provides that some nominations to specified positions will not be referred unless a senator requests referral .

instead of being immediately referred , the nominations are instead listed in a special section of the executive calendar , a document distributed daily to congressional offices and available online .

this section of the calendar is titled "privileged nominations. .

after the chair of the committee with jurisdiction over a nomination has notified the executive clerk that biographical and financial information on the nominee has been received , this is indicated in the calendar .

after 10 days , the nomination is moved from the "privileged nominations" section of the calendar and placed on the "nominations" section with the same status as a nomination that had been reported by a committee .

 ( see " executive calendar " below. ) .

importantly , at any time that the nomination is listed in the new section of the executive calendar , any senator can request that a nomination be referred , and it is then sent to the appropriate committee of jurisdiction .

formally the presiding officer , but administratively the executive clerk's office , refers the nominations to committees according to the senate's rules and precedents .

the senate rule concerning committee jurisdictions ( rule xxv ) broadly defines issue areas for committees , and the same jurisdictional statements generally apply to nominations as well as legislation .

an executive department nomination can be expected to be referred to the committee with jurisdiction over legislation concerning that department or to the committee that handled the legislation creating the position .

judicial branch nominations , including judges , u.s. attorneys , and u.s. marshals , are under the jurisdiction of the judiciary committee .

in some instances , the committee of jurisdiction for a nomination has been set in statute .

the number of nominations referred to various committees differs considerably .

the committee on armed services , which handles all military appointments and promotions , receives the most .

the two other committees with major confirmation responsibilities are the committee on the judiciary , with its jurisdiction over nominations in the judicial branch , and the committee on foreign relations , which considers ambassadorial and other diplomatic appointments .

occasionally , nominations are referred to more than one committee , either jointly or sequentially .

a joint referral might occur when the jurisdictional claim of two committees is essentially equal .

in such cases , both committees must report on the nomination before the whole senate can act on it , unless the senate discharges one or both committees .

if two committees have unequal jurisdictional claims , then the nomination is more likely to be sequentially referred .

in this case , the first committee must report the nomination before it is sequentially referred to the second committee .

the second referral often is subject to a requirement that the committee report within a certain number of days .

typically , nominations are jointly or sequentially referred by unanimous consent .

sometimes the unanimous consent agreement applies to all future nominations to a position or category of positions .

the senate handles executive business , which includes both nominations and treaties , separately from its legislative business .

all nominations reported from committee , regardless of whether they were reported favorably , unfavorably , or without recommendation , are listed on the executive calendar , a separate document from the calendar of business , which lists pending bills and resolutions .

usually , the majority leader schedules the consideration of nominations on the calendar .

nominations are considered in executive session , a parliamentary form of the senate in session that has its own journal and , to some extent , its own rules of procedure .

on april 3 , 2019 , the senate reinterpreted senate rule xxii to reduce , from 30 hours to 2 hours , the maximum time allowed for consideration of most nominations after cloture is invoked .

the senate took this step by reversing two rulings by the presiding officer .

the first vote established that "postcloture time under rule xxii for all executive branch nominations other than a position at level 1 of the executive schedule under section 5312 of title 5 of the united states code is 2 hours. .

on the second vote , the senate established that "postcloture time under rule xxii for all judicial nominations , other than circuit courts or supreme court of the united states , is 2 hours" ( see table 1 ) .

it is uncommon for the senate to reverse a decision by the presiding officer .

any senator can attempt to reverse a ruling by making an appeal , and except in specific cases , appeals are decided by majority vote .

in most circumstances , however , appeals are debatable , and therefore supermajority support ( through a cloture process ) is typically necessary to reach a vote to reverse a decision of the presiding officer .

in the april 3 proceedings , however , the appeal was raised after cloture had been invoked .

senate rule xxii states that after a successful cloture vote , "appeals from the decision of the presiding officer , shall be decided without debate. .

therefore , when the majority leader appealed the rulings of the presiding officer , the questions on whether the ruling should stand as the judgment of the senate received a vote without an opportunity for extended debate .

the senate voted that the ruling should not stand , and thereby upheld instead the position of the majority leader .

the future impact of these decisions on the nominations process is difficult to assess .

the immediate and obvious expected impact is that the time between a cloture vote and a confirmation vote will decrease .

in recent years , a vote to confirm a nominee has typically occurred the day after cloture was invoked ( or on the next day of senate session ) .

usually , senators did not spend all of the time between the votes debating the nomination .

instead , senators typically debated the nomination for some time post - cloture , but also usually entered into unanimous consent agreements that affected when the vote would occur .

for example , it became common in recent congresses for the senate to agree , by unanimous consent , to consider the time the senate spent in adjournment or recesses ( eg , overnight ) to count as post - cloture time .

the cloture rule affected the time of the vote set by unanimous consent: the rule provided for up to 30 hours of consideration of the nomination , and the senate would agree to vote on the nomination a day later — reflecting the approximate time that the senate could have debated the nomination under the rule .

assuming the senate continues to establish times for voting on nominations by unanimous consent , those negotiations will be affected by the reinterpretation of the rule .

in the absence of a unanimous consent agreement , most nominations can now receive a vote two hours after a vote to invoke cloture .

the two hours is not formally divided between the parties pursuant to the rule ( or pursuant to the reinterpretation of the rule ) , but it might be divided , by unanimous consent , between the majority and minority leader .

even without an explicit unanimous consent agreement , the majority and minority leaders are recognized before any other senators .

in addition , a senator can speak for a maximum of one hour post - cloture .

as a result , the majority leader could claim the first hour , and the minority leader the second , or vice versa .

 ( of course , senators could speak on a nomination at times other than after cloture has been invoked , even when the nomination is not formally pending before the senate. ) .

it is also possible that the recent reinterpretation of the rule will affect how often the senate relies on the cloture process to approve nominations .

after the first reinterpretation of the cloture rule in 2013 , the number of nominations subjected to cloture motions increased significantly in both of the congresses when the senate was controlled by the same party as the president ( 113 th ( 2013-2014 ) and 115 th ( 2017-2018 ) congresses ) .

nominations that are not confirmed or rejected are returned to the president at the end of a session or when the senate adjourns or recesses for more than 30 days ( senate rule xxxi , paragraph 6 ) .

if the president still wants a nominee considered , he must submit a new nomination to the senate .

the senate can , however , waive this rule by unanimous consent , and it often does to allow nominations to remain "in status quo" between the first and second sessions of a congress or during a long recess .

the majority leader or his designee also may exempt specific nominees by name from the unanimous consent agreement , allowing them to be returned during the recess or adjournment .

the constitution , in article ii , section 2 , grants the president the authority to fill temporarily vacancies that "may happen during the recess of the senate. .

these appointments do not require the advice and consent of the senate ; the appointees temporarily fill the vacancies without senate confirmation .

in most cases , recess appointees have also been nominated to the positions to which they were appointed .

furthermore , when a recess appointment is made of an individual previously nominated to the position , the president usually submits a new nomination to the senate in order to comply with a provision of law affecting the pay of recess appointees ( 5 u.s.c .

5503 ( a ) ) .

recess appointments have sometimes been controversial and have occasionally led to inter - branch conflict .

