in its final three sections , this report organizes the range of legislative issues pertaining tovaccines that members of congress may consider into three groups: availability , safety and effectiveness , and access .

cost - - of research , development , production , regulation and oversight , for example - - underlies eachof these concerns .

thirty - seven american companies made vaccines in 1967 ; in october 2004 , there werenine .

 ( 14 ) why ? .

reasonsgiven are mostly economic .

the road to a shot in the arm can take decades of research anddevelopment and , according to industry estimates , about $800 million per licensed vaccine , ( 15 ) requiring great financialreserves to sustain a company through the research and development and clinical trial process .

oncea vaccine is licensed , its continued production remains complex , as the 2004-2005 flu vaccineshortage in the united states illustrates .

a pillar of u.s. policy on drugs and vaccines is the protection of the individuals who usethem .

vaccines cannot be marketed within the united states without a license from fda ; and fdadoes not license a product until it is satisfied that the vaccine is safe and effective and that themanufacturing process can produce it .

congress may be called upon again to discuss issues of bothsafety and effectiveness .

this could mean assessing how safe is safe .

it will also mean definingeffectiveness: absolute or simply better than nothing or better than the available alternative ? .

it canalso mean assessing effectiveness in terms of value - for - cost .

safety is assessed by the nature and frequency of adverse reactions attributable to vaccineuse .

a vaccine need not be side - effect free for fda licensure ; the licensed smallpox vaccine carriesan estimate , based on data from its routine use 30 years ago , of one or two deaths per millionrecipients .

similarly , effectiveness does not mean that a vaccine must protect permanently orcompletely .

researchers attempt to assess efficacy , generally , with expensive and lengthy clinicaltrials that compare infection or illness rates in two groups , both exposed to the disease - causing agent,but with only one provided with the hypothesized vaccine protection .

effectiveness describes howthe product works in a real - world situation .

for drugs , effectiveness is often lower than efficacybecause of interactions with other medications or health conditions of the patient , sufficient dose orduration of use not prescribed by the physician or followed by the patient , or use for a off - labelcondition that had not been tested .

because vaccines are administered by the clinician , some of theseconditions are not relevant .

effectiveness may , however , still be diminished by the health of thevaccinee and whether circumstances permit all shots in a required series to be given according toschedule .

fda and cdc monitor safety , in part , with their vaccine adverse event report system ( vaers ) , which assembles reports from parents , clinicians , and manufacturers of problems that maybe related to vaccination .

another fda program , medwatch , informs the public with clinicalinformation about safety issues involving vaccines and other medical products .

these so - called passive surveillance systems rely on consumers and physicians to both recognize adverse events aspossibly vaccine - related and to follow through with reporting their concern to fda .

such reportsare valuable aids to researchers looking for potential risks .

the picture painted by the data , however,is incomplete .

 ( 43 ) .

successful development and production of a safe and effective vaccine does not ensure thateveryone who needs a vaccine gets it .

people have to ( 1 ) know about it and believe it will benefitthem ; ( 2 ) live near a health care provider willing to administer it ; and ( 3 ) be able to afford the costof vaccination and follow - up care , if necessary .

vaccines fare better than prescription drugs in health benefits coverage in the united states .

in 2002 , 75% of u.s. children between 19 and 35 months old had completed the recommended seriesof vaccinations , not yet reaching the hhs healthy people 2000 and 2010 objectives of 80% .

recommended adult immunization rates are even farther from hhs goals: 66% ofnon - institutionalized adults at least 65 years of age reported receiving a flu vaccine within the pastyear , far less than the hhs goal of 90% by 2010 .

 ( 59 ) also , there are regional and economic disparities in access toimmunization services .

reasons given for these problems include insufficient coordination ofvarying eligibility rules among private insurers and government vaccine programs ; incompletedocumentation of immunizations achieved ; and inadequate financing .

 ( 60 ) as federal and state agencies coordinated options and plans for smallpox vaccination,weaknesses in the u.s. public health infrastructure became apparent .

these include the need forimprovements in technology , training , hospital and laboratory capacity , and communication amongparticipants .

 ( 61 ) in manydeveloping countries , inadequate public health infrastructure overshadows any question of access .

congress has gone beyond a domestic focus and showed legislative interest in the lack of access tovaccines in less developed areas around the world .

congress has the opportunity to touch on access to safe and effective vaccines in itsconsideration of prescription drug benefit bills and broader issues involving global health .

coordination of government financing programs .

individual states and assorted federal programs work toward increasing childhood immunizationrates .

to improve immunization rates among u.s. children as well as the financial efficiency of theefforts , legislative discussions could address difficulties of coordination among the publicly fundedvaccine programs , such as medicaid , the state children's health insurance program , and vaccinesfor children .

adult immunization insurance coverage and government financing is less complete .

although medicare covers the major , recommended vaccines for adults , such as influenza andpneumococcal infections , many younger adults have no coverage for these routinely recommendedvaccines .

congress may consider funding levels and financing strategies for vaccine - related care inthe united states .

payment for vaccination and follow - up care .

in the context of medical countermeasures to bioterrorism attacks , such as the smallpox vaccine,congress may consider questions about the payment for the vaccine administration and , then , forfollow - up and treatment , if necessary , of vaccine - related illness .

as other vaccine countermeasuresare developed , congress may need to consider who would have access to that continuum of medicalcare .

 ( 62 ) global health .

concerns about access to vaccinesare not limited to biodefense and domestic use .

many government agencies and private groups worktoward international health objectives , such as eradicating polio .

some members noted concern forpublic health needs of developing countries worldwide and the need to assist those countries in fightsagainst infectious diseases .

their concern stemmed from both humanitarian impulses and a growingawareness of the links between poor health and economic and political instability .

their workresulted in p.l .

108-25 , the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malariaact of 2003 .

legislators may want to increase access to existing vaccines , spur the development ofaffordable new vaccines for which the technology already exists - - an issue of both availability andaccess , and consider increased long - term investment in vaccine development for these diseases .

