congress has long been concerned about whether u.s. policy advances u.s. security interests in reducing the role of the people's republic of china ( prc ) in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and missiles as well as obtaining china's cooperation in weapons nonproliferation .

this problem refers to the threat of nuclear , chemical , or biological weapons and missiles that could deliver them .

some have argued that certain prc transfers violated international treaties or guidelines , and / or have contravened various u.s. laws requiring sanctions to shore up those international standards .

even if no laws or treaties are violated , many view china's transfers as threatening u.s. security interests .

using unclassified consultations and citations , this crs report discusses the national security problem of the prc's role in weapons proliferation and issues related to the u.s. policy response , including legislation .

table 1 , at the end of this report , summarizes the u.s. sanctions imposed or waived on prc entities or the prc government for weapons proliferation .

for a discussion of the policy problem in the 1980s to 1996 , see crs report 96-767 , chinese proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: background and analysis ( pdf ) , and crs report 98-485 , china: possible missile technology transfers under u.s. satellite export policy — actions and chronology , by [author name scrubbed] .

weapons proliferation by the prc and / or its organizations raises policy issues concerning ( 1 ) assessments of the nature and seriousness of the prc government's role in the proliferation threat ; ( 2 ) the priority of this issue relative to other u.s. interests ( i.e. , other security issues , taiwan , trade , human rights ) ; and ( 3 ) u.s. leadership and leverage ( including the use of sanctions and diplomacy , and congressional actions ) to obtain china's cooperation in nonproliferation .

successive administrations have pursued a policy of "engagement" with beijing .

some policy makers and advocates stress a cooperative approach .

in 1998 , president clinton issued certifications to implement the 1985 nuclear cooperation agreement .

the clinton administration also encouraged the prc to join the mtcr and proposed to allow more prc satellite launches .

in november 2000 , the state department agreed to waive sanctions and consider new satellite exports in return for another missile non - proliferation pledge from china .

some officials and experts cite prc nonproliferation statements as signs that the united states made progress in nonproliferation goals .

some also say that u.s. sanctions are counterproductive and are too broad .

rather , they assert that china needs to recognize nonproliferation for its own national interests and develop stronger export controls , perhaps with u.s. assistance .

also , some stress that china would be more cooperative if brought in to draw up "the rules. .

some argue that "entities" in china largely operate without the prc government's knowledge .

critics argue that the "engagement" policy needs a tougher approach to counter china's activities that undermine u.s. security interests .

they note that prc weapons proliferation activities have continued and repeated prc assurances have proved to be unreliable .

also , they say that u.s. security interests are better served with a stronger approach to stigmatize sensitive transfers , which would include some sanctions .

some argue that the united states should not subsidize china's missile and nuclear industries .

these proponents tend to see u.s. leverage over china as stronger than china's influence against the united states .

some are skeptical that china sees nonproliferation as in its national interest , since beijing has made progress in nonproliferation commitments as part of improving relations with washington ( surrounding summits ) and tried to use its sales as a form of leverage against washington , especially on u.s. arms sales to taiwan .

they stress that prc export controls are weak , even as government repression can be harsh .

they also doubt that trade in sensitive nuclear weapons and missile technology can continue without the knowledge of the prc government and / or its military , especially given the status of certain state - owned and defense - industrial enterprises as "serial proliferators. .

concerning the debate about any knowledge or approval of the prc government , at a hearing of the senate armed services committee on march 19 , 2002 , dci george tenet told senator carl levin that while prc firms sometimes operate on their own , there are instances in which "activities are condoned by the government. .

the dci's january 2003 section 721 report to congress noted that prc entities could have continued contacts with pakistani nuclear weapons facilities "without beijing's knowledge or permission," but this comment was dropped from the april 2003 report .

the director of the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) , vice admiral lowell jacoby , testified to the senate intelligence committee on february 24 , 2004 , that prc entities "remain involved with nuclear and missile programs in pakistan and iran," while "in some cases," the entities were involved without the government's knowledge , implying that there were cases in which the prc knew of the relationships .

the bush administration repeatedly waived missile proliferation sanctions on certain activities of the prc government ( vs. "entities" ) .

reportedly , the state department communicated to china numerous concerns about proliferation activities in iran , syria , north korea , and pakistan for many years , including in cables in 2003-2009 .

in april 2014 , the house armed services subcommittee on strategic forces' markup of the fy2015 ndaa ( h.r .

4435 ; h.rept .

113-446 ) required a report from the dia's director , no later than august 31 , 2014 , on prc support and the activities of karl lee ( aka li fangwei ) .

the subcommittee noted that china has made little apparent effort to respond to his activities .

 ( the final fy2015 ndaa ( h.r .

3979 ) became p.l .

113-291 on december 19 , 2014. ) .

this prc national or his companies faced u.s. sanctions 14 times from 2004 to 2014 for missile proliferation in iran and were the subjects of an indictment in the state of new york and a hearing before the senate foreign relations committee in 2009 .

 ( see table 1 on sanctioned entities. ) .

on the same day , the department of state offered a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to lee's arrest and / or conviction .

the department of justice unsealed an indictment against lee .

the department of the treasury added eight of lee's front companies to the list of specially designated nationals and blocked persons .

the department of commerce added nine of lee's companies to the entity list .

the state department's spokesperson said on the next day that lee's activities threatened international stability and security but insisted that the united states and china were "one the same page" and worked closely on nonproliferation .

no matter what options are pursued , many argue that u.s. leadership and a forward - looking and credible strategy are needed for dealing with china's rising influence in world affairs .

a strategic approach might underpin short - term responses to violations and use both positive and negative sources of leverage .

policy issues often center on summitry , sanctions , and satellite exports .

after the downturn in u.s. - prc relations because of the 1989 tiananmen crackdown , the clinton administration resumed high - level exchanges in 1993 and argued that "comprehensive engagement" with china advances u.s. security goals , including weapons nonproliferation as the centerpiece of results in u.s. - prc summits .

president clinton granted jiang zemin summits in washington , on october 29 , 1997 , and in beijing , on june 29 , 1998 .

leading up to the 1997 summit , the administration urged china to adopt "comprehensive , nationwide regulations on nuclear export control. .

china responded by implementing a set of regulations on nuclear export controls signed by premier li peng on september 10 , 1997 .

the regulations permit nuclear exports to only facilities under iaea safeguards .

china also joined the zangger committee ( on nuclear trade ) on october 16 , 1997 .

then , china issued new export control regulations on dual - use nuclear items on june 17 , 1998 .

the 1998 summit in beijing produced an agreement on non - targeting nuclear weapons , and joint statements on south asia and on biological weapons .

but china refused to join the mtcr , saying that it was "actively studying" whether to join .

president bush raised the unresolved missile proliferation issue in shanghai in october 2001 and in beijing in february 2002 .

as deputy secretary of state richard armitage arrived in beijing to discuss the bush - jiang summit in crawford , tx , on october 25 , 2002 , china , on august 25 , 2002 , published the missile export control regulations promised in november 2000 , along with a control list that is modeled on the mtcr .

in addition , on october 14 , 2002 , the prc issued regulations for export controls over dual - use biological agents .

china continued to approach weapon nonproliferation as more a part of the u.s. - prc relationship than a commitment to international standards .

president bush called china an "ally" in the fight against terrorism .

with the improvement in u.s. - prc relations , however , some observers said that president bush did not forcefully press china's leaders on weapons nonproliferation as a priority issue , even while imposing numerous u.s. sanctions .

briefing reporters on president bush's meeting with prc president hu jintao in france on june 1 , 2003 , a senior white house official acknowledged that the two leaders did not discuss u.s. sanctions on norinco ( which the administration had just imposed on may 23 , 2003 , for missile technology transfers to iran ) and that president hu did not respond to bush's general concerns about iran's nuclear weapons program .

in thailand in october 2003 , at another meeting between the two presidents , bush asserted that they had a "very constructive dialogue" on trade , iraq , counter - terrorism , and north korea , but he did not mention weapons proliferation as an issue with china , although the administration had imposed another set of missile proliferation sanctions on norinco a month earlier .

as discussed above , president obama also has used summitry and renewed president clinton's use of u.s. - prc joint statements .

nonetheless , president obama has not announced significant breakthroughs , including in this meetings with prc leader xi jinping in sunnylands retreat , ca , in june 2013 or in beijing in november 2014 .

weapons proliferation was not a top focus of resolving problems with the prc , despite the threats from iran and north korea .

in november 2014 , the white house stated that "the united states and china agree to deepen cooperation on nonproliferation and counter - proliferation issues within the u.s. - china nonproliferation joint working group , which held its inaugural meeting in beijing on november 3. .

the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , added a compelling u.s. interest in considering u.s. policy on prc weapons proliferation .

with questions about the viability of pakistan's government after it gave strong support to the anti - terrorism war , the united states could seek intelligence from the prc about pakistan's nuclear weapons as well as cooperation in not further adding to instability in south asia .

also , the administration could maintain or strengthen its response to the proliferation problem , since prc entities have reportedly transferred nuclear , missile , and / or chemical weapons technology to sponsors of terrorism .

if the administration lifts sanctions for cooperating countries , options include waiving proliferation sanctions on the prc .

on december 11 , 2002 , president bush issued his national strategy to combat wmd , resting on the three pillars of counter - proliferation , nonproliferation , and response .

the first pillar , counter - proliferation , included interdiction , deterrence , and defense ( including preemptive measures and missile defenses ) .

some say that missile defense plays a critical role in the strategy to counter the proliferation threat .

others say the september 2001 attacks increased doubts about the likelihood of terrorists using missiles for weapons delivery .

china has opposed u.s. deployment of missile defense systems and related cooperation with japan or taiwan and threatened to increase its nuclear missile force .

china is concerned that missile defense would spur an arms race , negate its deterrence capabilities , forge closer u.s. - taiwan military cooperation , and violate the mtcr .

during defense secretary william cohen's visit to china in july 2000 , the prc reportedly warned that it would continue missile proliferation activities if the united states provides missile defense to taiwan ( washington post , july 12 , 2000 ) .

also , top prc arms control official sha zukang warned that the prc would withhold cooperation on arms control and weapons nonproliferation in response to u.s. deployment of nmd , reported the washington post ( july 14 , 2000 ) .

others say that prc proliferation activities and missile buildups continued regardless .

on may 31 , 2003 , in poland , president bush announced the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) to step up multinational efforts at interdiction and intelligence - sharing .

the united states faces a challenge in obtaining china's cooperation in counter - proliferation ( eg , interdiction of shipments , inspections , or intelligence - sharing ) , given its long - lasting negative and emotional reaction to u.s. inspection in 1993 of the prc ship , yinhe , which was suspected of carrying chemicals for iran .

also , china could doubt further the credibility of u.s. intelligence after president bush launched the controversial war in iraq in 2003 and failed to find wmd there .

china has not joined the psi .

china did not join the 11 original psi members plus norway , denmark , singapore , and canada in sending representatives to a meeting in washington on december 16-17 , 2003 , even though it took place just days after premier wen jiabao's visit to washington .

in october 2004 , a prc foreign ministry spokesman expressed concerns that the psi might allow "military interception , which is beyond the limits of international law. .

nonetheless , under secretary of state for arms control and international security john bolton visited beijing on february 16 , 2004 , and he revealed that "in the past several years , we have had cooperation with china in some interdiction efforts. .

while in tokyo on october 27 , 2004 , bolton said that "we are pleased with china's cooperation with the united states to block the export of chemicals that could have been used in north korea's nuclear weapons programs. .

the 9 / 11 commission issued its final report on july 22 , 2004 , and it urged that the united states encourage china ( and russia ) to join the psi .

the 110 th congress considered h.r .

1 , the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 .

the house - passed bill of january 9 , 2007 , noted that the commission called on china to participate in psi .

the senate passed its bill on july 9 without such language .

the conference report of july 25 adopted the house provisions on the commission's recommendations and on the sense of congress that the president should expand and strengthen the psi .

the bill became p.l .

110-53 on august 3 , 2007 .

the united states could assist china to strengthen export controls , including the areas of regulations , licensing , customs , border security , and law - enforcement .

the departments of commerce and state testified to the senate governmental affairs subcommittee on international security , proliferation , and federal services on june 6 , 2002 , that such exchanges were limited .

periodically , china has tried to link the issues of missile proliferation and u.s. conventional arms sales for taiwan's self - defense .

congress has exercised oversight of the administration's response to any direct or indirect linkage .

after president george h. w. bush approved the sale of 150 f - 16a / b fighters to taiwan in september 1992 , the prc ended its participation in the "arms control in the middle east" talks .

moreover , as discussed above , in november 1992 , the prc delivered 34 m - 11 missiles to pakistan , although that transfer took place probably with prior planning and regardless of president bush's announcement .

during the 1998 summit in beijing , the clinton white house reportedly considered a prc request for a u.s. pledge to deny missile defense sales to taiwan , if china promised to stop missile sales to iran ; but no agreement was reached , reported the far eastern economic review ( july 16 , 1998 ) .

on february 26 , 2002 , before the director general in charge of arms control at the prc foreign ministry , liu jieyi , attended meetings in washington on march 4-6 , an unnamed prc foreign ministry official told the associated press that the united states "can't just accuse us of violating our commitments and at the same time , sell large amounts of arms to taiwan," since such arms sales are "also a kind of proliferation. .

on july 24 , 2004 , wen wei po , a prc - owned newspaper in hong kong , quoted an unnamed official of the foreign ministry as linking weapons nonproliferation to u.s. arms sales to taiwan .

nonetheless , state department officials said that china did not pose taiwan as a "tactical issue" in discussions about north korea .

 ( see discussion on north korea above. ) .

thus , for many years , the united states has faced challenges in getting china's responsible cooperation in international nonproliferation problems while continuing u.s. policy toward taiwan , as governed by u.s. interests and the taiwan relations act ( tra ) of 1979 , p.l .

96-8 .

 ( see crs report rl30957 , taiwan: major u.s. arms sales since 1990 , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

there have been debates about using satellite exports to gain china's cooperation in missile nonproliferation .

since 1988 , the policy of granting licenses to export satellites and presidential waivers of post - tiananmen sanctions ( section 902 of p.l .

101-246 ) have allowed satellites to be exported for launch by china great wall industry corporation ( the same company sanctioned for missile proliferation ) and — increasingly — for china's own use .

in the clinton administration , the national security council , in a purported secret memo on talks leading up to the 1998 u.s. - prc summit ( dated march 12 and printed in the march 23 , 1998 , washington times ) , proposed to expand space cooperation , increase the number of satellite launches , issue a blanket presidential waiver of sanctions , and support china's membership in the mtcr — in return for prc missile export controls .

on november 21 , 2000 , the state department said it would waive sanctions , again process — not necessarily approve — licenses ( suspended in february 2000 ) to export satellites to china , and discuss an extension of the bilateral space launch agreement ( which later expired at the end of 2001 ) , in return for another prc promise on missile nonproliferation .

however , on september 1 , 2001 , the bush administration imposed sanctions for two years on the china metallurgical equipment corporation ( cmec ) , for proliferation of missile technology to pakistan , denying satellite exports to china .

before those sanctions expired , the state department determined on august 29 , 2003 , that norinco substantially contributed to missile proliferation of category ii mtcr items and imposed sanctions that again effectively banned satellite exports to china .

 ( see sanctions below. ) .

the last presidential waiver for satellite exports to china was issued in 1998 .

 ( see crs report 98-485 , china: possible missile technology transfers under u.s. satellite export policy — actions and chronology , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in 2009 , congress passed the fy2010 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) ( enacted on october 28 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-84 ) with section 1248 to require a report from the secretaries of defense and state that assessed the risks of removing the control of satellite exports from the u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) of the state department , not later than 180 days after enactment .

the obama administration submitted an interim "section 1248 report" on may 6 , 2011 , and did not issue the final " section 1248 report " until april 18 , 2012 .

the report discussed reform of the space export control policy and found that some satellites and components can be moved from the usml to the commerce control list ( ccl ) without harm to national security .

nonetheless , the departments recommended that the ccl support nonproliferation policy and prohibit licenses for the transfer of dual - use satellites and related technology destined for launches by the prc until it controls missile proliferation activities as it had committed .

congress passed the ndaa for fy2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) with section 1261 to remove satellites and related items from the usml , by repealing a section in the fy1999 ndaa ( p.l .

105-261 ) .

however , congress continued to prohibit the transfer of satellites to the prc ( and the dprk and any state sponsor of terrorism ) .

policy debates concerning prc technology transfers have often centered on the questions of whether to impose unilateral sanctions under u.s. laws , to enact new legislation to tighten mandates for sanctions or reports , or to integrate the multiple laws .

also , there have been the issues of whether to target the prc government or prc "entities" ( usually state - owned defense industrial organizations , like cpmiec or norinco ) and whether the prc government lacks the will or the capability to enforce its stated nonproliferation policy .

decisions on sanctions impact u.s. credibility and leverage on the non - proliferation issue .

while certain prc transfers might not violate any international treaties , sanctions could be required under laws that congress passed to set u.s. nonproliferation policy and shore up nonproliferation treaties and standards .

these laws , as amended , include export - import bank act ( p.l .

79-173 ) arms export control act ( aeca ) ( p.l .

90-629 ) export administration act ( eaa ) ( p.l .

96-72 ) nuclear proliferation prevention act ( title viii of p.l .

103-236 ) iran - iraq arms nonproliferation act ( p.l .

102-484 ) iran nonproliferation act ( p.l .

106-178 ) ; that became the iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation act ( p.l .

109-353 ) executive order 12938 , as amended by executive order 13094 executive order 13382 iran sanctions act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-172 ) ; expanded by the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-195 ) .

underlying the question of whether sanctions should be used are disagreements about the most effective approach for curbing dangerous prc sales and promoting u.s. interests and leadership .

some argue that a cooperative approach , rather than sanctions , is more effective .

others say that current sanctions are not effective in countering the prc's proliferation practices ( especially with certain entities being repeatedly sanctioned , negligible penalties , and sanctions targeting companies but not the government ) and that legislation requiring sanctions should be toughened .

still others say sanctions stigmatize countries , signal u.s. resolve , and shore up u.s. credibility on this important security problem .

another approach is to use senior - level diplomacy to achieve goals along with sanctions to deter proliferation .

in any case , by 2006 , china's government and state - owned defense industrial corporations under u.s. sanctions started to seek u.s. training to strengthen export controls and nonproliferation practices .

 ( see discussion below on training and internal compliance programs ( icp s ) . ) .

this evolution showed that u.s. sanctions worked , with negative impacts on the business of sanctioned entities .

still , any real improvement in policies and practices in response to sanctions could be a basis for lifting sanctions .

as for whether to impose or waive missile proliferation sanctions , on november 21 , 2000 , the clinton administration agreed to waive missile proliferation sanctions , again process — not necessarily approve — licenses to export satellites to china , and discuss an extension of the bilateral space launch agreement , in return for a new prc pledge on missile nonproliferation and a promise to issue missile export controls .

however , continued prc transfers raised the issue of imposing sanctions .

by july 2001 , the united states protested to china about its non - compliance with the agreement , reported the washington post ( july 27 , 2001 ) .

visiting beijing ahead of president bush's trip to shanghai in october 2001 , secretary of state powell , on july 28 , 2001 , noted "outstanding issues" about china's implementation of its november 2000 commitment .

in contrast to the clinton administration , the bush administration repeatedly imposed sanctions on prc "entities" ( but not the prc government ) for transfers ( related to ballistic missiles , chemical weapons , and cruise missiles ) to pakistan and iran , under the arms export control act , export administration act , iran nonproliferation act of 2000 , iran - iraq arms nonproliferation act of 1992 , executive order 12938 , and executive order 13382 .

 ( see table 1 : prc entities sanctioned for weapons proliferation . ) .

about half of the prc entities , "serial proliferators," have faced repeated sanctions , raising questions about effectiveness .

among the actions , on september 1 , 2001 , the bush administration imposed sanctions ( for two years ) on a prc company , the china metallurgical equipment corporation ( cmec ) , for proliferation of missile technology ( category ii items ) to pakistan .

the sanctions had the effect of denying licenses for two years for the export of satellites to china for its use or launch by its aerospace entities , because the category ii sanctions deny u.s. licenses to transfer missile equipment or technology ( mtcr annex items ) to any prc "person," which is defined by the so - called "helms amendment" ( section 74 ( a ) ( 8 ) ( b ) of the aeca , p.l .

90-629 ) as all prc government activity affecting the development or production of missiles , electronics , space systems , and military aircraft , and the state department considers that satellites are covered by the mtcr annex ( since it includes satellite parts ) .

in beijing with the president in february 2002 , national security advisor condoleezza rice said that the prc should stop "grandfathering" contracts signed before november 2000 .

on august 25 , 2002 , the prc published missile export control regulations ( promised in november 2000 ) , just before deputy secretary of state richard armitage arrived in beijing to discuss an upcoming summit , showing that china still viewed nonproliferation in the context of ties with the united states .

armitage welcomed the new regulations but added that further discussions were needed .

the state department stressed that questions remained about enforcement of the controls and reductions in prc proliferation practices .

with questions about enforcement and effectiveness of the controls , president bush did not waive the sanctions imposed in september 2001 .

moreover , the regulations raised a number of questions , including the roles of the ministry of foreign trade and economic cooperation ( moftec ) and ministry of foreign affairs .

part 1 of that control list ( missiles and other delivery systems ) and dual - use items ( in part 2 ) for military use are subject to the regulations on administering arms exports issued in 1997 , under the jurisdiction of the state council and central military commission .

also , unlike the mtcr , the prc's regulations on missile - related exports do not state a strong presumption to deny transfers of category i items or any missiles or other items judged to be intended to deliver any wmd .

in the 107 th congress , senator fred thompson inserted a section in the fy2003 ndaa ( enacted as section 1209 in p.l .

107-314 ) to require the dci to submit semi - annual reports that identify prc and other foreign entities contributing to weapons proliferation .

however , in his signing statement , president bush stated that he would construe this and several other sections in a manner consistent with the president's constitutional authority to "withhold information," if disclosure could harm foreign relations , national security , or the executive branch's duties .

before the september 2001 sanctions expired , the state department determined on august 29 , 2003 , that norinco substantially contributed to missile proliferation of category ii mtcr items in a publicly unidentified country and imposed sanctions for two years that banned the issuance to norinco of export licenses or u.s. government contracts for missile equipment or technology , and that banned the importation of norinco's products .

complicating u.s. considerations , the "helms amendment" again applied — denying exports of satellites to china .

but the bush administration contended that it was "essential to national security" to waive for one year the sanction on imports when applied to other prc government activities relating to missiles , electronics , space systems , and military aircraft .

the sanctions took effect on september 19 , 2003 .

within a year , the administration had to decide on the broader sanctions on imports of non - norinco products , which could have affected an estimated $12 billion in imports from the prc , according to one estimate .

after the one - year waiver passed , the state department , for five times , extended the waiver on the import sanction against certain activities of the prc government for six more months and permanently waived the sanction in march 2007 .

however , the bush administration did not point to any new nonproliferation cooperation from china .

still , by 2006 , after more u.s. sanctions , china's government and defense - industrial corporations started to seek u.s. training ( eg , from the university of georgia ) to improve export controls and nonproliferation practices .

sanctioned entities such as norinco , cmec , and cgwic set up internal compliance programs ( icp ) , working with the ministries of foreign affairs and commerce .

in december 2008 , norinco and cmec's presidents signed their companies' statements on adherence to weapons nonproliferation , export control , and internal compliance .

however , in july 2011 , norinco , cpmiec , and china xinxing import and export company tried to sell arms worth $200 million to libya's muammar al qadhafi , despite unsc sanctions .

options for congress include maintaining , deleting , or amending the "helms amendment," such as changing the language that broadly covers "electronics" or a review by the commerce department on whether to change china's "non - market economy" status , based upon which the "helms amendment" has broadened missile proliferation sanctions .

another question for congressional oversight concerned whether the executive branch enforced sanctions that already were imposed , particularly import bans .

in late 2009 and early 2010 , the wisconsin project on nuclear arms control and the wall street journal reported that sanctioned prc entities , including sub - units of cpmiec and limmt economic and trade co. , exported products to u.s. firms or through u.s. ports to other countries after 2006 .

afterwards , the treasury department's office of foreign assets control named for sanctions the cpmiec shanghai pudong company ( aka china jmm import and export shanghai pudong corporation ) .

in the 106 th congress , in may 2000 , senator fred thompson introduced s. 2645 , the "china nonproliferation act," to require annual reviews ( based on "credible information" ) , sanctions , and use of the u.s. securities market as a policy tool .

in september 2000 , the senate passed ( 65-32 ) a motion to table the legislation as an amendment to the bill granting china permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status .

in the 107 th congress , senator thompson inserted a section in the fy2003 intelligence authorization act ( enacted on november 27 , 2002 , as section 827 in p.l .

107-306 ) to require the dci to submit annual reports on prc and other foreign companies that are involved in weapons proliferation and raise funds in u.s. capital markets .

reporting the bill on may 13 , 2002 , the senate intelligence committee ( in s.rept .

107-149 ) added that it did not intend to restrict access to those markets .

the 108 th congress passed the fy2004 intelligence authorization act ( p.l .

108-177 ) that included section 361 ( e ) to repeal the reporting requirement .

in 1984 , president ronald reagan initialed the u.s. - prc agreement for nuclear cooperation , which was not signed until july 23 , 1985 .

congress approved the agreement on december 16 , 1985 , but required presidential certifications and a report on prc weapons proliferation .

after the prc promised not to start new nuclear cooperation with iran on the eve of the 1997 u.s. - china summit , president clinton , on january 12 , 1998 , signed certifications ( as required by p.l .

99-183 ) on china's nuclear nonproliferation policy and practices to implement the agreement .

according to president clinton , the agreement would serve u.s. national security , environmental , and economic interests , and "the united states and china share a strong interest in stopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction and other sophisticated weaponry in unstable regions and rogue states — notably , iran. .

the president also waived a sanction imposed after the tiananmen crackdown of 1989 ( in p.l .

101-246 ) .

at the 1998 summit , the department of energy ( doe ) and the prc state planning commission signed an agreement on nuclear cooperation , including bringing prc scientists to u.s. national labs , universities , and nuclear facilities .

 ( see crs report rl33192 , u.s. - china nuclear cooperation agreement , coordinated by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

on february 28 , 2005 , westinghouse submitted a bid to sell four ap1000 nuclear power reactors to china , with the nrc's approval .

the bush administration supported westinghouse's bid to sell nuclear reactors to china .

however , critics said that the united states , including its export - import bank , should not support nuclear exports to china , given proliferation concerns .

on june 28 , 2005 , representative bernard sanders introduced amendment 381 to the foreign operations , export financing , and relations programs appropriations act for fy2006 ( h.r .

3057 ) to prohibit funds from being used by the export - import bank to approve an application for a loan or loan guarantee for a nuclear project in the prc .

the house adopted the amendment ( 313-114 ) and passed h.r .

3057 on june 28 , 2005 , with the language in section 589 .

however , this section was dropped in the conference committee ( h.rept .

109-265 ) .

while in beijing on december 16 , 2006 , secretary of energy samuel bodman signed a bilateral memorandum of understanding that granted the deal to westinghouse .

policy makers have options that affect nuclear cooperation with china .

indeed , in 1998 , deputy assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation robert einhorn testified to congress that we must , therefore , approach implementation of the agreement with a healthy skepticism .

president reagan's advice to trust but verify is clearly warranted here .

so we will be monitoring china's behavior carefully , and the chinese will know that any actions inconsistent with their commitments will jeopardize future cooperation .

by 2014 , president obama's officials started to negotiate a potential renewal of the nuclear cooperation agreement .

 ( such agreements are subject to section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 and commonly called "123 agreements." ) .

congress might examine whether prc practices in nuclear proliferation warrant continued cooperation in nuclear power .

while sanctions may affect u.s. exports , some options may affect imports of products produced by prc military or defense - industrial entities suspected of contributing to proliferation .

import controls have been included as possible sanctions for missile proliferation under section 73 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) of the aeca and section 11b ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( iii ) of the eaa , as well as affected by what is popularly called the "helms amendment," giving a broad definition of "person" as a target of sanctions .

issues include whether to sanction imports and what the parameters should be .

export controls are a policy tool , because u.s. technology provides one source of leverage with respect to beijing .

after the cold war , u.s. export restrictions have been re - focused to the threat of wmd and missiles .

some in congress are concerned about u.s. technology reaching hostile states with wmd programs through china .

u.s. arms sales to china have been banned under sanctions imposed after the 1989 tiananmen crackdown ( in p.l .

101-246 ) .

however , there are competing economic interests in exporting dual - use technology .

another policy approach is to strengthen the international nonproliferation regimes .

there are two prongs in such efforts: ( 1 ) encouraging prc support for strengthening the regimes ( eg , the iaea's verification authority ) to enforce compliance and ( 2 ) filling gaps in china's participation .

some say that efforts to include china would capitalize on its desire to be treated as a "great power" and to be perceived as a responsible world leader .

in addition , they stress that china would be more cooperative if it helped to draw up the "rules. .

others argue that china's participation would risk its obstruction of tighter export controls , possible derailing of arms control efforts , linkage of nonproliferation issues to the taiwan issue , and access to intelligence - sharing .

one basis for this view is the experience with the arms control in the middle east effort in the early 1990s , in which china refused to cover missiles in the effort and later suspended its participation after president george h. w. bush decided in 1992 to sell taiwan f - 16 fighters .

options for u.s. policy have included support or opposition to china joining the mtcr ( as a member after it establishes a record of compliance and effective export controls ) , nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) , australia group ( on chemical and biological weapons ) , wassenaar arrangement ( military and dual - use export controls ) , and international code of conduct against ballistic missile proliferation .

previously , president clinton's national security council , in a purported secret memo , dated march 12 , 1998 ( printed in the march 23 , 1998 , washington times ) , proposed in a "china missile deal" to expand space cooperation with beijing , increase the number of satellites that china can launch , issue a blanket presidential waiver of post - tiananmen sanctions on satellite launches , and support china's membership in the mtcr — in return for effective prc missile export controls .

critics say that membership in the mtcr would exempt china from certain sanctions , provide it with intelligence , give it a potentially obstructionist role in decision - making , and relax missile - related export controls to china .

in september 1999 , congress passed the fy2000 ndaa ( p.l .

106-65 ) , stating its sense that the president shall take steps to obtain an agreement with the prc on adherence to the mtcr and its annex and that the prc should not be allowed to join the mtcr without meeting certain conditions .

it also required a report on the prc's adherence to the mtcr .

the classified report was submitted on august 18 , 2000 .

in 2004 , china applied to join the mtcr but was not accepted as a member , according to the dni's section 721 report to congress of 2006 .

though china is not a member , the mtcr chair has contacted china .

china joined the zangger committee ( on nuclear trade ) in october 1997 , before a summit in washington .

also , china issued new export control regulations on dual - use nuclear items on june 17 , 1998 , before another summit in beijing .

for years , china was the only major nuclear supplier to shun the multinational nsg , which requires "full - scope safeguards" ( iaea inspections of all other declared nuclear facilities in addition to the facility importing supplies to prevent diversions to weapon programs ) .

in january 2004 , china applied to join the nsg .

however , on may 5 , 2004 , china signed a contract to build a second nuclear power reactor ( chashma - 2 ) in pakistan .

this contract raised questions because of continuing prc nuclear cooperation with pakistan and its signing right before a decision by the nsg on china's membership .

with a pre - existing contract , chashma - 2 would be exempted from the nsg's requirement for full - scope safeguards .

the bush administration supported china's membership , after reportedly strident debate between officials who questioned china's commitment to nonproliferation and those who wanted to encourage china's cooperation .

on may 18 , 2004 , the house international relations committee held a hearing to question whether the administration should support china's membership in the nsg , given concerns about prc nuclear cooperation with pakistan and iran , about whether china would be a spoiler in the nsg , and about loss of u.s. leverage .

assistant secretary of state john wolf testified that the united states urged china to join the nsg since 1995 , that china was not a spoiler in the zangger committee , and that nsg membership would add multilateral influence on china's nuclear technology export policies .

wolf conceded , however , that pakistan had a nuclear weapons program and did not accept full - scope safeguards , and that the united states preferred that no country provide pakistan with benefits of peaceful nuclear cooperation .

he noted that the chashma - 2 plant will be under iaea safeguards , but the nsg exempts full - scope safeguards for contracts signed before nsg membership .

wolf also acknowledged that the administration did not request that beijing use its influence with islamabad to secure tighter pakistani export controls .

moreover , he conceded that the administration had not seen the contract for chashma - 2 nor received the requested "full information" on any ongoing nuclear cooperation projects that china sought to grandfather .

a memo dated may 26 , 2004 , by the project for the new american century criticized the administration's decision for turning a "blind eye to china's reactor sales to pakistan. .

the nsg decided at a meeting on may 28 to accept china as a member .

in later years , china has bolstered the concerns about whether it has played a spoiler by providing additional reactors to pakistan , beyond chashma - 2 .

the carnegie endowment argued in 2011 that china's so - called "grandfathering" of chashma - 3 and - 4 reactors further eroded the nsg and warned of damage to the nsg's credibility .

china , on july 30 , 1996 , began a moratorium on nuclear testing and signed the comprehensive test ban treaty ( ctbt ) on september 24 , 1996 .

however , after the u.s. senate rejected ( 51-48 ) the treaty on october 13 , 1999 , it became doubtful that the prc would ratify the ctbt .

also , the united states has sought prc cooperation on negotiating a global ban on the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices .

on october 4 , 1994 , the united states and china agreed to "work together to promote the earliest possible achievement of a multilateral , non - discriminatory , and effective verifiable convention" banning fissile materials production .

the prc could follow if the united states ratified the ctbt .

president obama issued a u.s. - prc joint statement at the obama - hu summit in beijing on november 17 , 2009 , in which the two countries committed to pursue "ratification" of the ctbt "as soon as possible," to work together for the early entry into force of the ctbt , and to support the launching of negotiations on the fissile material cut - off treaty .

at hu jintao's state visit in washington on january 19 , 2011 , the u.s. - prc joint statement did not mention ratification in calling again for the early entry into force of the ctbt .

the two countries reaffirmed cooperation based on the nuclear security summit in washington in april 2010 ( attended by hu jintao ) and signed a memorandum of understanding to set up a "center of excellence on nuclear security" in china .

congress passed the ndaa for fy2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

section 1303 limited the use of funds to no more than $500,000 in fy2011 under the cooperative threat reduction program to set up a center of excellence in any country outside of the former soviet union until 15 days after the defense secretary submitted a report with required information .

also , section 1304 required the secretaries of defense and energy to submit by april 1 , 2011 , a plan to congress concerning activities with the prc under the cooperation threat reduction program and defense nuclear nonproliferation program during fys 2011 through 2016 , including costs paid by the prc .

the house on may 26 , 2011 , passed h.r .

1540 , the ndaa for fy2012 , with section 3112 to stipulate that not more than $7 million may be obligated or expended for the u.s. - china center of excellence on nuclear security until the secretary of energy reports to congress on a review of the prc's capacity to develop and implement training in best practices for nuclear security and on how the center's activities could contribute to improving china's record on proliferation .

the senate armed services committee reported s. 1253 on june 22 , without a similar section .

enacted on december 31 , 2011 , section 3111 of p.l .

112-81 stipulated that not more than 25% of authorized funds may be used to establish a center of excellence in a country that is not of the former soviet union ( dropping explicit mention of china ) until congress receives the report .

the center for nuclear security is scheduled to open in china in 2016 .

under the 1987 treaty on the elimination of intermediate - range and shorter - range missiles ( inf treaty ) with the soviet union , the united states eliminated by 1991 all ground - launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges between 500 and 5,500 km .

by 2010 , china had the world's most active land - based ballistic and cruise missile program , including development of the world's only anti - ship ballistic missile ( asbm ) .

former pentagon officials proposed in 2011 an option to expand the inf treaty to include china , as a response to the instability raised by its missile buildup for taiwan , asian allies , the united states , and others .

