relations between the united states and nepal have traditionally been friendly .

u.s. policy objectives toward nepal include supporting democratic institutions and economic liberalization , promoting peace and stability in south asia , supporting nepalese independence and territorial integrity , and alleviating poverty .

the united states became nepal's first bilateral aid donor in january 1951 and has since contributed more than $1.4 billion bilaterally and multilaterally to that country .

american foreign policy interests in nepal have sought to strengthen democracy and to prevent the collapse of nepal which , should it become a failed state , could provide a base of support for terrorists or insurgents in the region .

such a scenario could be destabilizing to the security dynamics of the region .

the united states also seeks to promote democracy and civil society in nepal and provide developmental assistance to its people .

political instability and insurgency - related violence has undermined the country's economy .

u.s. government officials have asserted that further deterioration of nepal's circumstances could destabilize the region , spur new tensions between india and china , and potentially create a new terrorist haven in south asia .

on april 24 , 2006 , mounting popular resistance in support of the political parties led king gyanendra to hand over power to the seven party alliance .

the seven parties have worked together through their alliance to promote a more democratic nepal in the face of direct rule by the king .

with this development , nepal began a process that promises to end a period of intense political conflict between the king and the political parties , and armed struggle with the maoists .

in may 2006 , six of the seven political parties formed a coalition government .

on november 8 , 2006 , the seven party alliance and the maoists reached a peace agreement ending a decade - old insurgency that claimed some 13,000 lives .

in it , the maoists agreed to put down their arms and postpone a decision on the future disposition of the monarchy until after the election of a constituent assembly .

under the peace agreement , constituent assembly elections were to be held by the end of june 2007 .

the june election date slipped to november 2007 due to difficulties in preparing for the election .

the maoists favor the removal of the monarchy while the nepali congress party favors a ceremonial role for the monarchy .

girija prasad koirala of the nepali congress party is currently prime minister .

the seven party alliance that opposed the king in april includes the following parties as listed below .

the maoists are not part of the seven party alliance though they have worked with the alliance in recent months .

the nepali congress ( nc ) communist party of nepal unified marxist leninist cpn ( uml ) nepali congress ( democratic ) or nc ( d ) nepal sadbhavana party ( anandi devi ) or nsp ( a ) jana morcha nepal samyukta baam morcha ( united left front ) or ulf nepal workers and peasants party ( nwpp ) the six party government includes all of the seven party alliance members except the nwpp .

the royalist rashtriya prajatantra party ( rpp ) , the third - largest party in parliament , did not oppose the king's direct rule and is outside the government .

according to one source , the "maoists appear to be the most organized political force in the country" and the seven party alliance has "a history of bickering among themselves , a weakness that both the maoists and the royalists would be quick to exploit. .

for these reasons , as well as mounting protests in the south , nepal has yet to consolidate the significant moves towards peace and democracy that have transpired over the past year .

there is also growing concern that the constituent assembly election be held as soon as possible .

a poor security situation , particularly in rural areas , has hindered voter registration which was to have been completed by may 2007 for the scheduled june election .

unrest in the terai , including demands for greater political representation in parliament , remains unresolved .

the maoists have stated that the failure to hold the constituent assembly election in june ended the basis for their participation in the government .

a commission looking into the delineation of constituencies has also recommended the expansion of the number of constituencies from the planned 425 in the interim constitution to a total of 496 .

on january 15 , 2007 , 83 maoist parliamentarians , out of a total of 330 members of parliament , assumed their seats in accordance with the terms of the november peace agreement .

the nepali congress has 85 seats while the cpn ( uml ) has 83 seats .

this led to further hope that the maoists are serious in their decision to set aside their armed struggle for power and will now seek power through democratic means .

maoist leader prachanda , who has not taken a seat in parliament , addressed a maoist rally in february 2007 and called for nepal to become a republic .

he also expressed concern that the constituent assembly elections may be delayed: "if the elections are delayed beyond the deadline , we should straight away declare nepal a federal democratic republic. .

under the previously negotiated agreement , it is up to the constituent assembly to decide the fate of the king and disposition of the government .

in a poll released in february 2007 , 43.2% of nepalis surveyed believed there was no place for the monarchy in nepal while nearly 45% said there should be a place for the monarchy .

under the comprehensive peace agreement of november 2006 , the political parties and the maoists agreed that the maoists would retire to cantonments and secure their arms under lock and key .

these maoist arms have been monitored by united nations personnel , though the maoists retain the keys to the arms stores .

the u.n. has expressed concern over reports that maoists have attacked the gatherings of other political parties and have been interfering with the creation of voter lists .

maoists reportedly seized recently prepared electoral rolls in the towns of salyantar and khalde .

the election commission has stated that the voter list , which is being revised for the upcoming constituent assembly election , has expanded by 15% .

nepal appears to be emerging from a political struggle between monarchists , the political parties , and maoists , all of whom have been vying for control of the country .

the madhesis of the terai have added a new dimension to nepal's struggle for political stability .

the maoists have set aside the military path to power , at least for the time being , and are now seeking to gain power through a constituent assembly .

in this way they seek to achieve politically what they have been unable to gain on the battlefield .

in recent years u.s. attention to nepal has focused on issues related to the maoist insurgency , though non - military assistance has been far greater .

the united states has in the past provided nepal with light weaponry and other military assistance to assist nepal in its fight against the maoists .

u.s. assistance to nepal has been focused on strengthening nepal's democratic institutions .

economic support funds ( esf ) , development assistance ( da ) , and child survival and health ( csh ) programs seek to enhance stability and security while seeking to strengthen governance and protect human rights .

imet programs have sought to develop nepal's military's ability to conduct operations while "following the rules of engagement that respect the rule of law , international human rights standards , and democratic values. .

u.s. assistance to nepal will reportedly continue even with the maoists in the interim government under the terms of a one - year license to the agency for international development .

the united states has viewed the maoists' past plans to institute a one - party republic , collectivize agriculture , reeducate class enemies and export revolution as undermining regional stability as well as the promotion of democracy and development for nepal .

