u.s. trade with the people's republic of china ( prc ) has raised several policy concerns .

the trade is highly unbalanced in china's favor with a u.s. deficit of $201 billion in 2005 .

year - to - date ( january - october 2006 ) , the u.s. deficit reached $190 billion .

many associate this deficit with the concomitant loss of american jobs in industries competing with rapidly rising imports from china .

some policymakers as well as leaders of industry and labor blame china for unfair trade practices , including deliberately undervaluing its currency , which they claim create an uneven playing field for u.s. companies when competing against imports from the prc .

u.s. - china trade issues are often driven by larger policy objectives .

u.s. trade with china is but one aspect of the overall u.s. policy of engagement with the prc , a policy that serves broader u.s. interests .

trade also underpins beijing's development strategy and contributes to domestic support for the prc government .

this report presents data and analysis of china's trade that shed light on various policy issues , provides an overview of recent u.s. legislative initiatives , and examines the goals and constraints of u.s. trade policy toward the prc .

some of the specific questions addressed are how the u.s. trade balance with china compares with those of the european union and japan , whether imports from china are merely replacing imports from other pacific rim nations , and how imports from china by industry compare with imports from other countries .

allowing trade with china to develop is part of the overall u.s. strategy of engagement with the prc .

the rationale behind engagement is that working with china through economic , diplomatic , informational , and military interchanges helps the united states to achieve important national security goals such as preventing nuclear proliferation , defeating global terrorism , defusing regional conflicts , fostering global economic growth , and championing aspirations for human dignity .

these goals are aimed at achieving u.s. national interests of security and prosperity for all americans and projecting u.s. values abroad .

u.s. trade policy toward china is based upon the assumption that trade between the two countries has both economic and political benefits: ( 1 ) in general , trade with china benefits both sides and allows for a more efficient allocation of available resources ; ( 2 ) the rapidly developing chinese economy affords a rare opportunity for u.s. businesses to become part of a huge and rapidly expanding market ; ( 3 ) china's membership in the world trade organization ( wto ) compels the prc to comply with international trading rules and spurs the development of market forces in the country ; and ( 4 ) foreign trade and investment create a dependency on exports , imports , and foreign investment and other interaction with the outside world in china , which in turn strengthen its relations with the western world , create centers of power outside the chinese communist party , and foster economic and social pressures for democracy ; ( 5 ) a country as significant as china — accounting for a quarter of the world's population , armed with nuclear weapons , and a member of the u.n. security council — cannot be ignored or isolated .

according to some experts , globalization and economic interests may be exerting a moderating influence on beijing's policies toward protecting china's national security interests .

however , the chinese communist party's determination to maintain political legitimacy through economic growth also creates tensions with other countries and with emerging non - party political actors .

the possible problems or challenges raised by the u.s. strategy of economic engagement with china include adjusting to economic competition in sectors where china has a comparative advantage , responding to prc unfair trade practices , and the rise of an economically powerful china that is becoming more assertive in global affairs: ( 1 ) imports from china may be entering in such increased quantities that they are a substantial cause of serious injury , or threat thereof , to competing u.s. industries ; ( 2 ) imports from china may be dumped , subsidized , or unfairly aided by government entities in china , which still wield considerable influence in the economy ; ( 3 ) according to some economists and many policymakers , the u.s. trade deficit with the prc stems in large part from beijing's policy of maintaining an undervalued currency ; ( 4 ) china has a poor record of adopting or enforcing internationally recognized standards for working conditions and environmental regulation which , in addition to violating human rights and harming the environment , may provide prc businesses with unfair competitive advantages ; and ( 5 ) u.s. economic engagement with china arguably contributes to the legitimacy of the socialist government and the strengthening of china's military by facilitating general economic development .

u.s. trade law and wto regulations can deal with injury from imports and unfair trade practices .

trade disputes with china would normally be first discussed bilaterally before taking the case to the wto for dispute resolution .

china's alleged violations of international labor and environmental standards , as well as its own laws and government regulations , have fewer institutional remedies for the united states .

policy options include working to improve china's compliance through bilateral consultations and technical assistance , international organizations ( such as the international labor organization ) , non - governmental organizations , and multilateral treaties ( such as the u.n .

framework convention on climate change and kyoto protocol ) , and the threat of trade sanctions .

what light do the trade data shed on the controversy over economic relations with china ? .

first , china has burst onto the u.s. trading scene in recent years .

in 2003 , the prc surpassed japan to become america's third largest trading partner , after canada and mexico , while the united states is the prc's second largest trading partner , after the expanded european union ( 25 nations ) .

in 2005 , according to prc data , eu - china trade was valued at $217.3 billion compared to u.s. - china trade of $211.6 billion .

china's largest export market is the united states followed by the eu - 25 and japan .

although china is a new player in international trade , it is taking major shares of markets once dominated either by other countries and u.s. domestic industries .

china is the second largest source of u.s. imports of merchandise ( $243 billion in 2005 ) after canada ( $287 billion ) .

prc imports surpassed those of mexico in 2003 and of japan in 2002 .

china now accounts for over 14% of u.s. imports ( 2005 ) , up from 12% in 2003 , 8% in 1999 , and 3% in 1990 , although this share still falls short of japan's 18% in the early 1990s .

second , the data show that while u.s. trade with china is unbalanced , the same is also true for europe and japan , although to a lesser extent .

china runs a trade surplus with the world's three major economic centers .

the u.s. bilateral deficit in 2005 ( $201 billion ) , however , was 1.6 times larger than that of the eu - 15 ( $121.8 billion ; the eu - 25 deficit was $133 billion ) and seven times that of japan ( $28.5 billion ) .

 ( as reported by the united states , eu , and japan. ) .

third , the data show that the u.s. trade deficit with china is rising with the overall u.s. trade deficit or growing at a slightly faster rate .

between 1996 and 1998 , china's share of the overall u.s. merchandise trade deficit averaged 24% ; between 1999 and 2001 , china's share was 18% , and between 2002 and 2004 , 22% .

in 2005 , the united states trade deficit with china constituted 26% of its global trade deficit .

over the same period , the shares of the u.s. deficit in goods trade accounted for by japan , the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , and the east asian newly industrialized countries ( nics ) have decreased while the european union's share has increased .

fourth , the data show that u.s. exports to china are growing faster than u.s. exports to other nations .

u.s. exports to china ( up 157% between 2000 and 2005 ) have grown faster than u.s. exports to canada ( up 19.8% over the same period ) , mexico ( 7.5% ) , and japan ( - 15% ) , although exports to china have grown from a low base .

in 2004 , china replaced germany and the united kingdom to become the 4 th largest market for u.s. goods , moving up from 11 th place in 1999 .

the united states exported somewhat more to china ( $41.8 billion ) than it did to the united kingdom ( $38.6 billion ) in 2005 .

according to japanese , european , and korean data , in 2005 , japan was the largest overseas supplier of products to china with $79.9 billion in exports .

south korea and the eu - 15 and were the second and third largest exporters to china in 2005 with $69.8 billion and $61.9 billion in exports , respectively .

fifth , the u.s. industrial sectors most at risk from import competition from china are generally labor intensive , but china is moving quickly up the technology ladder .

the sectors in which the united states runs the largest trade deficits are generally those that depend on abundant and low - cost labor , while the united states accrues surpluses with china in some advanced technology items , such as aircraft , as well as in some agricultural products .

in china's trade with the developed countries , over two - thirds of its exports are "low - end manufactures" — appliances , toys , furniture , footwear , apparel , and plastic goods — while 85% of its imports are capital - intensive machinery and equipment , electronic goods , and natural resource - related products .

the united states has incurred large trade deficits with china in some high value - added sectors as well .

these sectors include office and data processing machines , telecommunications and sound equipment , and electrical machinery and appliances .

in 2003 , china became the third largest car market and the fourth largest maker of automobiles with an output of 4.4 million vehicles .

production of cars reached an estimated 5.5 million units in 2005 , putting the prc on par with germany in automobile production .

however , china is not a major global importer or exporter of cars and it remains heavily reliant upon foreign technology in this sector .

sixth , prc data show much smaller bilateral trade deficits than those claimed by its trading partners .

prc trade data differ from u.s. data primarily because of the treatment of products from or to china ( mainland ) that pass through the hong kong special administrative region ( sar ) .

other reasons include different accounting systems and a lack of transparency in china's data reporting .

china counts hong kong as the destination of its exports sent there , even goods that are then transshipped to other markets .

by contrast , the united states and many of china's other trading partners count chinese exports that are transshipped through hong kong as products from china , not hong kong , including goods that contain hong kong components or involve final assembly or processing in hong kong .

furthermore , the united states counts hong kong as the destination of u.s. products sent there , even those that are then re - exported to china .

however , the prc counts many of such re - exported goods as u.s. exports to china .

some analysts argue that the u.s. department of commerce overstates the u.s. trade deficit with china by as much as 21% because of the way that it calculates entrepot trade through hong kong .

according to prc data , china's trade surplus with the united states in 2005 was $114 billion — not $201 billion as reported by the united states government .

in japan's case , both countries claim to be running trade deficits with each other .

according to prc data , in 2005 , china ran deficits with many of its major trading partners , including taiwan ( $57.9 billion ) , south korea ( $41.7 billion ) , japan ( $16.3 billion ) , malaysia ( $9.5 billion ) , saudi arabia ( $8.4 billion ) , philippines ( $8 billion ) , thailand ( $6 billion ) , australia ( $5 billion ) , brazil ( $5 billion ) iran ( $3.5 billion ) .

seventh , some trade specialists suggest that the surge of u.s. imports from china do not pose an additional threat to u.s. industries and workers because it merely represents a shift of investment and production from other pacific rim countries .

china's share of u.s. imports has been rising while those of other pacific rim nations have been falling or holding steady .

in terms of absolute values , until recently , u.s. imports from all major pacific rim countries continued to rise , although at slower rates than imports from china .

in 2005 , u.s. imports from the east asian nics — south korea , taiwan , hong kong , and singapore — fell or barely rose from the previous year .

eighth , the rapid growth of the chinese economy is adding to world demand for basic commodities that is causing upward pressure on world prices .

particularly significant are chinese net imports of crude oil , copper , and soybeans .

as shown in figure 1 and appendix table a - 1 , according to prc data , with the exception of 1993 , china has run a global trade surplus in goods each year since 1990 .

that surplus emerged at the beginning of the 1990s , entered into a deficit of $11 billion in 1993 ( when the government temporarily loosened controls on imports ) , and reached a peak of $43.3 billion in 1998 before declining to $22.6 billion in 2001 .

in 2005 , china's global trade surplus leapt to $102 billion ( prc data ) .

between 1995 and 2001 , china's current account surplus ( includes trade in goods , services , and unilateral transfers such as remittances and government to government payments ) was smaller than its surplus in merchandise trade because of a deficit in its services trade .

since 2002 , the current account surplus has exceeded the merchandise trade surplus due to large increases in services exports and remittances .

in 2005 , the current account surplus was $160.8 billion compared to the merchandise trade surplus of $102 billion .

according to one projection , china's global current account balance will remain in surplus "for some years to come," due to continued high rates of foreign investment , strong exports , and excessive savings in the non - state sector .

as mentioned in the previous section , prc data show much smaller bilateral trade deficits than those claimed by its trading partners .

in 2005 , the united states claimed it had incurred a $201 billion trade deficit with china , while china reported a trade surplus of only $114 billion with the united states .

japan reported a $28.5 billion merchandise trade deficit with china , while china likewise claimed a $16.3 billion trade deficit with japan .

in 2005 , the european union's trade deficit with china ( $121.8 billion ) was only $63 billion according to chinese data .

in 2005 , the 156 countries categorized as the "world" by the international monetary fund reported an aggregate trade deficit with china of $342 billion .

this is approximately 3.3 times the $102 billion global merchandise trade deficit reported by china for that year .

 ( see appendix tables a1-a5 . ) .

not only have the surge in imports from china affected u.s. markets , but china has become a major importer of world commodities or primary goods .

table 1 shows china's imports by major commodity .

imports of machinery ( including electrical ) have soared from a total of $63.1 billion in 1999 to $271.3 billion in 2005 .

such an increase in demand for machinery , however , has only a moderate effect on overall prices .

china's imports of mineral fuel , organic chemicals , iron and steel , ores , copper , cotton , and wood , however , can affect world prices , particularly when combined with rising world demand or tightening supplies .

in 2004-2005 , chinese demand for mineral fuel , in particular , including crude petroleum added to upward world price pressures .

while china is gaining manufacturing prowess and its trade surplus with the united states is spiraling , the country is purchasing heavily from neighboring trading partners .

in 2004 , china's imports rose by 35% , including machinery , raw materials , and components for manufacturing , although this growth in imports slowed to 17% in 2005 .

in addition , the bulk of china's exports are manufactured under foreign brand names , and over half of china's exports are produced by foreign - owned companies .

according to prc official estimates , 70% of prc exports to the united states contain foreign components , particularly from taiwan , south korea , and singapore .

china ( not including hong kong ) has become the largest trading partner of taiwan and the second largest trading partner of japan .

the prc has become south korea's largest foreign investment destination and largest export market .

according to taiwanese and korean data , in 2005 , taiwan's estimated trade surplus with china was $31.9 billion , while south korea's surplus was $31.2 billion .

china has become a huge buyer of raw materials , agricultural commodities , industrial machinery , and electronic components from southeast asia , as well as an important source of foreign investment and second largest source of foreign tourists in the region .

china's top exports to southeast asia include machinery , electronic goods , iron and steel , mineral fuels , textiles and apparel , and optical , photographic , and medical equipment .

despite worries about economic competition , in 2004 , asean , which ran a trade surplus of $20 billion with china that year ( prc data ) , agreed to establish a free trade zone with china which would be implemented gradually over five years .

in the view of many of its major trading partners in asia , china's economic growth and open trade policies have presented both competitive challenges and economic opportunities .

however , according to some analysts , china's appetite for imports is slowing , while its export production shows little sign of abating .

although asean accumulated a trade surplus with china again in 2005 ( $19.5 billion , according to prc data ) , china's exports to asean grew 50% faster than its imports from southeast asia .

some trade specialists suggest that the surge of u.s. imports from china do not pose an additional threat to u.s. industries and workers because it merely represents a shift of investment and production from other pacific rim countries .

in other words , expanding imports from china have been offset by declining imports from other east asian or pacific rim countries .

these countries include those at a similar level of development which are competing directly with china , such as malaysia and thailand , and more industrialized countries or special administrative regions that have moved their lower - end production to the prc , such as macao , hong kong , south korea , and taiwan .

in sectors such as footwear , handbags , apparel , furniture , and building and lighting fixtures , u.s. imports from china have been displacing those from hong kong , south korea , taiwan , and mexico and reducing imports those from other developing asian nations .

as shown in figure 2 , china's share of u.s. imports grew from 3% in 1990 to 14% in 2005 ( out of total u.s. imports of $491 billion and $1.66 trillion , respectively ) , while the rest of east asia's share ( japan , nics , and asean ) fell from 36% to 19% .

mexico's share of u.s. imports grew from 6% in 1990 to 11.6% in 2002 .

it fell to 10.6% in 2004 and further to 10.1% in 2005 .

as shown in figure 3 and appendix table a - 2 , by either chinese or u.s. data , china runs a trade surplus with the united states .

although chinese figures show it at only $114 billion in 2005 , the united states reports it to be $201 billion .

according to prc data , china has run a trade surplus with the united states since 1993 .

according to u.s. data , the united states has incurred trade deficits with china since 1983 .

as is the case with the united states , japan has run a trade deficit with china since the 1980s ( according to japanese data ) .

as shown in figure 4 and in appendix table a - 3 , japan's balance of trade with china dropped from a surplus of $6 billion in 1985 to a deficit of nearly $6 billion in 1990 .

japan's trade deficit with china reached a peak of $26.5 billion in 2001 , which was surpassed in 2005 ( $28.5 billion ) .

japan's exports to china have grown dramatically in the past few years , its largest exports to the prc being electronics , general machinery , iron and steel , optical , photographic , and medical equipment , and organic chemicals .

as shown in figure 5 and appendix table a - 4 , according to eu data , the european union incurred a trade deficit with china of $947 million in 1988 , which grew to $121.8 billion in 2005 .

according to chinese figures , however , the eu trade deficit with china began in the late 1990s and grew to $63 billion in 2005 .

compared to the world's two other major economic centers , the u.s. trade deficit with china at $201 billion in 2005 was the largest , followed by the eu - 15 deficit with china at $121.8 billion and japan at $28.5 billion .

within the eu , according to trading partner 2005 data , germany's trade deficit with china was $23 billion , the u.k.'s was $18.8 billion , and france's was $9.9 billion .

as shown in appendix table a - 5 , however , china's trade statistics indicate smaller european trade deficits or even surpluses .

the u.s. trade deficit with china is notable for not only its size but also the large imbalance between imports from and exports to china .

in 2005 , japan exported 2.5 times more to the united states than it imported , while canada and mexico exported 1.3 times and 1.4 times more , respectively , than they imported .

china , by comparison , exported 5.8 times more to the u.s. market in 2005 than it imported from the united states .

this indicates that the chinese market has been vastly underdeveloped as a destination for u.s. exports .

this section presents charts and data on u.s. imports from china by selected industrial sectors .

the charts show imports from china as compared with imports from other major exporting countries or groups of countries .

these include the european union ( fifteen original countries ) , the association of southeast asian nations ( asean , which includes , indonesia , malaysia , singapore , thailand , the philippines , brunei , vietnam , laos , and myanmar [burma] ) , taiwan , mexico , south korea , japan , hong kong , and canada .

the data in this section are presented according to two - digit standard international trade classification ( sitc ) codes as reported by the u.s. department of commerce .

the industries selected are those in which the share of imports from china has risen to a significant level or trade policy has played a significant role ( e.g .

iron and steel and automobiles ) even though u.s. imports from china in those industries might be relatively small .

fueling china's export boom is an unprecedented infusion of foreign capital in the manufacturing sector .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is directed toward investments in companies in which the foreign investor has a controlling interest .

it is primarily for physical plant and equipment and for the costs of establishing enterprises in china .

it is not for portfolio investment on china's stock exchanges .

in 2002 , china overtook the united states as the world's largest recipient of foreign direct investment .

in 2005 , china remained in that position , despite a slight decrease from a year earlier , with $60 billion in utilized fdi .

the united states is one of the largest sources of utilized fdi in china , investing $3.1 billion in 2005 .

 ( see table 18 . ) .

china relies heavily upon investment from hong kong and other east asian countries and regions .

a significant amount of fdi from hong kong comes from taiwan or from mainland chinese companies via their subsidiaries in hong kong .

annual or utilized fdi from japan and south korea surpassed that of the united states in 2003 .

in 2004 , south korea surpassed japan to be the third largest source of fdi in china .

the united states remains the second largest source of cumulative fdi after hong kong .

china's wto commitments include allowing more foreign investment in sectors such as telecommunications , energy , banking , and insurance .

