the increasing globalization of markets , including in agriculture , has brought not onlyopportunity , but also uncertainty , to u.s. farmers and ranchers , rural communities , and thebusinesses that sell to them and market their products .

up until 30 or 40 years ago , clearerdistinctions could be made between domestic and foreign markets for the products of agriculture - and early federal farm policy reflected this distinction .

farm support programs were initiallydeveloped primarily to support farm income and commodity prices through government spending .

these programs were often combined with supply management measures that included importrestrictions .

u.s. export competitiveness and impacts on world trade relations and patterns were lessimportant considerations .

mounting productivity has enabled u.s. agriculture to produce far more than needed simply to meet domestic demand , which is relatively stable .

foreign markets , once viewed more as an outletfor surplus production , are increasingly becoming the foundation of agriculture's prosperity ( see"u.s .

agricultural exports," below ) .

a robust world economy and strong demand ( particularly inthe developing world where consumer incomes and populations are rising ) suggest strong exportprospects and positive farm returns .

conversely , when exports decline , farm income suffers - asoccurred after 1998 when the asian financial crisis signaled the start of a wider recession that hurtu.s .

agricultural exports .

 ( congress subsequently provided billions of dollars in federal farm aidto bolster farm incomes. ) .

even when world economic conditions are favorable , u.s. agriculture enters the global marketplace facing stiff competition from foreign exporting nations like canada , australia,argentina , and brazil , where production costs may be competitive with those in the united states,and the european union ( eu ) and china , where strong government support in the form of subsidiesand / or other aids also play an important and often trade - distorting role , according to many analysts .

furthermore , the eu and china , along with others like russia , japan and korea , have imposed whatu.s .

interests consider to be unjustified sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) and technical measures ( labeling rules , segregation of imported from domestic product , etc .

 ) , high tariffs , and other importbarriers that choke access to their markets .

these countries are , and are expected to remain , leadingcustomers for u.s. farm products - not only bulk grains but , increasingly , higher - value products likemeats , poultry , fruits and vegetables , and processed food products .

furthermore , their views aboutagricultural markets influence the views of policymakers in developing countries .

farm groups and agribusinesses are well aware that many world factors influence u.s. agricultural exports .

they count on lawmakers and administration officials to develop and promoteu.s .

trade policies that ( 1 ) aggressively reduce foreign - imposed barriers ( including tariffs , non - tariffbarriers , domestic subsidies , and export subsidies ) to u.s. farm products , ( 2 ) hold other countriesaccountable for commitments they have already made in existing trade agreements , ( 3 ) resolvefestering agricultural disputes with major trading partners , and ( 4 ) fully use usda export and foodaid programs .

some u.s. farm groups point out that , by maintaining barriers to u.s. imports and their own high export subsidies and internal farm supports , not all countries have fully honored existing tradeagreements .

such concern has on occasion dampened u.s. agriculture's enthusiasm for entering intonew trade agreements .

even when the united states wins a case in dispute settlement , as it did in1997 , when the world trade organization ( wto ) ruled in favor of the united states that the eucannot ban , without scientific justification , beef produced with hormones , a country may not complywith the decision .

in the beef case , the united states was authorized to impose retaliatory tariffs butu.s .

beef still cannot enter the eu .

although u.s. officials say more trade disputes are resolvedfavorably than unfavorably ( often through negotiation at lower levels rather than formal disputeresolution ) , there is a perception among some farmers that established international trading ruleshave not always worked to their benefit .

moreover , some u.s. producer groups ( particularly those representing import - sensitive commodities ) have pressed for continued protection of their own commodities , and for morerestrictions on foreign farm and food imports into the united states .

the u.s. average tariff onagricultural imports ( 12% ) is much lower than the global average tariff ( 62% ) imposed on similarimports .

however , the united states along with other developed countries restricts the entry of"import - sensitive" agricultural products to protect certain domestic producers from foreigncompetition and the economic adjustments that such imports might entail .

u.s. tariff - rate quotasallow zero or low duty access for specified amounts of foreign beef , sugar , peanuts , cotton , tobacco,and dairy products .

imports above the quota may enter , but face prohibitively high tariffs .

thisusually makes such imports uncompetitive in the u.s. market .

safeguards ( involving the temporaryuse of higher tariffs and / or quotas ) allow producers of an affected commodity or product sectoradditional time to adjust to increased import competition .

such adjustments will be more severe inareas whose production must compete with imported products .

in recent years , the united states hasimposed safeguards on imports of lamb meat and wheat gluten to allow u.s. producers of thoseproducts time to adjust to foreign competition .

 ( 2 ) foreign trading partners argue that such efforts are ill - advised because free trade must flow in all directions , including into the united states .

in some cases , other countries are using tradenegotiations and , sometimes , dispute settlement procedures in the wto , to enhance their access tothe u.s. market for agricultural products , or to reduce competition in third - country markets fromsubsidized u.s. production .

for example , both the lamb and wheat gluten safeguard actions weresuccessfully challenged by other wto member countries in wto dispute settlement and were notrenewed by the united states .

more recently , in september 2002 , brazil initiated a case at the wtoagainst certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program .

many developing countries are particularly concerned about what they see as limited access tothe u.s. market for the above import - sensitive and other commodities .

such countries also see highdomestic farm supports in richer countries like the united states and eu member states astrade - distorting and are seeking substantial reductions in such support in multilateral negotiations .

it is within this context of competing u.s. agricultural interests and other countries' concerns , that agricultural trade issues are likely to be taken up in legislation , congressional - executive branchconsultations on trade negotiations , or in oversight hearings during the 108th congress .

among themost prominent are the following , which are discussed in more detail later in this report: agriculture in bilateral and regional free trade agreements .

unique to free trade agreements ( ftas ) , as illustrated by the northamerican free trade agreement ( nafta ) , are provisions designed to fully liberalize trade ( eg,reduce and eliminate tariffs and quotas ) between partners within an agreed - upon time period .

provisions affecting agricultural trade are found in two bilateral ftas the bush administrationconcluded with chile and singapore late in 2002 .

agriculture also will likely prove to be acontentious issue in negotiating other ftas the administration has initiated , including withaustralia .

while some agricultural commodity groups and food product manufacturers welcome themarket openings these agreements may provide , producers of import - sensitive commodities ( eg,sugar , dairy products , meats ) will carefully monitor and seek to shape those provisions that affectthem .

the administration also has placed a high priority on negotiating an agreement to remove all trade barriers within the western hemisphere .

the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) isintended to go beyond nafta to encompass all trade and services among all of the region'scountries ( except cuba ) , and eventually supersede both nafta and regional trading agreements,including the free trade agreement the united states has just negotiated with chile and the ftabeing negotiated with central america .

crafting rules for liberalizing agricultural trade andnegotiating the fine details among the region's 34 countries by 2005 will be difficult and contentious .

agricultural negotiations in the world trade organization .

the united states is engaged in a new round of multilateral tradenegotiations , one of whose aims is further liberalization of global agricultural trade .

according tothe declaration agreeing to a new trade round , the objectives for agriculture are to substantiallyimprove market access for agricultural products , reduce and phase out export subsidies , andsubstantially reduce trade - distorting domestic support .

most u.s. agricultural interest groups supportthe inclusion of agriculture in a broader multilateral trade round .

these groups believe thattrade - offs possible in a comprehensive negotiation would result in improved market prospects foru.s .

agricultural exports .

others , such as producers of import - sensitive crops , who feeldisadvantaged by previous trade agreements ( eg , nafta ) or threatened by possible newagreements , are not as enthusiastic about u.s. participation in a new round .

the agriculturalnegotiations have important implications for farm bill programs that provide price and incomesupport to farmers and for export and food aid programs .

there are also important differences innegotiating positions among wto member countries , especially between the united states and theeuropean union , and between those two wto members and the developing countries .

biotechnology and agricultural trade .

differences between the united states and its trading partners over genetically engineered ( ge ) crops and food products that contain or are derived from them pose a potential threat to , and in someinstances have already disrupted , u.s. agricultural trade .

corn and soybean exports are the mostseriously threatened crops .

underlying the conflicts are pronounced differences , reflected inconsumer attitudes and regulatory systems , between the united states and several important tradingpartners about ge products and their potential health and environmental effects .

china and u.s. agriculture .

there is mounting concern from u.s. producer groups , administration officials , and other trading partners that chinahas been slow to implement , only partially implemented , or in some instances has failed to complywith agricultural trade commitments made under recent international trade agreements .

the speedand manner with which china implements its trade commitments are critical to the development ofu.s. - china agricultural trade .

while u.s. agriculture and trade officials have been working toresolve these differences , progress has been slow .

country - of - origin labeling .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) soon will require many food stores to provide country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) onfresh fruits , vegetables , red meats , seafood , and peanuts .

proponents of cool argue that u.s.consumers have a right to know the origin of their food , particularly during a period when foodimports are increasing , and will continue to increase under both existing and future trade agreements,and when there are concerns about food safety .

critics of the new law , however , argue that suchlabeling does not increase public health protection by telling consumers which foods are safer thanothers: all food imports already must meet equivalent u.s. food safety standards , which are enforcedvigorously by u.s. officials at the border and overseas .

scientific principles , not geography , mustbe the arbiter of safety , they add .

some critics are urging the 108th congress to revisit the newlabeling law , on the grounds that implementation will be extremely costly and hinder rather than helpu.s .

producers' competitive advantage .

proponents maintain that the expected benefits to u.s.farmers , ranchers , and consumers will outweigh implementation and compliance costs .

agricultural exports to cuba .

u.s. policy is to exempt commercial sales of agricultural and medical products from u.s. unilateral sanctionsimposed on foreign countries , subject to specified conditions and prohibitions .

debate continues,though , among policymakers on the scope of restrictions that should apply to agricultural sales tocuba .

bilateral trade disputes .

the united states is engaged in a variety of trade disputes involving individual countries .

the outcome of a number ofthese could prove critical to future application and recognition of wto farm subsidy rules , disputesettlement procedures , and other world trade issues of importance to u.s. agriculture .

among thedisputes are: a wto case , instituted in september 2002 , by brazil against certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program .

subsequent consultations between the united states andbrazil indecember and january failed to resolve the dispute .

continuation of the wto dispute settlementprocess could lead to a "final" panel decision for or against the complaining country .

resolution ofthe case in brazil's favor could result in wto recommendations concerning implementation of u.s.cotton program provisions .

non - compliance with such provisions on the part of the united statescould result in compensation or possible limited trade sanctions .

a u.s. complaint that canadian wheat trading practices , particularly theexport practices of the canadian wheat board ( cwb ) , are inconsistent with canada's wtoobligations and disadvantage u.s. wheat exporters in canadian and international markets .

canadamaintains that canadian import practices and the cwb wheat export practices comply fully withinternational trade rules and its wto obligations .

successful resolution of this dispute in favor ofthe united states could result in greater competitiveness for u.s. wheat vis - a - vis canadian wheatin international markets and in u.s. wheat having improved access to the canadianmarket .

import barriers by russia , mexico , the eu , and japan , affecting u.s. meat and / or poultry exports .

the united states is one of the world's leaders in meat and poultry trade .

meat and poultry products are among the fastest growing components of u.s. agricultural exports .

however , at the same time that the industries' reliance on foreign markets is increasing , countrieshave instituted barriers that have disrupted exports , threatened future growth , and heightened tradetensions .

longstanding sweetener trade disputes between the united states and mexico .

mutual recognition that nafta sugar provisions have not worked prompted u.s. andmexican negotiators to intensify efforts in mid - 2002 to resolve two key issues: market access formexican sugar in the u.s. market , and market access and sales of u.s. high fructose corn syrup inmexico .

however , talks have been stalled .

appropriations for agricultural export and food aid programs .

congress is currently considering fy2004 appropriations for usda'sinternational activities .

at issue are funding levels for agricultural export subsidies , export marketdevelopment programs , export credit guarantees , and foreign food aid .

congress and theadministration have been at odds over the use of commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) funds tofinance food aid programs and over the administration's decision in 2003 to begin phasing out foodaid based on surpluses .

congress is currently considering fy2004 appropriations for usda's international activities .

at issue are funding levels for agricultural export subsidies , export marketdevelopment programs , export credit guarantees , and foreign food aid .

congress and theadministration have been at odds over the use of commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) funds to finance food aid programs and over the administration's decision in 2003 to beginphasing out food aid based on surpluses .

wto agriculture negotiations could result inrestrictions on agricultural export and credit guarantee programs , the preservation of whichthe trade act of 2002 lists as an objective for the wto agriculture negotiations .

anychanges in these programs resulting from a trade agreement would ultimately be subject tocongressional scrutiny under fast - track procedures for considering trade agreements .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) authorizes usda to operate a number of programs to promote u.s. agricultural exports or to provide foreign food aid .

the foreign agriculturalservice operates usda's international programs .

these programs include: agriculturalexport subsidies , export market development , export credit guarantees , and foreign food aid .

legislative authority for most of these programs now extends to the end of 2007 .

exportsubsidies , but not other types of export and food aid programs , are subject to reductioncommitments agreed to in the 1994 uruguay round agreement on agriculture ( uraa ) .

on - going wto agriculture negotiations are considering new rules and disciplines for exportcredit programs and food aid based on surpluses .

u.s. agricultural export subsidies include the export enhancement program ( eep ) and the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) .

market promotion programs include the marketaccess program ( map ) and the foreign market development or "cooperator" program ( fmdp ) .

considered to be non - trade distorting , programs to promote exports are exemptfrom uruguay round reduction commitments .

the fsria authorizes export credit guaranteesby usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) of $5.5 billion worth of farm exportsannually , plus guarantees of an additional $1 billion for emerging markets through 2007 .

the fsria also authorizes p.l .

480 food for peace programs and food for progress through fy2007 .

p.l .

480 titles i ( trade and development assistance ) and ii ( emergencyand private assistance ) are the main vehicles for u.s. foreign food aid .

food for progress ( ffp ) provides commodities to developing countries and emerging markets that aredeveloping their private sectors .

another food aid program , section 416 ( b ) , permanentlyauthorized in the agricultural act of 1949 , provides surplus commodities for donationoverseas .

the 2002 farm bill also established a new food aid program , the mcgovern - doleinternational school feeding and child nutrition program .

some of these programs , notably food aid provided under p.l .

480 and the salaries and expenses of usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) , require annual appropriations .

other programs ( food aid other than p.l .

480 , export subsidies , export market development,export credit guarantees ) are funded or guaranteed by usda's commodity creditcorporation ( ccc ) and do not require line item appropriations .

congress is presentlyconsidering proposals in the president's budget transmitted to congress on february 3 , 2003for funding usda export and food aid programs in fy2004 .

the president's budgetestimates that agricultural export and food aid programs would have a program value of $6.2billion .

of that amount , approximately $1.4 billion ( for p.l .

480 and fas ) would requireauthorization of budget authority in an appropriations act ; the rest would be funded by cccborrowing from the treasury .

the biggest item requiring authorization of budget authority is $1.185 billion requested for p.l .

480 title ii , the same as requested in fy2003 .

however , the president's budgetrequest for title ii is less than the amount appropriated in fy2003 .

the farm bill authorized$100 million of ccc funding for the mcgovern - dole school feeding program in fy2003 .

beginning in fy2004 , however , the program will be funded by appropriations and thepresident requested $50 million for mcgovern - dole in fy2004 .

the president's budgetenvisions $151 million of ccc funding for ffp .

that program level is expected to provide the minimum 400,000 tons of commodities in ffp required by the 2002 farm bill .

the president's budget assumes a program level of $28 million in fy2004 for eep .

the farm bill , however , allows eep spending of $478 million , which is the maximum allowedunder the world trade organization / uruguay round agreement on subsidy reductioncommitments .

eep is capped at $28 million in fy2003 by p.l .

108-7 , but for fy2004,unless congress decides otherwise , usda retains some flexibility to increase the level ofeep subsidies.. for deip , the budget expects a program level of $57 million for fy2004 , anincrease above the $36 million estimated for fy2003 .

the budget request assumes that theccc will guarantees commercial financing of $4.2 billion of u.s. agricultural exports infy2004 .

consistent with the farm bill reauthorization of map , the budget provides for mapfunding of $125 million in fy2004 .

the budget assumes the farm bill authorized level of$34.5 million for fmdp in fy2004 .

following house and senate appropriations committee deliberations , spending measures will be brought to the floor of each chamber .

in addition to hearings andcongressional action on appropriations for usda's international activities , severalcommittees have indicated that they will be carrying out oversight of the administrations'simplementation of the export and food aid programs authorized in the 2002 farm bill .

someusda agricultural export and food aid programs - especially usda's export credit guaranteeprogram - could be affected by agreements reached in wto agriculture negotiations .

many in congress are closely following the wto agricultural negotiations and theconsideration being given to proposals to tighten multilateral restrictions on u.s. export creditprograms which guarantee , on average , private financing of around $3 billion annually ofu.s .

agricultural exports .

under provisions established by the trade act of 2002 ( p.l.107-210 ) , congress and the administration will be consulting on these negotiations and theirimplications for legislatively authorized programs .

crs issue brief ib980-06 , agricultural export and food aid programs .

crs report rl31301 , appropriations for fy2003: u.s. department of agriculture and related agencies ( see section on "agricultural trade and food aid" ) .

crs report rs21425 , the administration's fy2004 budget request for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) ( see section on "agricultural trade and food aid" ) .

crs report rs20285 , agricultural export subsidies , export credits , and the world trade organization .

