there is widespread awareness that the subject matter knowledge and teaching skills of teachers play a central role in the success of elementary and secondary education reform .

title ii , part a of the higher education act ( hea ) includes programs and provisions intended to improve the overall quality of the k - 12 teacher preparation programs currently administered by higher education institutions , hold these programs accountable for the quality of their graduates , and strengthen recruitment of highly qualified individuals to teaching .

the 110 th congress will likely consider legislation that would reauthorize the hea , including its provisions in title ii addressing the quality of the k - 12 public school teaching force .

the statutory authorities in the hea expired at the end of fy2004 ; however , they have been recently extended and currently remain effective .

this report provides an overview of the current programs and provisions of hea title ii , part a , describes available information on their implementation , and identifies a number of the key issues that may be part of a debate over the reauthorization of this legislation .

the report begins with a discussion of the broader context within which the reauthorization of hea title ii , part a might occur .

this section considers the current presence of higher education institutions in the preparation of k - 12 teachers , as well as the growing federal involvement in activities designed to strengthen the quality of k - 12 teaching .

title ii , part a of the hea ( as amended by the higher education amendments of 1998 , p.l .

105-244 ) provides for three competitively awarded grants to improve k - 12 teacher quality — state grants , partnership grants , and recruitment grants .

appropriated funds are to be divided as follows: 45% to state grants , 45% to partnership grants , and 10% to teacher recruitment grants .

the fy2006 and fy2007 appropriations were $59.895 million and the fy2008 appropriation is $33.662 million .

the complete appropriations history of the program is provided in table 1 .

this section describes the general teacher education accountability requirements of title ii , part a , and their implementation .

all states and nearly all teacher education programs in the country are affected by the accountability provisions in the teacher quality enhancement grant program .

this section briefly identifies a number of issues related to the teacher quality enhancement grants that might be considered during an hea reauthorization process .

issues addressing the grant programs funded under this authority are considered separately from those arising from the general accountability provisions applying to all states and nearly all teacher preparation programs .

congressional consideration of the grant programs ( state , partnership , and recruitment ) may include at least the following issues .

it is probably too early to tell whether the three grant programs authorized by title ii , part a have achieved their objectives .

funding has been awarded over five fiscal years .

it does not appear that any grantees have had their grants revoked for failing to demonstrate progress .

the sole national evaluation of title ii , for which we have only preliminary results , is focused on the partnership grants .

further , as gao noted in its report , evaluating the impact of title ii grants in general may be difficult given ed's administration of the programs .

the current statute establishes a reporting and evaluating process applying to all grantees , with continued funding conditioned on demonstrating progress .

in light of the gao findings , the congress may consider whether this process is adequate but not well implemented , or whether the process itself should be amended .

as ed and gao have observed , the mandated division of the annual appropriation for these programs and the one - time only nature of the state grants raise the prospect of ed being unable to expend fully the state grant portion of the appropriation .

one or the other of these features of the current program structure will probably have to be modified if future funding is to be fully spent .

the funding structure issue raises questions about the appropriate mix of programs and activities being funded under this authority .

ed requested fy2004 and fy2005 appropriations authority to allow state grant funds to shift to partnerships ; such authority was included in the fy2005 appropriations legislation .

during the reauthorization process , the congress may consider where the emphasis should be placed among these kinds of grants or the kinds of activities being supported .

how important is it to have seas involved in addressing the improvement of teacher preparation or in strengthening teacher recruitment ? .

is the interaction among the various entities engaged in partnership grants likely to have a significant impact on the quality of teacher preparation and recruitment , and , if so , should support for partnerships be expanded ? .

how should the congress respond to the concern expressed by various higher education associations that the title ii programs offer little or no direct support for improving teacher preparation at higher education institutions ? .

where should the balance be placed among investment in such activities as teacher preparation , teacher recruitment , professional development , and accountability ? .

how much support should be directed to alternatives to traditional teacher preparation programs and alternative routes to certification ? .

the general accountability provisions of title ii , part a applicable to states and higher education institutions with teacher preparation programs have generated significant debate since their inception .

several of the issues that have arisen are briefly identified below .

as described earlier in this report , the standards for identifying teacher preparation programs as low - performing under title ii are set by each individual state .

these may or may not involve the various criteria in the reports required from institutions and states , such as the pass rates of graduates on initial licensure exams .

federal consequences for an institution identified as low - performing flow only if its state takes specified action .

to date , relatively few institutions have been identified as low - performing under the title ii provisions .

congress may consider whether to modify this framework .

proposals may be considered to bring the federal government more directly into the process through such steps as setting the low - performance standards or imposing federal penalties independent of any state action against the teacher preparation program .

alternatively , given how recently the current framework was initiated , some may want to maintain it without significant change and see what impact it has over time .

still others may argue for scrapping this federal effort since the standards are inconsistent across states .

congress may consider whether the emphasis in the title ii accountability process on licensing exam pass rates should be constrained or expanded .

the utility of the current pass rate - based system from a national perspective may be limited because the selection of certification exams and the setting of passing scores are state specific and do not easily allow for interstate comparisons .

further , recent research concludes that many current licensing exams are not rigorous , measuring essentially basic skills .

increased institutional pass rates on such exams may say relatively little about whether teacher preparation programs are graduating students who will be good teachers .

nevertheless , the premise that teacher preparation programs should graduate students who can pass initial credentialing exams does not appear to be at issue .

indeed , there is some evidence that higher education institutions may respond to low pass rates with , what one set of researchers described as , "innovative strategies to enhance the content knowledge of prospective teachers as well as their writing and reading skills. .

for some policymakers , the limitations of the present system may suggest that the current federal involvement is but an initial step in a multi - step process necessary to improve teacher preparation program quality .

for example , consideration may be given to establishing a single , nationwide standard , although such a proposal is likely to prove politically controversial .

for others , the reporting burden and difficulty in making cross - state comparisons may suggest a refocusing of these provisions , perhaps to measures of state support for teacher preparation or the alignment of state certification exams with state standards for teacher preparation program approval .

one of the more specific issues that the congress may debate during the reauthorization process is the calculation of pass rates .

this debate is likely to focus particularly on the 100% pass rates reported by some states and many institutions .

as described earlier , such rates resulted in part from decisions made by ed regarding the definition of a graduate and in part from institutional and state policies .

to the extent that increasing numbers of institutions report 100% pass rates the utility of these rates as an accountability measure is undercut .

congress may consider various alternatives to address this issue .

for example , institutions might be required to report the extent to which graduates passed certification exams the first time they took them , regardless of how the institutions define a graduate .

alternative measures to gauge the teaching effectiveness of graduates of a program might be considered , such as changes in the academic performance of a teacher's students or expressions of school administrator satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a program's graduates .

