the national security education program ( nsep ) , authorized by the david l. borennational security education act ( nsea ) , ( 1 ) provides aid for international education and foreign languagestudies by american undergraduate and graduate students , plus grants to institutions of highereducation ( ihes ) .

the statement of purpose for the nsea emphasizes the needs of federalgovernment agencies , as well as the nation's postsecondary education institutions , for an increasedsupply of individuals knowledgeable about the languages and cultures of foreign nations , especiallythose which are of national security concern and have not traditionally been the focus of americaninterest and study .

specifically , the nsea declares the purposes of this program to be: providingthe "necessary resources , accountability , and flexibility" to meet the national security needs of theunited states ; increasing the "quantity , diversity , and quality" of teaching and learning of foreignlanguage and area studies critical to the nation's interest ; expanding the pool of applicants foremployment in u.s. government agencies with national security responsibilities ; expanding theforeign language and area studies knowledge base upon which u.s. citizens and governmentemployees can rely ; and permitting the federal government to "advocate the cause of internationaleducation" ( 50 usc 1901 ) .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been increased congressionalinterest in the nsep and other federal programs of aid for "critical" foreign language and areastudies .

several bills passed in the 107th and 108th congressional sessions that would have alteredthe nsep's funding and administration .

in addition , the intelligence reform bill ( p.l .

108-458 ) signed by the president on december 17 , 2004 , amends title x of the national security act to createa new intelligence community scholarship program ( icsp ) that is quite similar to the nsep ( â§1042 ) .

this report provides background information on the nsep and an analysis of related issuesincluding the icsp .

it will be updated in response to major legislative developments .

the national security education program ( nsep ) ( 2 ) is intended to complement , and not duplicate , other federalprograms of aid for foreign language and area studies education , such as those authorized under titlevi of the higher education act , the fulbright - hays act , and other legislation .

 ( 3 ) distinctive elements of thensep , compared to most other federal programs of aid to international education or exchange,include its service requirement for aid recipients , administration by the department of defense ( dod ) , rather than the departments of education ( ed ) or state , and its support for internationaltravel by american undergraduate students .

the recent establishment of the nsep pilot program,the national flagship language initiative , distinguishes it even further from title vi programs .

selected issues that have arisen with respect to the nsep are discussed in theremainder of this report .

as noted earlier , the original intention was that the nsep would be funded via theearnings of a trust fund .

an initial appropriation of $150 million was provided to the trustfund , with the possibility of additional appropriations being provided to the fund afterward .

the apparent intention of using this funding mechanism was to help insulate the programfrom the uncertainties of the annual budget and appropriations processes , although funds tobe used for annual grants and administration must still be appropriated from the fund .

however , the reduction of the nsetf by one - half in subsequent rescissionslegislation ( p.l .

104-6 ) , combined with a decline in interest rates mean that annual nsetfearnings have been only $2-3 million in recent years , much lower than the annualappropriations and program level of approximately $8 million per year .

thus , as noted in table 2 , the fund's balance is steadily declining ; if current trends continue , the fund will bedepleted by fy2006 .

if nsep activities are to be maintained at their current ( or higher ) levels , the size of the fund must be increased significantly .

alternatively , the nsep'sfunding structure might be shifted totally to an annual appropriations basis , as is the case forthe majority of federal grant programs .

p.l .

107-306 , discussed above , requires thesecretary of defense to study the feasibility of such a shift .

an issue which arises with respect to any federal program intended to supportinstruction in "critical" foreign languages , regions , and disciplines is whether aid awards areappropriately targeted on such languages , regions , and disciplines .

according to the nsea,"critical" foreign languages , regions , and disciplines are those in which there is a majornational security interest , the knowledge and skills of u.s. students and federal employeesare deficient , and they are infrequently taught in the nation's colleges and universities andinfrequently represented in other international educational exchange programs .

the nseb conducts an annual survey of federal agencies to identify foreignlanguages , regions , and disciplines which the agencies deem to be critical to their operations .

a wide variety of languages that are both frequently ( eg , spanish ) and infrequently ( eg,farsi ) taught are identified through this process .

however , the nseb identifies a subset ofthese languages , along with associated world regions / nations , plus disciplines to be the focusof scholarship and fellowship awards for the succeeding year .

in addition , the nationalflagship language initiative , as planned by the nseb and as authorized by p.l .

107-306 ,will attempt to identify the most critical languages to be the focus of all institutional grantsbeginning in 2003 .

while any process to identify critical foreign languages , world regions and disciplineswill be imperfect and subject to regular revision , and past institutional grants may not alwayshave been clearly focused on such critical subjects , it appears that substantial effort isdevoted toward focusing nsep grants on languages , regions and disciplines which areinfrequently taught in american ihes , and are of national security interest , particularly incomparison to most other federal foreign language and area studies programs .

the nsep's emphasis on helping to meet national security needs , and its servicerequirement for individual aid recipients , distinguish it from other federal programs ofsupport for foreign language and area studies .

nevertheless , the nsep shares with severalother federal programs the goals of increasing understanding of , and the availability ofadvanced instruction in , world languages and regions which are infrequently taught in unitedstates ihes .

therefore , efficiency in the use of federal aid funds is likely to be enhancedthrough coordination of the nsep and such programs as ed's title vi of the highereducation act and the fulbright - hays act programs administered by the departments ofstate and education .

currently , such coordination occurs through representation on thenational security education board of designees of the secretaries of education and state,among others .

however , there is no statutory provision for analogous representation ofnsep officials on decision - making bodies for related programs administered by other federalagencies .

one aspect of the nsep - - institutional grants , including those under the nationalflagship language initiative - - is especially similar to activities supported under anotherfederal program , title vi of the higher education act ( hea ) .

 ( 13 ) both the nsepinstitutional grants and two programs under hea title vi - - national resource centers andlanguage resource centers - - provide grants to united states ihes to increase their capacityto provide instruction in foreign languages and regions , with special emphasis on thosewhich are infrequently taught in this nation .

the major difference may be the degree of focuson "most critical" foreign languages and regions , especially in view of the plannedrestructuring of the nsep institutional grants under the national flagship languageinitiative .

the nsep has attempted to address this concern about possible program overlap byrequiring ihes to propose activities which complement , but do not duplicate , those supportedunder other federal programs when applying for nsep institutional grants .

nevertheless,especially given recent efforts through the annual appropriations process to increase the focusof hea title vi on the most critical languages and regions , plus the inefficiencies andadministrative costs associated with conducting multiple federal grant competitions for ihes,as well as the concerns expressed about nsep institutional grants by some members of theacademic community ( discussed later in this report ) , the possibility of consolidating thensep institutional grant program with the hea title vi national and language resourcecenter programs might be considered .

in addition , coordination with other programs may be altered by proposals to movethe administrative responsibility for nsep from the secretary of defense to the director ofcentral intelligence ( h.r .

1588 as passed by the senate ) or to the secretary ofeducation ( as the president's budget recommends ) .

placing responsibility for both the nsepand the hea , title vi programs under the secretary of education would presumably increasethe degree of coordination and decrease the amount of overlap among these programs .

onthe other hand , it is not clear how shifting responsibility for the nsep to the director ofcentral intelligence would impact program coordination .

some have questioned whether support of foreign travel grants by a limited numberof undergraduate students should be a priority for expenditure of federal funds under thensea .

in the 107th congress the senate - passed version of h.r .

4628 wouldhave eliminated the nsep's undergraduate scholarship program , shifting available funds tograduate fellowships and institutional grants .

although the enacted version of this legislationdoes not eliminate authority for undergraduate scholarships , debate over this issue maycontinue .

according to the senate select committee on intelligence report ( on s. 2506 , 107th congress ) : the committee views the graduate program asthe most effective way of achieving the stated goal of the program for several reasons .

first,the graduate program reaches students after they have already selected a career path .

also,nsep officials have told the committee that graduate students are enthusiastic about servingas federal employees , and generally seek employment in national security positions .

thecommittee notes that the undergraduate program , while providing unique learningopportunities , is an inadequate mechanism for ensuring that students will obtain employmentwith the federal government , and thereby fails to meet the stated goal of producing anincreased pool of applicants to serve in the federal government .

because the nsep isessentially taking a 'risk' on students by providing them with a substantial amount offinancial assistance , the committee believes that it is in the best interest of the program tofocus on those students most likely to seek and attain employment in the field of nationalsecurity .

 ( s.rept .

107-149 ) in addition to the above arguments , the level of foreign language proficiency attainedby graduate students is likely to be substantially higher than for undergraduates .

in contrast , supporters of the current nsep undergraduate scholarship program haveargued that it provides a relatively rare opportunity for federally - funded foreign travel at apoint in their educational careers at which most students are deciding upon the path they willfollow for their graduate study and future careers .

only one other , relatively small , federalprogram - - the gilman international scholarship program ( 14 ) - - supports foreigntravel opportunities for u.s. undergraduate students , and it is not focused on critical foreignlanguages or world regions .

 ( 15 ) in addition , the argument that graduate students are more likely to pursue a career ina national security position with the federal government would not seem to be supported bydata on the ways in which scholarship and fellowship recipients have met their servicerequirements thus far .

according to cumulative data for 1996-2002 provided by nsep staff,the percentage of undergraduate scholarship recipients who have taken federal positions ( 93% ) is much higher than the percentage of graduate fellowship recipients who have mettheir service requirement by taking federal positions ( 50% ) .

thus far , it appears thatgraduate fellowship recipients are much more likely to meet their service requirement bytaking positions in higher education .

this is most likely to occur with respect to students indoctoral ( as opposed to master's ) degree programs .

throughout the life of the nsep , and especially after the adoption of amendmentsto the nsea service requirements in 1996 ( by p.l .

104-201 , the national defenseauthorization act for fiscal year 1997 ) , some members of the u.s. academic communityhave expressed concern about the linkages between this program and the dod , centralintelligence agency ( cia ) , and other federal national security agencies .

this concern arisesnot only from the nsep's service requirement - - the obligation to seek employment in anational security position ( although not necessarily in a national security agency ) - - but alsoother linkages between the program and national security agencies - - eg , administration ofthe program by the dod , under the auspices of the national defense university ; andrepresentation of national security agencies on the nseb .

the nsea explicitly prohibits scholarship and fellowship recipients from beingrequired to "undertake any activity" on behalf of any federal agency , as a condition for receiptof their assistance , while engaged in their subsidized education program .

in addition , asnoted earlier , the service requirement has been interpreted relatively broadly in practice toinclude positions in a wide range of federal agencies ( see footnote 9 ) .

further , the length ofthe service requirement - - generally equal to the period of time for which aid was received - - is shorter than for some other scholarship or loan forgiveness programs , requiring servicefor only a few months to two years in general .

further , cumulative ( 1996-2002 ) data provided by nsep staff on federal employmentof scholarship and fellowship recipients indicate that a majority have met their servicerequirement by taking positions outside the dod , cia , and similar national securityagencies .

first , 50% of graduate fellowship recipients , and 7% of undergraduate scholarshiprecipients , have met their service requirement by taking positions in higher educationinstitutions , not the federal government .

second , among those taking federal positions tomeet their service requirement , more than one - half have taken positions in agencies otherthan the dod , cia , and similar national security agencies .

 ( 16 ) nevertheless , critics of these linkages have expressed concern that participatingstudents would be treated with suspicion and might even be in danger abroad if they areidentifiable as possible future employees of u.s. intelligence and defense agencies .

concernhas been expressed about the safety of participants as well as the cooperation of foreigneducational institutions if the nsea is perceived as being related to the u.s. nationalsecurity agencies .

while critics of this aspect of the nsep have expressed concerns about all of theprogram's grant programs , such criticism has most recently been focused primarily on thecurrent and prospective institutional grant programs , including the national flagshiplanguage initiative .

critics have argued that the linkages between the nsep and nationalsecurity agencies affect only individual students under the scholarship and fellowshipprograms , while involving , at least indirectly , entire ihes which accept institutional grants .

according to a statement by the board of directors of the middle east studies association ( mesa ) , [w]e have ( 1992 , 1995 ) noted our strongreservations concerning the decision to locate the nsep administration in the departmentof defense and the involvement of the cia on the board that oversees the nsep .

webelieve it is essential to maintain the administrative independence of such programs fromgovernment agencies involved in national security .... [w]e are apprehensive that theproposed establishment of university programs will link all participating students byassociation with defense department language study funding through the institutional grantsthat nfli - p [national flagship language initiative - pilot program] has announced .... agovernment - funded program that emphasizes cooperation between the u.s. academy andgovernment agencies responsible for intelligence and defense will increase the difficultiesand dangers of such academic activities , and may foster the already widespread impressionthat academic researchers from the united states are directly involved in governmentactivities .

this may discourage foreign colleagues from collaboration with americans inscholarly projects .

ultimately , such a program may actually undermine the research andteaching of languages , histories and culture that area studies programs in u.s. universitiesstrive to advance .... we urge that funding for second - language acquisition , like othereducational programs , be administered through the department of education .... werecommend that mesa members and institutions not seek or accept funding for the nfli - pas presently defined , constituted , and administered .

 ( 17 ) in contrast , supporters of the service requirement and other nsep linkages withnational security agencies argue that they are consistent with what they view as being theprimary purposes of the program , and help to assure that the federal government receives anappropriate return for its investment in persons aided by the program .

while other federalprograms supporting foreign language and area studies are administered by the departmentsof education and state , they argue , those other programs have broader purposes than thensep .

the statement of purpose in the nsea focuses primarily on helping to meet thenational security needs of the united states and expanding the pool of applicants foremployment in u.s. government agencies with national security responsibilities , while alsomentioning the somewhat broader goals of increasing the "quantity , diversity , and quality"of teaching and learning of foreign language and area studies critical to the nation's interest,expanding the foreign language and area studies knowledge base upon which both u.s.citizens and government employees can rely , and permitting the federal government to"advocate the cause of international education" ( 50 u.s.c .

â§ 1901 ) .

supporters of theprogram's current provisions and structure argue that this mixture of purposes is consistentwith the nsep's linkages to national security agencies , combined with flexibility in otherrespects ( eg , alternative of service in higher education , opportunity to meet the servicerequirement in a relatively wide variety of federal agencies , and relatively short term ofrequired service ) .

in fact , if the primary , distinctive purpose of the nsep is to increase thenumber of individuals with specialized language skills in national security positions , theservice requirement might even be tightened - - for example , by lengthening the requiredperiod of service , narrowing the variety of federal agencies at which the service requirementmay be met , or eliminating the alternative of meeting the service requirement throughemployment in higher education .

