data mining involves the use of sophisticated data analysis tools to discover previously unknown , valid patterns and relationships in large data sets .

these tools can include statistical models , mathematical algorithms , and machine learning methods ( algorithms that improve their performance automatically through experience , such as neural networks or decision trees ) .

consequently , data mining consists of more than collecting and managing data , it also includes analysis and prediction .

data mining can be performed on data represented in quantitative , textual , or multimedia forms .

data mining applications can use a variety of parameters to examine the data .

they include association ( patterns where one event is connected to another event , such as purchasing a pen and purchasing paper ) , sequence or path analysis ( patterns where one event leads to another event , such as the birth of a child and purchasing diapers ) , classification ( identification of new patterns , such as coincidences between duct tape purchases and plastic sheeting purchases ) , clustering ( finding and visually documenting groups of previously unknown facts , such as geographic location and brand preferences ) , and forecasting ( discovering patterns from which one can make reasonable predictions regarding future activities , such as the prediction that people who join an athletic club may take exercise classes ) .

as an application , compared to other data analysis applications , such as structured queries ( used in many commercial databases ) or statistical analysis software , data mining represents a difference of kind rather than degree .

many simpler analytical tools utilize a verification - based approach , where the user develops a hypothesis and then tests the data to prove or disprove the hypothesis .

for example , a user might hypothesize that a customer who buys a hammer , will also buy a box of nails .

the effectiveness of this approach can be limited by the creativity of the user to develop various hypotheses , as well as the structure of the software being used .

in contrast , data mining utilizes a discovery approach , in which algorithms can be used to examine several multidimensional data relationships simultaneously , identifying those that are unique or frequently represented .

for example , a hardware store may compare their customers' tool purchases with home ownership , type of automobile driven , age , occupation , income , and / or distance between residence and the store .

as a result of its complex capabilities , two precursors are important for a successful data mining exercise ; a clear formulation of the problem to be solved , and access to the relevant data .

reflecting this conceptualization of data mining , some observers consider data mining to be just one step in a larger process known as knowledge discovery in databases ( kdd ) .

other steps in the kdd process , in progressive order , include data cleaning , data integration , data selection , data transformation , ( data mining ) , pattern evaluation , and knowledge presentation .

a number of advances in technology and business processes have contributed to a growing interest in data mining in both the public and private sectors .

some of these changes include the growth of computer networks , which can be used to connect databases ; the development of enhanced search - related techniques such as neural networks and advanced algorithms ; the spread of the client / server computing model , allowing users to access centralized data resources from the desktop ; and an increased ability to combine data from disparate sources into a single searchable source .

in addition to these improved data management tools , the increased availability of information and the decreasing costs of storing it have also played a role .

over the past several years there has been a rapid increase in the volume of information collected and stored , with some observers suggesting that the quantity of the world's data approximately doubles every year .

at the same time , the costs of data storage have decreased significantly from dollars per megabyte to pennies per megabyte .

similarly , computing power has continued to double every 18-24 months , while the relative cost of computing power has continued to decrease .

data mining has become increasingly common in both the public and private sectors .

organizations use data mining as a tool to survey customer information , reduce fraud and waste , and assist in medical research .

however , the proliferation of data mining has raised some implementation and oversight issues as well .

these include concerns about the quality of the data being analyzed , the interoperability of the databases and software between agencies , and potential infringements on privacy .

also , there are some concerns that the limitations of data mining are being overlooked as agencies work to emphasize their homeland security initiatives .

while data mining products can be very powerful tools , they are not self - sufficient applications .

to be successful , data mining requires skilled technical and analytical specialists who can structure the analysis and interpret the output that is created .

consequently , the limitations of data mining are primarily data or personnel - related , rather than technology - related .

although data mining can help reveal patterns and relationships , it does not tell the user the value or significance of these patterns .

these types of determinations must be made by the user .

similarly , the validity of the patterns discovered is dependent on how they compare to "real world" circumstances .

for example , to assess the validity of a data mining application designed to identify potential terrorist suspects in a large pool of individuals , the user may test the model using data that includes information about known terrorists .

however , while possibly re - affirming a particular profile , it does not necessarily mean that the application will identify a suspect whose behavior significantly deviates from the original model .

another limitation of data mining is that while it can identify connections between behaviors and / or variables , it does not necessarily identify a causal relationship .

for example , an application may identify that a pattern of behavior , such as the propensity to purchase airline tickets just shortly before the flight is scheduled to depart , is related to characteristics such as income , level of education , and internet use .

however , that does not necessarily indicate that the ticket purchasing behavior is caused by one or more of these variables .

in fact , the individual's behavior could be affected by some additional variable ( s ) such as occupation ( the need to make trips on short notice ) , family status ( a sick relative needing care ) , or a hobby ( taking advantage of last minute discounts to visit new destinations ) .

beyond these specific limitations , some researchers suggest that the circumstances surrounding our knowledge of terrorism make data mining an ill - suited tool for identifying ( predicting ) potential terrorists before an activity occurs .

successful "predictive data mining" requires a significant number of known instances of a particular behavior in order to develop valid predictive models .

for example , data mining used to predict types of consumer behavior ( i.e. , the likelihood of someone shopping at a particular store , the potential of a credit card usage being fraudulent ) may be based on as many as millions of previous instances of the same particular behavior .

moreover , such a robust data set can still lead to false positives .

in contrast , as a cato institute report suggests that the relatively small number of terrorist incidents or attempts each year are too few and individually unique "to enable the creation of valid predictive models. .

data mining is used for a variety of purposes in both the private and public sectors .

industries such as banking , insurance , medicine , and retailing commonly use data mining to reduce costs , enhance research , and increase sales .

for example , the insurance and banking industries use data mining applications to detect fraud and assist in risk assessment ( eg , credit scoring ) .

using customer data collected over several years , companies can develop models that predict whether a customer is a good credit risk , or whether an accident claim may be fraudulent and should be investigated more closely .

the medical community sometimes uses data mining to help predict the effectiveness of a procedure or medicine .

pharmaceutical firms use data mining of chemical compounds and genetic material to help guide research on new treatments for diseases .

retailers can use information collected through affinity programs ( eg , shoppers' club cards , frequent flyer points , contests ) to assess the effectiveness of product selection and placement decisions , coupon offers , and which products are often purchased together .

companies such as telephone service providers and music clubs can use data mining to create a "churn analysis," to assess which customers are likely to remain as subscribers and which ones are likely to switch to a competitor .

in the public sector , data mining applications were initially used as a means to detect fraud and waste , but they have grown also to be used for purposes such as measuring and improving program performance .

it has been reported that data mining has helped the federal government recover millions of dollars in fraudulent medicare payments .

the justice department has been able to use data mining to assess crime patterns and adjust resource allotments accordingly .

similarly , the department of veterans affairs has used data mining to help predict demographic changes in the constituency it serves so that it can better estimate its budgetary needs .

another example is the federal aviation administration , which uses data mining to review plane crash data to recognize common defects and recommend precautionary measures .

in addition , data mining has been increasingly cited as an important tool for homeland security efforts .

some observers suggest that data mining should be used as a means to identify terrorist activities , such as money transfers and communications , and to identify and track individual terrorists themselves , such as through travel and immigration records .

initiatives that have attracted significant attention include the now - discontinued terrorism information awareness ( tia ) project conducted by the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) , and the now - canceled computer - assisted passenger prescreening system ii ( capps ii ) that was being developed by the transportation security administration ( tsa ) .

capps ii is being replaced by a new program called secure flight .

other initiatives that have been the subject of congressional interest include the able danger program and data collection and analysis projects being conducted by the national security agency ( nsa ) .

as data mining initiatives continue to evolve , there are several issues congress may decide to consider related to implementation and oversight .

these issues include , but are not limited to , data quality , interoperability , mission creep , and privacy .

as with other aspects of data mining , while technological capabilities are important , other factors also influence the success of a project's outcome .

during the 108 th congress , a number of legislative proposals were introduced that would restrict data mining activities by some parts of the federal government , and / or increase the reporting requirements of such projects to congress .

for example , on january 16 , 2003 , senator feingold introduced s. 188 the data - mining moratorium act of 2003 , which would have imposed a moratorium on the implementation of data mining under the total information awareness program ( now referred to as the terrorism information awareness project ) by the department of defense , as well as any similar program by the department of homeland security .

s. 188 was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

on january 23 , 2003 , senator wyden introduced s.amdt .

59 , an amendment to h.j.res .

2 , the omnibus appropriations act for fiscal year 2003 .

as passed in its final form as part of the omnibus spending bill ( p.l .

108-7 ) on february 13 , 2003 , and signed by the president on february 20 , 2003 , the amendment requires the director of central intelligence , the secretary of defense , and the attorney general to submit a joint report to congress within 90 days providing details about the tia program .

some of the information required includes spending schedules , likely effectiveness of the program , likely impact on privacy and civil liberties , and any laws and regulations that may need to be changed to fully deploy tia .

if the report was not submitted within 90 days , funding for the tia program could have been discontinued .

funding for tia was later discontinued in section 8131 of the fy2004 department of defense appropriations act ( p.l .

108-87 ) , signed into law on september 30 , 2003 .

on march 13 , 2003 , senator wyden introduced an amendment to s. 165 , the air cargo security act , requiring the secretary of homeland security to submit a report to congress within 90 days providing information about the impact of capps ii on privacy and civil liberties .

the amendment was passed by the committee on commerce , science , and transportation , and the bill was forwarded for consideration by the full senate ( s.rept .

108-38 ) .

in may 2003 , s. 165 was passed by the senate with the wyden amendment included and was sent to the house where it was referred to the committee on transportation and infrastructure .

funding restrictions on capps ii were included in section 519 of the fy2004 department of homeland security appropriations act ( p.l .

108-90 ) , signed into law october 1 , 2003 .

this provision included restrictions on the "deployment or implementation , on other than a test basis , of the computer - assisted passenger prescreening system ( capps ii ) ," pending the completion of a gao report regarding the efficacy , accuracy , and security of capps ii , as well as the existence of a system of an appeals process for individuals identified as a potential threat by the system .

in its report delivered to congress in february 2004 , gao reported that "as of january 1 , 2004 , tsa has not fully addressed seven of the eight capps ii issues identified by the congress as key areas of interest. .

the one issue gao determined that tsa had addressed is the establishment of an internal oversight board .

gao attributed the incomplete progress on these issues partly to the "early stage of the system's development. .

on march 25 , 2003 , the house committee on government reform subcommittee on technology , information policy , intergovernmental relations , and the census held a hearing on the current and future possibilities of data mining .

the witnesses , drawn from federal and state government , industry , and academia , highlighted a number of perceived strengths and weaknesses of data mining , as well as the still - evolving nature of the technology and practices behind data mining .

while data mining was alternatively described by some witnesses as a process , and by other witnesses as a productivity tool , there appeared to be a general consensus that the challenges facing the future development and success of government data mining applications were related less to technological concerns than to other issues such as data integrity , security , and privacy .

on may 6 and may 20 , 2003 the subcommittee also held hearings on the potential opportunities and challenges for using factual data analysis for national security purposes .

on july 29 , 2003 , senator wyden introduced s. 1484 , the citizens' protection in federal databases act , which was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

among its provisions , s. 1484 would have required the attorney general , the secretary of defense , the secretary of homeland security , the secretary of the treasury , the director of central intelligence , and the director of the federal bureau of investigation to submit to congress a report containing information regarding the purposes , type of data , costs , contract durations , research methodologies , and other details before obligating or spending any funds on commercially available databases .

s. 1484 would also have set restrictions on the conduct of searches or analysis of databases "based solely on a hypothetical scenario or hypothetical supposition of who may commit a crime or pose a threat to national security. .

on july 31 , 2003 , senator feingold introduced s. 1544 , the data - mining reporting act of 2003 , which was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

among its provisions , s. 1544 would have required any department or agency engaged in data mining to submit a public report to congress regarding these activities .

these reports would have been required to include a variety of details about the data mining project , including a description of the technology and data to be used , a discussion of how the technology will be used and when it will be deployed , an assessment of the expected efficacy of the data mining project , a privacy impact assessment , an analysis of the relevant laws and regulations that would govern the project , and a discussion of procedures for informing individuals their personal information will be used and allowing them to opt out , or an explanation of why such procedures are not in place .

also on july 31 , 2003 , senator murkowski introduced s. 1552 , the protecting the rights of individuals act , which was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

among its provisions , section 7 of s. 1552 would have imposed a moratorium on data mining by any federal department or agency "except pursuant to a law specifically authorizing such data - mining program or activity by such department or agency. .

it also would have required the head of each department or agency of the federal government that engages or plans to engage in any activities relating to the development or use of a data - mining program or activity shall submit to congress , and make available to the public , a report on such activities .

on may 5 , 2004 , representative mcdermott introduced h.r .

4290 , the data - mining reporting act of 2004 , which was referred to the house committee on government reform subcommittee on technology , information policy , intergovernmental relations , and the census .

h.r .

4290 would have required each department or agency of the federal government that is engaged in any activity or use or develop data - mining technology shall each submit a public report to congress on all such activities of the department or agency under the jurisdiction of that official .

a similar provision was included in h.r .

4591 / s. 2528 , the civil liberties restoration act of 2004 .

s. 2528 was introduced by senator kennedy on june 16 , 2004 and referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

4591 was introduced by representative berman on june 16 , 2004 and referred to the committee on the judiciary and the permanent select committee on intelligence .

data mining continued to be a subject of interest to congress in the 109 th congress .

on april 6 , 2005 , h.r .

1502 , the civil liberties restoration act of 2005 , was introduced by representative berman and was referred to the committee on the judiciary , the permanent select committee on intelligence , and the committee on homeland security .

section 402 , data - mining report , of h.r .

1502 would have required that the head of each department or agency of the federal government that is engaged in any activity to use or develop data - mining technology shall each submit a public report to congress on all such activities of the department or agency under the jurisdiction of that official .

as part of their content , these reports would have been required to provide , for each data mining activity covered by h.r .

1502 , information regarding the technology and data being used ; information on how the technology would be used and the target dates for deployment ; an assessment of the likely efficacy of the data mining technology ; an assessment of the likely impact of the activity on privacy and civil liberties ; a list and analysis of the laws and regulations that would apply to the data mining activity and whether these laws and regulations would need to be modified to allow the data mining activity to be implemented ; information on the policies , procedures , and guidelines that would be developed and applied to protect the privacy and due process rights of individuals , and ensure that only accurate information is collected and used ; and information on how individuals whose information is being used in the data mining activity will be notified of the use of their information , and , if applicable , what options will be available for individual to opt - out of the activity .

these reports would have been due to congress no later than 90 days after the enactment of h.r .

1502 , and would have been required to be updated annually to include "any new data - mining technologies. .

on june 6 , 2005 , s. 1169 , the federal agency data - mining reporting act of 2005 was introduced by senator feingold , and was referred to the senate committee on the judiciary .

among its provisions , s. 1169 would have required any department or agency engaged in data mining to submit a public report to congress regarding these activities .

these reports would have been required to include a variety of details about the data mining project , including a description of the technology and data to be used , a discussion of the plans and goals for using the technology when it will be deployed , an assessment of the expected efficacy of the data mining project , a privacy impact assessment , an analysis of the relevant laws and regulations that would govern the project , and a discussion of procedures for informing individuals their personal information will be used and allowing them to opt out , or an explanation of why such procedures are not in place .

on july 11 , 2005 , h.r .

3199 , the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 was introduced .

on july 21 , 2005 , representative berman introduced h.amdt .

497 to h.r .

3199 , which would required the attorney general to submit a report to congress on the data mining initiatives of the department of justice and other departments and agencies as well .

the provision stated , in part ; the attorney general shall collect the information described in paragraph ( 2 ) from the head of each department or agency of the federal government that is engaged in any activity to use or develop data - mining technology and shall report to congress on all such activities .

h.amdt .

497 was passed on july 21 , 2005 by a 261-165 recorded vote and appeared as section 132 of h.r .

3199 .

also on this day , h.r .

3199 was passed by the house and sent to the senate .

on july 29 , 2005 , the senate passed an amended version of h.r .

3199 .

the senate version did not contain a comparable provision on data mining .

the bill went to a house - senate conference in november 2005 .

section 126 of the conference report ( h.rept .

109-333 ) filed on december 8 , 2005 included a provision for a report on data mining by the department of justice alone , rather than other departments and agencies as well .

the provision stated , in part: not later than one year after the date of enactment of this act , the attorney general shall submit to congress a report on any initiative of the department of justice that uses or is intended to develop pattern - based data mining technology.. .

the bill was signed into law as p.l .

109-177 on march 9 , 2006 .

on october 6 , 2005 , h.r .

4009 , the department of homeland security reform act of 2005 , was introduced by representative thompson , and was referred to the committee on homeland security , the permanent select committee on intelligence , and the committee on transportation and infrastructure .

section 203 ( c ) ( 16 ) would have directed the chief intelligence officer , as established in section 203 ( a ) : to establish and utilize , in conjunction with the chief information officer of the department , a secure communications and information technology infrastructure , including data - mining and other advanced analytical tools , in order to access , receive , and analyze data and information in furtherance of the responsibilities under this section , and to disseminate information acquired and analyzed by the department , as appropriate .

on december 6 , 2005 , h.r .

4437 , the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 was introduced by representative sensenbrenner and was referred to the committee on the judiciary and the committee on homeland security .

on december 8 , 2005 , the committee on the judiciary held a markup session and ordered an amended version of h.r .

4437 to be reported .

on december 13 , 2005 , the committee on homeland security discharged the bill , which was subsequently referred to and discharged from the committee on education and the workforce and the committee on ways and means .

on december 16 , 2005 , h.r .

4437 was passed by the house and sent to the senate , where it was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

section 1305 , authority of the office of security and investigations to detect and investigate immigration benefits fraud , of h.r .

4437 would have granted the office of security and investigations of the united states citizenship and immigration services at the department of homeland security the authority to: ( 1 ) to conduct fraud detection operations , including data mining and analysis ; ( 2 ) to investigate any criminal or noncriminal allegations of violations of the immigration and nationality act or title 18 , united states code , that immigration and customs enforcement declines to investigate ; ( 3 ) to turn over to a united states attorney for prosecution evidence that tends to establish such violations ; and ( 4 ) to engage in information sharing , partnerships , and other collaborative efforts with any — ( a ) federal , state , or local law enforcement entity ; ( b ) foreign partners ; or ( c ) entity within the intelligence community ( as defined in section 3 ( 4 ) of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

401a ( 4 ) ) .

on july 12 , 2006 , senator feingold introduced s.amdt .

4562 to h.r .

5441 , the homeland security department fy2007 appropriations bill .

s.amdt .

4562 is substantively similar to s. 1169 , although only applies to departments and agencies within the department of homeland security , rather than the entire federal government .

s.amdt .

4562 was agreed to by unanimous consent and was included in the senate - passed version of h.r .

5441 as section 549 .

according to the conference report ( h.rept .

109-699 ) section 549 was deleted from the final bill that was passed into law ( p.l .

109-295 ) .

however , the conference report also included a statement on data mining by the conference managers expressing concern about the development and use of data mining technology and ; "direct[s] the dhs privacy officer to submit a report consistent with the terms and conditions listed in section 549 of the senate bill .

the conferees expect the report to include information on how it has implemented the recommendation laid out in the department's data mining report received july 18 , 2006. .

data mining has been the subject of some of the earliest proposed bills and hearings of the 110 th congress .

on january 10 , 2007 , s. 236 , the federal agency data - mining reporting act of 2007 was introduced by senator feingold and senator sununu , and was referred to the senate committee on the judiciary .

among its provisions , s. 236 would require any department or agency engaged in data mining to submit a public report to congress regarding these activities .

these reports would be required to include a variety of details about the data mining project , including a description of the technology and data to be used , a discussion of the plans and goals for using the technology when it will be deployed , an assessment of the expected efficacy of the data mining project , a privacy impact assessment , an analysis of the relevant laws and regulations that would govern the project , and a discussion of procedures for informing individuals their personal information will be used and allowing them to opt out , or an explanation of why such procedures are not in place .

also in the senate , the committee on the judiciary held a hearing on january 10 , 2007 entitled "balancing privacy and security: the privacy implications of government data mining programs. .

the witnesses included a former member of congress and several individuals from research centers and think tanks .

collectively , they highlighted a number of perceived strengths and weaknesses of data mining , as well as the continually evolving nature of the technology and practices behind data mining .

the witnesses also addressed the inherent challenge of simultaneously protecting the nation from terrorism while also protecting civil liberties .

on february 28 , 2007 , senator reid introduced s.amdt .

275 to s. 4 the improving america's security by implementing unfinished recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 .

section 504 of this amendment , entitled the federal agency data mining report act of 2007 , was identical to s. 236 , as introduced .

during the senate floor debates held on s. 4 in early march 2007 , several amendments to the data mining section of s. 4 were introduced .

on march 6 , 2007 , senator kyl introduced s.amdt .

357 to s.amdt .

275 of s. 4 .

the purpose of s.amdt .

357 was described as "to amend the data - mining reporting requirement to protect existing patents , trade secrets , and confidential business processes , and to adopt a narrower definition of data mining in order to exclude routine computer searches. .

later on march 6 , 2007 , senator kyl offered a modification to s.amdt .

357 that used definitions of data mining and database very similar to those that appear in p.l .

109-177 the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 , and that slightly changed the original language of s.amdt .

357 regarding protection of patents and other proprietary business information .

on march 8 , 2007 , senator feingold introduced s.amdt .

429 to s.amdt .

275 .

s.amdt .

429 is very similar to s. 236 , as introduced , with a few differences .

one difference is that the initial description used to partially define data mining is changed to include "a program involving pattern - based queries , searches , or other analyses of 1 or more electronic databases...." another difference is that the data mining reporting requirement excludes data mining initiatives that are solely for "the detection of fraud , waste , or abuse in a government agency or program ; or the security of a government computer system. .

another difference is the inclusion of language requiring that the data mining reports be "produced in coordination with the privacy officer of that department or agency. .

s.amdt .

429 also includes language detailing the types of information that should be included in the classified annexes of the data mining reports ( i.e. , classified information , law enforcement sensitive information , proprietary business information , and trade secrets ) , and states that such classified annexes should not be made available to the public .

later on march 8 , 2007 , senator feingold introduced s.amdt .

441 to s.amdt .

357 .

s.amdt .

441 is substantively the same as s.amdt .

429 , but with a technical modification .

on march 13 , 2007 , s.amdt .

441 was agreed to by unanimous consent , and s.amdt .

357 , as modified , and as amended by s.amdt .

441 was agreed to by unanimous consent .

also on march 13 , 2007 , s. 4 passed the senate by a 60-38 vote .

the data mining provision appears as section 604 in s. 4 .

as originally passed by the house in january 2007 , the house version of s. 4 , h.r .

1 , did not contain a comparable provision on data mining .

on march 21 , 2007 , the house committee on appropriations subcommittee on homeland security held a hearing entitled "privacy and civil rights in homeland security. .

the witnesses included hugo teufel iii , the chief privacy officer at dhs ; daniel sutherland of the office of civil rights and civil liberties at dhs ; and the government accountability office ( gao ) .

collectively they addressed some of the data mining activities being carried out by dhs , in particular the use of the analysis , dissemination , visualization , insight , and semantic enhancement ( advise ) data mining tool , and the precautions taken by dhs to protect citizens' privacy and civil liberties .

on april 12 , 2007 , the senate committee on the judiciary voted to approve a revised version of s. 236 , the data mining act of 2007 .

on june 4 , 2007 , the committee reported the bill .

with one exception , this revised version of s. 236 is substantively identical to data mining provision passed as section 604 in s. 4 , and later as section 804 of p.l .

110-53 in july 2007 ( discussed below ) .

as passed by the committee , s. 236 includes a provision regarding penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of classified information contained in the annex of any reports submitted to congress .

on june 15 , 2007 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

2638 , concerning fy2008 appropriations for the department of homeland security .

the accompanying house report ( h.rept .

110-181 ) includes language prohibiting funding for the analysis , dissemination , visualization , insight , and semantic enhancement ( advise ) data mining program until dhs has completed a privacy impact assessment for the program .

advise is alternatively described as a technology framework , or a tool , for analyzing and visually representing large amounts of data .

advise is being developed by the directorate for science and technology at dhs .

the accompanying senate report ( s.rept .

110-84 ) for s. 1644 , concerning fy2008 dhs appropriations , also includes similar language recommending that no funding be allocated for advise until a program plan and privacy impact assessment is completed .

on july 9 , 2007 , the senate took up h.r .

1 , struck all language following the enacting clause , substituted the language of s. 4 as amended , and passed the bill by unanimous consent .

differences between h.r .

1 and s. 4 were resolved in conference later that month .

the data mining provision that appeared as section 604 in s. 4 was retained as section 804 in the agreed upon bill .

on july 26 , 2007 , the senate agreed to the conference report ( h.rept .

110-259 ) in a 85-8 vote .

on july 27 , 2007 , the house agreed to the conference report in a 371-40 vote .

on august 3 , 2007 , the bill was signed into law by the president as p.l .

110-53 .

crs report rl32802 , homeland security: air passenger prescreening and counterterrorism , by [author name scrubbed] and william krouse .

out of print ; available from author ( [phone number scrubbed] ) .

crs report rl32536 , the multi - state anti - terrorism information exchange ( matrix ) pilot project , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl30671 , personal privacy protection: the legislative response , by [author name scrubbed] .

out of print ; available from author ( [phone number scrubbed] ) .

crs report rl31730 , privacy: total information awareness programs and related information access , collection , and protection laws , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31786 , total information awareness programs: funding , composition , and oversight issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

darpa , report to congress regarding the terrorism information awareness program , may 20 , 2003 , http: / / www.eff.org / privacy / tia / tia - report.pdf .

department of defense , office of the inspector general , information technology management: terrorism information awareness program ( d - 2004-033 ) , december 12 , 2003 http: / / www.dodig.osd.mil / audit / reports / fy04 / 04-033.pdf .

department of homeland security , office of the inspector general , survey of dhs data mining activities ( oig - 06-56 ) , august 2006 http: / / www.dhs.gov / xoig / assets / mgmtrpts / oig_06-56_aug06.pdf .

department of homeland security , office of legislative affairs , letter report pursuant to section 804 of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 , february 11 , 2008 , http: / / www.dhs.gov / xlibrary / assets / privacy / privacy_rpt_datamining_2008.pdf .

department of homeland security , privacy office , 2007 data mining report: dhs privacy office response to h.rept .

109-699 , july 6 , 2007 , http: / / www.dhs.gov / xlibrary / assets / privacy / privacy_rpt_datamining_2007.pdf .

department of homeland security , privacy office , report to the public on the transportation security administration ' s secure flight program and privacy recommendations , december 2006 , http: / / www.dhs.gov / xlibrary / assets / privacy / privacy - secure - flight - 122006.pdf .

department of homeland security , privacy office , report to the public concerning the multistate anti - terrorism information exchange ( matrix ) pilot project , december 2006 , http: / / www.dhs.gov / xlibrary / assets / privacy / privacy - secure - flight - 122006.pdf .

jeff jonas and jim harper , effective counterterrorism and the limited role of predictive data mining , cato institute policy analysis no .

584 , december 11 , 2006 http: / / www.cato.org / pubs / pas / pa584.pdf .

office of the director of national intelligence , data mining report , february 15,2008 , http: / / www.dni.gov / reports / data_mining_report_feb08.pdf .

