the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) is the u.n. agency dedicated to the protection of refugees and other populations displaced by conflict , famine , and natural disasters .

this report describes the mandate , operations , and budget of unhcr .

it looks at the challenges facing the organization and issues of concern for congress .

unhcr provides legal protection , implements long - term solutions , and coordinates emergency humanitarian relief for refugees and other displaced persons .

an understanding of unhcr and its challenges is particularly relevant today with the possibility of war in iraq , which might create new populations of refugees and other displaced persons , and the continuing refugee situations in afghanistan and other parts of the world .

issues of particular concern to congress are funding shortages at unhcr , burdensharing , and avenues for u.s. influence within unhcr .

the u.s. government is the largest contributor to unhcr , representing at least 25% of all contributions .

the largest share of u.s. contributions is voluntary .

in fy2002 , the u.s. government contributed $255 million to unhcr .

until fy2003 funding has been appropriated , programs will continue to operate at fy2002 funding levels .

a key concern is whether unhcr will receive adequate contributions from the united states in fy2003 .

the state department's population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) bureau expects to have refugee needs equal to fy2002 , and there could be a significant shortage in refugee program funding , including funding to unhcr .

any additional funds would depend on the possibility of a supplemental appropriation ( with a likely delay in funding of unhcr programs ) .

furthermore , many countries follow the u.s. lead in making their own voluntary contributions .

if the united states lowers its contributions , other countries may follow suit .

in general , both the executive branch and congress value the work of unhcr .

for example , the senate committee on appropriations' most recent foreign operations report stated that the committee "strongly supports" the work of unhcr , is "deeply concerned" by the large budget shortfall , and is "alarmed that this shortfall is beginning to adversely impact field operations in a number of regions. .

authorization for participation in the unhcr program is through the migration and refugee assistance act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-510 ) , as amended .

authorization is found in the department of state authorization bill , which is determined by the senate committee on foreign relations and the house committee on international relations .

appropriations for unhcr programs are provided in the foreign operations appropriations bill to the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account and to the emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) fund , which are overseen by the state department .

how much of unhcr's expenses should the united states cover ? .

according to u.s. assistant secretary for population , refugees and migration arthur e. dewey , the european union has not made adequate contributions to unhcr , providing only 15% of its budget , in contrast to the 25% contributed by the united states .

through its european community humanitarian office ( echo ) , the european union has distributed humanitarian assistance through ngos , instead of through multilateral agencies like unhcr .

according to dewey , echo should contribute the same level to unhcr as the united states .

however , individual european governments also provide money directly to unhcr .

according to unhcr , echo and the european union member governments have collectively provided about $70 million more than the united states to unhcr in fy2002 .

the main issue appears to be whether echo and the member governments should redirect more funds from their own bilateral programs into multilateral programs like unhcr .

the u.s. government has reduced the number of refugees admitted into the united states .

until 1995 , the ceiling for admissions was over 100,000 .

this ceiling has fallen to 70,000 for 2003 .

these reductions should be considered within the context of the broader international asylum crisis .

in addition , u.s. response to asylum seekers and protection of refugees will likely impact its ability to influence other countries' behavior with regard to the protection of asylum seekers .

congress has sought to make certain that specific programs and geographical areas receive adequate resources .

the house committee on international relations has emphasized protecting afghan refugees , east timorese refugees , and refugees in africa .

the u.s. government influences the activities of the unhcr in many ways .

first , since it contributes a substantial proportion of the total unhcr budget and earmarks these funds , the u.s. government supports certain programs and certain geographical areas , and allows u.s. policy priorities to influence unhcr priorities .

second , through the very act of contributing money and protecting refugees according to certain standards , the u.s. government also encourages other countries to contribute at appropriate levels and treat refugees at a certain standard .

third , the united states is an active member of unhcr's executive committee and , therefore , has a voice in the administration of unhcr .

fourth , u.s. nationals work for unhcr and bring u.s. interests , values , and perspectives with them .

congress may address two related questions .

what kind of influence should the united states have ? .

how can the united states balance its priorities with the fact that unhcr is a global , multilateral agency with a universal mandate ? .

