the congressional review act establishes three principal time periods for congressional action on a joint resolution disapproving a rule , or regulation , proposed by the executive branch .

two of these , here called the initiation period and the action period , regulate congressional action on joint resolutions of disapproval under the act .

the third , which this report refers to as the waiting period , affects the possible effective date of certain rules that the act defines as "major. .

each of the three time periods nominally runs for 60 days , and all run roughly concurrently .

however , the starting point of the initiation period may differ slightly from the others , and the days of the three periods are counted in different ways .

these differences ( elaborated in the following pages , but summarized below in table 1 ) play a key role in determining how the act may operate .

the act also includes procedures governing final action to reconcile house and senate action on a disapproval resolution submitted and considered in accordance with the act .

these procedures need not occur within the constraints of the time periods specified , and are not associated with any provisions restricting the time at which they must occur .

pursuant to other provisions of the congressional review act , however , various actions by congress or the president can elaborate or alter the effect and application of these three basic time periods .

specifically: the sine die adjournment of a session can result in renewal of the initiation period and action period ; congressional action to defeat a disapproval resolution can result in termination of the waiting period ; and presidential veto of a disapproval resolution can bring about an additional waiting period , whose extent may depend on subsequent congressional action in relation to the veto .

the following sections address the operation of these subsidiary time restrictions as well as the three basic ones .

although the expedited procedures of the congressional review act eliminate many of the constraints on action inherent in the normal legislative process , the act lacks certain provisions found in many expedited procedure statutes .

as the preceding discussion shows , these omissions in certain respects limit the ability the act confers on congress to enact the disapproval resolutions for which it provides .

these limitations may in practice present little obstacle to successful action .

nevertheless , determining how the act may most effectively be used may require taking them into account .

among the special features described in the preceding sections , three appear potentially the most noteworthy in this connection .

the expedited procedure in the act covers committee and floor consideration of disapproval resolutions only in the senate .

committee and floor consideration in the house of representatives is to occur under its regular legislative procedures ; the act provides no special mechanisms to help ensure that the house can complete action .

in mitigation of this potential obstacle , the house possesses well - established general means to expedite the consideration of measures , which can readily be used for disapprovals under the congressional review act if the leadership and the pertinent committee are supportive .

specifically , the house might likely consider a disapproval resolution pursuant to the terms of a special rule .

a special rule is a house resolution , which the committee on rules has jurisdiction to report , making a specified measure in order and proposing terms for its consideration .

in particular , a special rule for considering a disapproval resolution might be expected to prohibit amendment on the floor .

 ( a special rule providing such a prohibition is often called a "closed rule." ) .

a joint resolution of disapproval , like any other proposed law , may be enacted only through being presented to the president for approval .

if congress passes a joint resolution disapproving a particular rule , a president who favors the rule can veto the measure .

in that case the rule will take effect , unless a two - thirds vote in each house overrides the veto .

experience shows that particular circumstances may arise under which this requirement may present little obstacle to congressional action .

if , in the interim between promulgation of the rule and congressional action , a new administration unsympathetic to the rule assumes office , any disapproval resolution may not likely be vetoed in the first place .

congressional disapproval in 2001 of the ergonomics regulation proposed by the clinton administration in the previous year illustrates this situation .

at that time , substantial congressional interest was expressed in using the congressional review act to disapprove numerous other rules promulgated in the last months of the clinton administration as well .

although this interest did not result in other legislative action , some of the regulations in question were withdrawn or suspended by the new bush administration .

the provisions of the congressional review act for final congressional action on disapproval resolutions presume that both houses will initially pass measures with substantively similar texts .

yet the overall expedited procedures of the act do not conclusively ensure: that substantively similar disapproval resolutions will be submitted in each chamber ; that neither house will amend a disapproval resolution in a way that makes it substantively dissimilar from the other , or otherwise ineligible for consideration under the expedited procedures for final action ; or that each house will take initial action on a disapproval resolution of its own .

each of these possibilities might present a different kind of difficulty for achieving final enactment .

in practice , however , each kind of difficulty could likely be readily overcome when majorities in both houses are supportive of the disapproval effort .

under most circumstances , coordination of disapproval efforts between the two houses could suffice to avoid potential problems .

the two houses might initially pass disapproval resolutions with different texts either because: the respective resolutions are initially introduced with different texts , or either chamber amends its resolution in the course of committee or floor consideration .

the house could amend a disapproval resolution because the procedure in the act does not prohibit amendment in that chamber .

the senate would be constrained in such action by the prohibition on amendment contained in the expedited procedure , but might be able either to: suspend that prohibition by unanimous consent , or circumvent the prohibition by acting on a resolution reported from committee as an original measure in lieu of one initially submitted .

none of these actions would necessarily prevent expeditious agreement of the two houses on one of the two measures .

as long as both measures , as passed , still met the requirements of the act , final action could undoubtedly occur through the procedures for hooking up the two measures provided by the act .

if either house succeeded in amending a disapproval resolution , the amended resolution might cease to meet the statutory requirements for a measure to be considered under the expedited procedure .

for example , one house might amend the resolution to disapprove only part of the rule in question , even though the congressional review act is explicit in making its mechanism for expedited disapproval applicable only to a rule as a whole .

a disapproval resolution amended in this way would apparently cease to fulfill the requirements for a disapproval resolution to be eligible for the expedited procedure .

when received in the other house , the amended resolution would then fail to qualify for the automatic hookup for which the act provides .

instead , the second house could refer it to committee , which might either report it with or without amendment , or take no action and effectively kill the measure .

alternatively , the second house could use its regular procedures either to consider the amended resolution it received , or to consider a measure of its own that it could then hook up with the one received .

the easiest way for supporters of disapproval to deal with this difficulty , however , would be to forestall its arising by preventing or defeating any amendment that would have this effect .

the congressional review act also affords no procedure pursuant to which either house could take up and adopt a disapproval resolution from the other , except after first considering one of its own .

therefore , if a disapproval resolution is submitted only in one house , none can be enacted under the expedited procedure .

the house in which the resolution was submitted could adopt it and send it to the other .

the receiving house , however , could not act on the received resolution under the expedited procedure , because that procedure provides for such action only after the receiving house first considers its own measure .

the same difficulty could arise when disapproval resolutions are introduced in both houses , if , in the house of representatives , none is reported , or one is reported but not considered on the floor .

because the congressional review act provides no expedited committee or floor procedure in the house , supporters of the disapproval resolution could not discharge the house committee , or bring the measure to the house floor , except under the general rules , which normally leave control in the hands of the committee and leadership .

therefore , the procedure in the act would still offer no means to bring the house to the point at which it could consider a companion resolution received from the senate .

this situation could be most readily forestalled if supporters of the disapproval effort ensure the submission ( as well as consideration and adoption ) of corresponding disapproval resolutions in both houses .

also , however , whether or not a companion measure had been submitted in the receiving house , and whether or not the committee of referral in that house had reported the measure or had been discharged from considering it , it would still be possible for the receiving house to act , under its regular procedures , on the measure received from the other and held at the desk .

in the 107 th congress , the house of representatives took action in this way on s.j.res .

6 , disapproving the ergonomics rule , while its companion measure , h.j.res .

35 , remained in committee .

in the house , nevertheless , this end too could normally be achieved only with cooperation from the leadership .

in the senate , considering the house measure without the constraints of the expedited procedure would mean that it could be filibustered .

finally , the enactment of a disapproval resolution would have the same effect whether it had been considered under the expedited procedure provided by the act or otherwise .

as long as the resolution had been submitted during the initiation period , and satisfied the description provided in the act , its enactment would render the disapproved rule without force and effect , and would also prohibit the agency from issuing a "substantially similar" rule without subsequent legislative authority .

