the growth of the unauthorized ( also called illegal or undocumented ) alien population during the 1990s coupled with changes in the distribution of the population within the united states has increased interest in funding of emergency medical treatment for this population .

although unauthorized aliens are ineligible for most federal means - tested programs , all aliens regardless of status are eligible for emergency medicaid .

statute requires that all medicare - participating hospitals with emergency departments treat all medically unstable patients and women in active labor .

between fy2001 and fy2004 , there were no other federal funds available for the specific purpose of reimbursing hospitals or states for emergency medical care provided to unauthorized aliens .

on december 8 , 2003 the president signed the medicare prescription drug , improvement and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) which contains a provision to provide reimbursement to states for emergency care afforded to unauthorized aliens .

additionally it is extremely difficult to ascertain the amount of money spent for emergency medical care for unauthorized aliens since most hospitals do not ask patients their immigration status .

currently , noncitizens' eligibility for federal medicaid benefits largely depends on their immigration status and whether they arrived ( or were on a program's rolls ) before august 22 , 1996 , the enactment date of personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) .

legal permanent residents ( lprs ) entering after august 22 , 1996 , are barred from medicaid for five years , after which coverage becomes a state option .

states have the option to use state funds to provide medical coverage for lprs within five years of their arrival in the united states .

refugees and asylees are eligible for medicaid for seven years after arrival .

after the seven years , they may be eligible for medicaid at state option .

lprs with a substantial ( 10-year ) work history or a military connection are eligible for medicaid .

lprs receiving supplemental security income ( ssi ) on or after august 22 , 1996 are eligible for medicaid since medicaid coverage is required for all ssi recipients .

finally , in the case of lprs sponsored for admission after 1997 , the income and resources of their sponsor are "deemed" available to them when judging their eligibility .

nonetheless , all aliens regardless of status who otherwise meet the eligibility requirements for medicaid are eligible for emergency medicaid .

the total cost incurred by the states for unauthorized aliens is often an issue since many contend that immigration , especially border control , is solely a federal issue .

the federal government is wholly responsible for establishing immigration policy , and for policing the borders to keep out unauthorized aliens .

thus , some argue that the burden to pay for immigration related cost should be born by the federal government not the states .

however , others note that the provisions in prwora which limited immigrant access to public benefits were the result of a desire that immigrants be self - sufficient and not rely on public resources to meet their needs .

additionally , proponents of the provisions in prwora did not want the availability of public benefits to constitute an incentive for immigrants to migrate to the united states .

cms collected data from the 12 states with the highest number of unauthorized aliens on their total expenditures on emergency medical expenses for unauthorized aliens .

table 2 shows total emergency health service costs for unauthorized aliens , including both emergency medicaid and expenditures on emergency services for individuals who did not meet the medicaid eligibility requirements .

it is important to note that these costs are reported by the states , and different states use different accounting procedures .

it is unlikely , for example , that new jersey and washington spent no money on emergency services for unauthorized aliens .

the data shown in table 2 are the closest approximation available of the cost of emergency services for unauthorized aliens .

with the caveats that the data reflect emergency services as defined by medicaid and that differences in the percent paid by states may be the result of state differences in accounting procedures , the data show for those reporting both federal and state shares that the federal government pays more than half the cost of emergency services for unauthorized aliens .

california , the most heavily impacted state , reported that 53% of its emergency costs for unauthorized aliens was reimbursed by the federal government .

maryland reported that 50.1% of its emergency cost was reimbursed , which is the smallest proportion of the states that reported both federal and state shares .

in addition , the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) of 1996 authorized reimbursement of public hospitals and certain nonprofit hospitals for emergency medical assistance to unauthorized aliens .

the provision , which is to be administered by the attorney general in consultation with the secretary of hhs , has not been implemented to date .

the funding is subject to a number of restrictions , as follows: funding is "subject to such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation acts. .

to date no funds have been appropriated .

funds are available for reimbursement "only to the extent that such costs are not otherwise reimbursed through any other federal program. .

no payment can be made "with respect to services furnished to an individual unless the immigration status of the individual has been verified through appropriate procedures" established by the secretary of hhs and the attorney general .

obviously , the lack of an appropriation has been the primary impediment to the implementation of this provision .

however , according to hhs and former ins officials , the other restrictions would also pose difficulties .

first , it is difficult to determine that no other federal funding exists , given the availability of other non - specific funding sources ( eg , medicaid dsh payments , discussed below ) .

second and probably more seriously , there is no procedure for determining the immigration status of hospital patients .

iirira also authorized reimbursement of state and local governments for emergency ambulance services provided aliens injured while crossing u.s. borders while in state custody .

in 1997 , the conference committee on the fy1998 commerce , justice , and state ( cjs ) appropriations act adopted the recommendation of the house appropriations committee for "a pilot project for reimbursement for emergency ambulance services in nogales , arizona. .

the nogales pilot project began at the end of fy1998 .

a subsequent report to congress on the feasibility of expanding the nogales project , did not recommend expanding or continuing the project since the border patrol had to redirect enforcement resources to administer the reimbursement of ambulance costs .

the report suggests that if congress wants to create a program for reimbursement that it "should develop a coordinated policy that includes the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , state and local health services , and other authorities .

we do not believe that under current law the hhs has the authority to reimburse states for this activity. .

although there is no medicaid funding for the specific purpose of reimbursing hospitals for the cost of unauthorized aliens , the medicaid statute requires that states make disproportionate share ( dsh ) adjustments to the payment rates of certain hospitals treating large numbers of low - income and medicaid patients , including unauthorized aliens .

these payments implicitly recognize the disadvantaged situation of hospitals treating large numbers of medicaid patients and other patients with no insurance .

states must define hospitals in their state medicaid plans qualifying as dsh hospitals and the dsh payment formulas .

however , the identification of unauthorized aliens among the medicaid patients and uninsured as a component of either the dsh designation or payment formula is not required , and thus , there are no data on the amount of dsh payments used for unauthorized aliens .

there were several bills introduced in the 107 th congress which would have created a grant program to provide additional funding to states for emergency health services for unauthorized aliens .

these programs would have been similar to the one created in bba97 .

although none of the bills passed , the bills are similar to legislation that has been introduced in the 108 th congress .

s. 169 introduced by senator kyl on january 24 , 2001 , would have authorized $2 billion in each fiscal year fy2002-fy2005 to be divided among the 17 states with the highest number of unauthorized aliens .

s. 2449 introduced by senator bingaman on may 2 , 2002 , would have appropriated $50 million in each fiscal year fy2003-fy2007 to be divided among the 15 states with the highest number of unauthorized aliens .

the bill would have also amended prwora to allow states to use state funds to provide health benefits to all noncitizens regardless of immigration status .

on june 24 , 2002 , during the senate finance committee mark - up of the work , opportunity , and responsibility for kids ( work ) act of 2002 ( substitute h.r .

4737 ) , senator kyl introduced an amendment that would have authorized additional funding to certain states to cover the emergency medical costs of treating unauthorized aliens .

the measure was defeated .

there are several policy issues concerning the provision of federal funding for states with large populations of unauthorized aliens .

as discussed above , the provisions in prwora which limited immigrant access to public benefits were the result of a desire that immigrants be self - sufficient and not rely on public resources to meet their needs .

additionally , proponents did not want the availability of public benefits to constitute an incentive for immigrants to migrate to the united states .

nonetheless , others argue that immigration is solely a federal issue .

the federal government is wholly responsible for establishing immigration policy , and for policing the borders to keep out unauthorized aliens .

thus , they argue that the burden to pay for immigration - related cost should be born by the federal government , not the states .

additionally , some question the wisdom of only providing funding to help cover the costs of unauthorized aliens when no federal funds are provided to states to cover the emergency medical costs of nonimmigrants and legal permanent residents who have been in the country for less than five years .

another issue concerns the lack of reliable data on the number and distribution of unauthorized aliens .

as the 2000 census of the u.s. population is being released , preliminary data analyses offer competing population totals that , in turn , imply that illegal migration soared in the late 1990s and that estimates of unauthorized residents of the united states have been understated .

the department of homeland security estimates that there are about 7 million unauthorized aliens living in the united states .

in testimony before the house committee on the judiciary subcommittee on immigration and claims , jeffrey passel , a demographic researcher at the urban institute , offered an estimate of 8 to 9 million unauthorized residents .

at the same hearing , economists from northeastern university using employment data reported by business establishments as well as 2000 census totals concluded that the unauthorized population may be 11 million .

these discrepancies suggest that assessments of the unauthorized population by state may be an inaccurate and problematic basis for distributing grant funds .

none of these estimates addresses the distribution among states of the unauthorized population ; however , anecdotal reports suggest that unauthorized aliens may be dispersed among many states rather than concentrated in a few states as previously presumed .

if this is true , a program which limits the number of states eligible for additional reimbursement for medical treatment of unauthorized immigrants may exclude smaller states that have proportionally high numbers of unauthorized aliens in relation to their population , but not high absolute numbers of unauthorized aliens .

