on november 22 , 2002 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) finalized revisions to several aspects of the clean air act's ( caa ) new source review ( nsr ) requirements .

these revisions became effective with their publication in the federal register on december 31 , 2002 .

at the same time , epa proposed a rule to clarify the definition of "routine maintenance" under nsr .

the proposed and final rules have generated controversy .

the bush administration has argued that the new rules will reduce pollution and increase energy efficiency .

in contrast , the state and territorial air pollution program administrators ( stappa ) and association of local air pollution control officials ( alapco ) argue that the revisions will "undermine efforts to achieve and sustain clean , healthful air. .

the attorneys general in nine northeastern states filed suit against the final rules issued by epa on december 31 , 2002 in the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit .

pennsylvania filed a separate lawsuit on january 27 , 2003 .

on january 30 , the attorneys general in eight states , mostly from the midwest and the south filed a petition in support of the final rule .

alternatives to the current nsr situation focus on either energy or environmental considerations .

for example , the administration's proposed revisions to routine maintenance are an outgrowth of the president's national energy policy and are intended "to provide greater regulatory certainty without sacrificing the current level of environmental protection...." the policy goal is not to reduce emissions .

as stated in the proposed rule: what these [epa's] analyses indicate , however , is that regardless of which scenario is closest to what comes to pass , none of the proposed provisions related to the rmrr [routine maintenance , repair , replacement] exclusion will have a significant impact on emissions from the power sector .

the bush administration's nsr focus on energy policy contrasts directly with the focus of the clinton administration's enforcement initiative where , by seeking to enforce nsr requirements , epa attempted to exploit an existing authority to reduce emissions .

likewise , proposed legislation in the 107 th congress to define a modification in terms of a power plant's age was another attempt to use nsr as an emissions reduction program .

nsr is one approach that the clean air act takes to control emissions from existing sources , but arguably more efficient and more effective methods to ensure declining emissions from existing sources over time have been developed since nsr was added to the caa in 1977 .

for example , title iv of the caa , enacted in 1990 , explicitly and substantially reduces so 2 and nox emissions from existing utility plants .

in fact , title iv reduced more so 2 emissions from coal - fired electric generating facilities in its first year of implementation ( 1995 ) than nsr has in its 20 years of existence .

the "cap and trade" program has had nearly100% compliance ( indeed , substantial over - compliance ) ; the implicit logic of epa's lawsuits suggests nsr's compliance with respect to electric generating facilities has been near zero .

the title iv program began without significant delays ( so 2 program on - time , nox program 1 year late ) ; the epa lawsuits could take years to resolve with uncertain results .

much of the popular debate on nsr has focused on "grandfathered" powerplants .

one example from a 1998 report by a public interest group states: the clean air act of 1970 , as amended in 1977 and 1990 , contains a major exemption that allows older coal - burning power plants to emit between 4 and 10 times the amount of pollution that new plants may emit under the clean air act .

in part , this colossal loophole exists because industry lobbyists argued successfully that its older plants would soon retire , and that therefore it would be wasteful to require expensive retrofits to control pollution from these plants .

however , over 20 years later , many of these same plants , built in the 30s , 40s , 50s and 60s , are still operating , largely without environmental controls .

the term "grandfathered powerplant" is a much used and little understood concept employed in debate on emissions from existing powerplants .

specifically , "grandfathered" is an ambiguous , and , in some cases , meaningless term generally used to indicate whether a given powerplant is covered under section 111 of the clean air act .

passed with the 1970 clean air act amendments , section 111 requires the epa to promulgate regulations defining the minimum controls necessary for new sources ( including power plants ) regardless of their location .

called new source performance standards ( nsps ) , they require major new sources constructed after their promulgation to install the best system of continuous emission reduction which has been adequately demonstrated according to epa .

currently , there are nsps regulations for powerplants that cover three pollutants – sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and particulate matter .

typically , "grandfathered" refers to those plants ( usually coal - fired powerplants ) that were constructed before the effective dates of those nsps regulations and , hence , not subject to them .

nsps regulations for powerplants were first promulgated in 1971 and revised in 1979 .

the nox nsps regulations for powerplants were revised again in 1998 .

instead of nsps requirements , such "grandfathered" sources must meet emission rate limits established by a state implementation plan ( sip ) .

three aspects of the nsps make the term "grandfathered" at best ambiguous: some emissions of concern , such as carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and mercury ( hg ) are not criteria air pollutants , and , therefore , not covered by the nsps for powerplants at the current time .

hence , "grandfathered" would not apply for these pollutants as all powerplants ( indeed , all major sources of these pollutants ) are "grandfathered. .

epa is required to review the nsps every eight years , resulting in increased stringency for covered pollutants as technology improves ( and for determinations of bact and laer ) .

therefore , what powerplants are "grandfathered" is ambiguous as there is no set baseline .

for example , the nsps for nox was revised in 1998 to a stringency that only a couple of commercially operating coal - fired powerplants met at the time ; by that standard , virtually all coal - fired powerplants are "grandfathered" with respect to nox emissions .

title iv of the 1990 clean air act amendments changed the regulation of existing powerplants with respect to so 2 and nox .

in some cases , the requirements under title iv for existing sources are more stringent than some of the existing or previous nsps .

for example , under phase 1 , some existing "grandfathered" powerplants were required in 1995 to meet nox standards more stringent than then - existing nsps nox requirements for new powerplants .

likewise , under phase 2 of title iv , existing "grandfathered" coal - fired powerplants were required in 2000 to meet so 2 standards that are essentially equivalent to ( if not more stringent than ) the 1971 nsps for so 2 .

the term "grandfathered" is essentially meaningless under such circumstances .

if the focus of debate about "grandfathered" powerplants is nox emissions , then age of plant is not a relevant consideration – fuel source is .

coal - fired facilities , regardless of age , are the relevant focus of any effort to increase nox controls .

if the focus of debate about "grandfathered" powerplants is so 2 emissions , then the title iv emissions cap is the relevant consideration .

there , age was a consideration in allocating emission credits ; however , the relevant definition was not based on nsps compliance ( or any other caa compliance ) , but on whether the plant was operational , under construction , or planned at the time of enactment .

indeed , the nsps for so 2 for new powerplants is in some ways moot – all new sources must completely offset their emissions under the cap as they receive no allocation of emission credits .

the nsps is effectively zero net emissions .

thus , if reducing so 2 from electric generating facilities is the goal , shrinking the current cap on so 2 is the most logical approach .

likewise , a cap on nox emission is a logical extension for reducing nox emissions from electric generating facilities .

epa favors this approach in addressing transported pollution programs in the northeast where the agency has proposed state - by - state emissions caps .

the wepco decision precipitated public debate and congressional oversight , and the bush administration's proposed revisions to nsr have done the same .

unlike previous efforts to address nsr , the focus of the administration's proposed routine maintenance rule is not to reduce pollution , but to facilitate electricity production .

the proposed rule's attempt to reduce barriers to energy production by widening the definition of routine maintenance is not attached to legislation to reduce any emissions effects .

the administration has introduced legislation to reduce emissions from powerplants , but promulgation of its proposed routine maintenance rule is not contingent on passage of that legislation .

the administration believes the linkage is not critical as it believes that the definition of routine maintenance will have no effect on emissions .

others may disagree .

