in the midst of an economic downturn , colleges and universities in the united states are finding themselves confronting economic difficulties .

many schools rely on endowments to help fund activities , programs , and expenses .

the marked decrease in schools' endowments due to investment losses could potentially mean that many schools would need to cut programs and costs , as well as become more reliant on other sources of revenue to cover shortfalls .

foreign students have historically been an important source of revenue for colleges and universities because unlike many of their native counterparts , foreign students frequently do not receive financial aid from the university — particularly at the undergraduate level .

consequently , numerous college and university administrators will likely advocate that maintaining or increasing foreign student levels is an important element to remaining financially viable through their economic difficulties .

despite the financial justifications for admitting large numbers of foreign students , critics of foreign student admissions generally raise two objections .

the first objection is that foreign students are potentially displacing united states citizens at top - tier institutions , thereby putting the united states labor force at a competitive disadvantage .

moreover , if these students are allowed to stay and become employed in the u.s. economy , critics argue , they displace u.s. citizens from employment opportunities .

the second objection is that foreign students could potentially constitute a security risk .

although security systems for tracking foreign students have been implemented , critics will note that these systems have loopholes .

additionally , the historical record of terrorist exploitation of foreign student visas for many observers means that the categories could be subject to future attempted terrorist admissions to the united states .

the tension over whether to legislate foreign student admissions levels is part of a broader set of competing policy agendas surrounding economic development and national security .

foreign students sit at the nexus of these competing policies due to their linkage to both the emerging labor force and their historical ties to security - based vulnerabilities .

thus , a potential issue for the 111 th congress is whether foreign student visas should be numerically limited , or if they should remain uncapped .

additionally , congress may need to consider whether it should legislate programs that either promote or deter additional admissions of foreign students to the united states .

since the immigration act of 1924 , the united states has expressly permitted foreign students to study in u.s. institutions .

most foreign students are at least 18 years old and are enrolled in higher education programs .

if they attend public high schools in the united states , the law requires that foreign students pay tuition , with some exceptions .

it also bars the admission of foreign students for the purpose of attending public elementary schools .

although foreign students are also barred from receiving federal financial assistance , many are successful at gaining financial assistance from the colleges and universities they attend .

foreign students are generally considered to enrich cultural diversity of the educational experience for u.s. residents as well as enhance the reputation of u.s. universities as world - class institutions .

concerns have arisen in recent years that have caused congress to take a new look at the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provisions that govern their admission .

the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks conducted by foreign nationals — including several terrorists on foreign student visas — raised a series of questions about foreign students in the united states , their rights and privileges , the extent to which the u.s. government monitors their presence in this country , and whether u.s. policy hampers the ability of domestic higher education institutions to attract foreign students .

there are three main avenues for students from other countries to temporarily come to the united states to study , and each involves admission as a nonimmigrant .

a nonimmigrant is an alien legally in the united states for a specific purpose and a temporary period of time .

there are more than 20 major nonimmigrant visa categories , and they are commonly referred to by the letter that denotes their subsection in the law .

the three visa categories generally used by foreign students are f visas for academic study ; m visas for vocational study ; and j visas for cultural exchange .

foreign students have been coming to study in the united states for almost a century , and the numbers admitted have more than doubled over the past two decades .

in fy1979 , the total number of f and j visas issued by dos consular officers was 224,030 and comprised 4% of all nonimmigrant visas issued .

in fy1989 , the number of f , m , and j visas had grown to 373,932 , constituting 5% of all nonimmigrant visas dos issued .

by fy2008 , dos issued 767,266 visas to f , j , and m nonimmigrants , and these categories made up 11% of all nonimmigrant visas issued .

as figure 1 illustrates , j cultural exchange visitors lead all educational visa categories with 392,089 visas issued in fy2008 .

the f academic students category followed with 364,423 , and the m students category trailed with 10,754 visas issued in fy2008 .

the largest sending region of the world for f and m student visas is asia , as figure 2 depicts .

dos data show asia having 244,737 visas issued to f and m nonimmigrants in fy2008 , representing 65.2% of the 364,423 cumulative f and m visas issued .

europe had the second largest portion of visas issued with roughly 17.8% , or 66,965 .

north and south american countries had smaller portions , with 17,849 and 23,593 , respectively , or approximately 4.8% and 6.3% of the total .

africa's share of f and m nonimmigrant visas issued was 19,486 or roughly 5.2% of the total , while oceania's 2,465 visas issued constituted approximately 0.7% of the total for f and m visas .

according to international educational exchange's open doors survey of u.s. colleges and universities , the largest group ( 44.4% ) of foreign students enrolled in 2007-2008 were in graduate degree programs .

as figure 3 presents , the second largest portion ( 28.5% ) were enrolled in undergraduate degree programs .

an additional 10.5% were enrolled in associate degree programs .

foreign students enrolled in other programs comprised 7.5% of the foreign student total .

participants in optional practical training programs constituted 9.1% of the international student total in the 2007-2008 academic year .

the fields of study undertaken by foreign students appear to be quite diverse , as figure 4 shows .

the largest category is business and management , which is the field of study for 17.8% of foreign students .

engineering along with physical and life sciences follow with 15.4% and 8.5% , respectively .

mathematics and computer sciences and social sciences accounted for 7.4% of the student population .

the number of students participating in optional practical training has seen a marked increase in the last couple of years and currently accounts for 9% of foreign students' major study fields .

the category of other fields of study accounted for 9.8% of the foreign student population .

although the ina contains specific categories for intending students , almost all classes of nonimmigrant visitors are permitted to attend schools in the united states .

generally , the visa holders' course work must be incidental to their primary purpose for being in the united states .

as shown in table 1 below , the principal visa holder in all classes of nonimmigrants except "b" visitors , "c" aliens in transit , and "d" crewmen may attend school .

moreover , the majority of these categories also permit spouses and minor children to attend school .

however , because school attendance is incidental to the visa's primary purpose , the visas may not be extended to complete a course of study .

as such , all nonimmigrant categories except aliens in transit , crewmen , "k" fiancees and spouses of u.s. citizens , and "s" witnesses and informants are allowed to change status to the f , j , or m nonimmigrant categories .

nonimmigrant students who are in the united states on other than f , j , or m visas may attend the school of their choice on either a part - time or full - time basis ( with exceptions noted in table 1 ) , including schools that are not approved by the ( sevp ) .

provided that school enrollment and attendance does not supercede the nonimmigrant's primary intent under his or her existing visa category ( or in no other way violates the terms of the visa ) , the nonimmigrant may continue to pursue course work .

investigation of student activities and the determination of visa violations are made by ice agents .

ice generally encourages nonimmigrants who wish to pursue education in the united states to apply for change of status to an f , j , or m nonimmigrant visa .

moreover , if the nonimmigrant wishes to pursue employment resulting from educational attainment , he or she must apply for work authorization , as well as for change of status to a qualifying nonimmigrant visa .

the reporting requirements of sevis transfer to neither non - educational visa holders nor programs without enrolled f , j , or m visa holders .

a foreign national enrolled on a non - educational visa is not required to submit documentation in the sevis system .

schools are required to report only on foreign students with f , j , or m visas , and if the school does not enroll those classes of nonimmigrants , it is not required to be sevp approved for nonimmigrant visa holders to attend .

the application and admissions process for both sevp and non - sevp - certified programs varies from school to school , but with the exception of the sevis document requirements , the required documentation standard is set by the school .

in the wake of the september 11 terrorist attacks , congress chose to increase the monitoring of educational visas .

however , it did not create restrictions on other nonimmigrant visas to prevent school attendance by nonimmigrants without one of the three educational visas .

therefore , sevis serves as a monitoring system for foreign nationals admitted on educational visas , but it does not monitor foreign students as a whole .

as an example , a trucking school may not be sevp - certified but may still enroll a nonimmigrant on an "e" treaty trader or investor visa .

although the school would still have other reporting requirements , they would not be immigration - related ; rather , they would represent the aggregate data on legal operations , as well as the distribution of federal and state - provided student funding .

if the students do not receive federal funds and none of the students are on f , j , or m visas , the trucking school has neither the incentive , nor an instrument , for reporting on its foreign student population to immigration authorities .

after dedicating the years since the september 11 terrorist attacks to improving security and tracking measures for foreign students , universities in the past couple of years have geared their efforts toward attracting foreign students in high - demand fields of study .

in particular , the stem fields of study have received strong attention .

with the economic downturn affecting the revenue streams of colleges and universities , this emphasis is likely to continue .

the stem fields generate strong revenues in the form of grants , and its graduates tend to receive higher salaries in the workforce — the latter tendency being attractive because it ultimately is correlated with stronger levels of alumni donations .

the issue of funding , as well as several other current issues relating to foreign students , is discussed below .

as of the date of publication , no legislation on foreign students had been introduced in the 111 th congress .

legislation introduced in previous congresses has focused on attracting more students in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics .

thus , it is likely that similar legislation will be introduced in the 111 th congress .

