on november 12 , the house , and on november 13 , the senate , approved a conferenceagreement on the fy2003 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

4546 ) , and the presidentsigned the bill into law on december 2 ( p.l .

107-314 ) .

earlier , on october 10 , the house , and onoctober 16 , the senate , approved a conference agreement on the fy2003 defense appropriationsbill ( h.r .

5010 ) , and the president signed it into law on october 23 ( p.l .

107-248 ) .

the conference agreement on the defense appropriations bill provides $355.1 billion for programsit covers .

this is $11.7 billion below the administration's request .

the bill does not include $10billion that the administration requested as a contingency fund for costs of counter - terrorismoperations in fy2003 .

fy2003 defense authorization bills .

on may1 , the house armed services committee marked up its version of the fy2003 defense authorizationbill , h.r .

4546 .

the committee also considered , but did not report , a companionmeasure , h.r .

4547 , to provide funds for the war on terrorism .

the house passed h.r .

4546 early on the morning of may 10 .

on may 9 , the senate armed servicescommittee completed marking up its version of the fy2003 defense authorization , s. 2514 , and a report was issued on may 15 .

on june 13 , the committee approved an amendment tobe offered on the floor regarding the crusader artillery system .

on june 18 , the full senate beganconsidering the bill , and the senate passed the bill on june 27 .

on july 18 , the house armedservices committee reported h.r .

4547 , entitled the cost of war against terrorismauthorization act ( cowataa ) , and the full house approved the bill under suspension of the ruleson july 24 .

on november 12 , a conference report on the bill was filed .

the conference agreementwas approved in the house under suspension of the rules on november 12 .

the senate approvedthe conference report on november 13 by voice vote .

the president signed by bill on december 2 .

fy2003 defense appropriations bill .

on june 19 , the house defense appropriations subcommittee marked up its version of the fy2003 defenseappropriations bill , and on june 24 , the full committee marked up the bill ( h.r .

5010 ) and ordered it to be reported .

the house passed the bill on june 27 .

on july 18 , the senateappropriations committee reported its version of the bill ( also h.r .

5010 ) .

the senatepassed the bill on august 1 .

on october 9 , conferees announced agreement on a compromiseversion of the bill .

the house approved the conference report on october 10 and the senate onoctober 16 .

the president signed the bill into law on october 23 .

fy2003 congressional budget resolution .

on march 20 , the house passed its version of the annual congressional budget resolution , h.con.res .

353 , and the senate reported its version , s.con.res .

100 , onmarch 22 .

both versions recommended funding levels for defense in fy2003 very close to what theadministration requested .

the full senate never considered the resolution on the floor , however,and it the two chambers were not able to agree on a common budget .

on may 22 , as part of the rulegoverning debate on supplemental appropriations , the house approved a measure deeming thebudget resolution , as approved in the house , to have been passed for purposes of guiding later actionon funding legislation .

fy2002 supplemental appropriations .

on march 21 , the administration submitted a request for $27.1 billion in supplemental fy2002 appropriationsfor activities in response to last year's terrorist attacks , of which $14 billion was for defenseprograms .

on may 24 , the house approved its version of the bill , h.r .

4775 , providing$28.8 billion using office of management and budget ( omb ) scoring of a key provision ( asassumed by the appropriations committee ) and $30.1 billion using congressional budget office ( cbo ) scoring .

the senate approved its version of the bill on june 7 , providing $31.4 billion .

onjuly 18 , conferees announced agreement on a compromise bill that provides $28.9 billion , including$14.5 billion for defense .

the house approved the conference report on july 23 and the senate onjuly 24 , and the president signed the bill on august 2 ( p.l .

107-206 ) .

of the total in the bill , $5.1billion was provided in contingent emergency appropriations , and on august 13 , the white houseannounced that the president would not designate those amounts as emergency funding .

withoutthose amounts , the total available for defense in the bill is $13.983 billion offset by $613 million inrescissions .

table 1a .

status of fy2003 defense appropriations table 1b .

status of fy2003 defenseauthorizatio .

on february 4 , 2002 , the administration submitted its formal fy2003 budgetrequest to congress .

the administration proposed $396.8 billion for the nationaldefense budget function , about $46 billion above the estimated fy2002 level ( for anoverview of the request , see appendix b ) .

of the total requested , $3.4 billion wasfor full accrual accounting of civilian personnel retirement benefits , which congressultimately did not approve .

without the accrual accounting change , the request was$393.4 billion .

of this amount , $366.7 billion was requested for programs coveredby the defense appropriations bill , $9.7 billion by the military constructionappropriations bill , $16.5 billion for department of energy defense - related activitiesfunded in the energy and water appropriations bill , and the remainder in otherappropriations bills .

with a global war against terrorism underway , congress was not inclined to make substantial changes in the administration's request for a defense increase .

early in the year , however , there was some skirmishing , particularly between thedefense committees and the budget committees , over two issues: first , how to treat the administration's request for $10 billion in fy2003 in an unallocated contingency fund for the war against terrorism and , second , how to treat the administration's request for full accrual accounting of civilian retirement benefits , which , across the wholegovernment , would increase discretionary spending by about $9 billion and reducemandatory spending by an equal amount ( see appendix b for a discussion of accrualaccounting ) .

along with negotiations about the overall level of defense spending , there wasconsiderable debate in congress about priorities within the budget and about anumber of specific programs .

the most contentious issue was whether to permitconcurrent receipt of military retired pay and veterans disability benefits .

the houseauthorization bill included a provision to phase in partial concurrent receipt .

thesenate bill included a measure approved on the floor to provide immediate , fullconcurrent receipt .

the white house statement of administration policy on thesenate bill threatened to veto any bill that includes either partial or full concurrentreceipt .

the conference agreement on the defense authorization bill provides abenefit payment only to military retirees with a disability determined to be caused bya combat or combat - related injury .

another major issue emerged at the beginning of may , on the eve of the house armed services committee markup of the defense authorization bill , when thecommittee received word that the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) haddecided to terminate the army crusader self - propelled artillery program .

thecommittee did not agree to end the program , however , and it included full fundingfor the crusader in the bill that passed the full house .

subsequently , however , aswork on defense funding bills proceeded , congress agreed to terminate the program,though it added money for a new artillery system that the administration had notrequested .

a major issue in the senate debate over the authorization bill was the level of funding for missile defense .

the senate armed services committee reducedrequested missile defense r&d funds by more than $800 million , freeing up fundsfor , among other things , increased shipbuilding .

eight republicans on thecommittee voted against reporting the bill , several citing the missile defense cut asthe reason .

in floor action , however , the senate voted to allocate $814.3 million inanticipated inflation savings either to missile defense or to counter - terrorism .

other major issues over the course of the year included provisions concerning environmental limitations on military training , missile defense funding andmanagement , and nuclear weapons development and testing .

the following discussion provides an overview of major elements of the administration's request and of congressional action to date , with particularlycontroversial items highlighted .

crs report rl31310 .

appropriations for fy2003: military construction , by danielh .

else .

crs report rs21327 .

concurrent receipt of military retirement and va disability benefits: budgetary issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21218 .

crusader xm2001 self - propelled howitzer: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and steven r. bowman .

crs report rl31456 .

defense cleanup and environmental programs: authorization and appropriations for fy2003 , by david michael bearden .

crs issue brief ib10062 .

defense research: dod's research , development , test and evaluation program , by john dimitri moteff .

crs report rl31415 .

the endangered species act , migratory bird treaty act , and department of defense readiness activities: current law and legislativeproposals , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib93103 .

military medical care services: questions and answers , by richard a .

best , jr. crs issue brief ib10089 .

military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 95-469 ( pdf ) .

military retirement and veterans' compensation: concurrent receipt issues , by robert goldich and carolyn merck .

crs issue brief ib85159 .

military retirement: major legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31111 .

missile defense: the current debate , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20535 .

navy ship procurement rate and the planned size of the navy: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20643 .

navy cvnx aircraft carrier program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21059 .

navy dd ( x ) future surface combatant program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib94040 .

peacekeeping: issues of u.s. military involvement , by nina maria serafino .

crs report rl31297 ( pdf ) .

recruiting and retention in the active component military , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib92115 .

tactical aircraft modernization: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31187 ( pdf ) .

terrorism funding: congressional debate on emergency supplemental allocations , by [author name scrubbed] and larry q. nowels .

crs report rs21133 ( pdf ) .

the nuclear posture review: overview and emerging issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31384 .

v - 22 osprey tilt - rotor aircraft , by [author name scrubbed] .

congress provides funding for national defense programs in several annualappropriations measures , the largest of which is the defense appropriations bill .

congress also acts every year on a national defense authorization bill , whichauthorizes programs funded in all of the regular appropriations measures .

theauthorization bill addresses defense programs in almost precisely the same level ofdetail as the defense - related appropriations , and congressional debate about majordefense policy and funding issues usually occurs mainly in action on theauthorization .

because the defense authorization and appropriations bills are soclosely related , this report tracks congressional action on both measures .

the annual defense appropriations bill provides funds for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) , including pay and benefits of military personnel,operation and maintenance of weapons and facilities , weapons procurement , andresearch and development , as well as for other purposes .

most of the funding in the bill is for programs administered by the department of defense , though the bill also provides ( 1 ) relatively small , unclassified amountsfor the central intelligence agency retirement fund and intelligence communitymanagement , ( 2 ) classified amounts for national foreign intelligence activitiesadministered by the cia and by other agencies as well as by dod , and ( 3 ) very smallamounts for some other agencies .

five other appropriations bills also provide fundsfor national defense activities of dod and other agencies including: the military construction appropriations bill , which finances construction of military facilities and construction and operation of military familyhousing , all administered by dod ; the energy and water development appropriations bill , which funds atomic energy defense activities administered by the department ofenergy ; the va - hud - independent agencies appropriations bill , which finances civil defense activities administered by the federal emergency managementagency , activities of the selective service system , and dod support for nationalscience foundation antarctic research ; the commerce - justice - state appropriations bill , which funds national security - related activities of the fbi , the department of justice , and someother agencies ; and the transportation appropriations bill , which funds some defense - related activities of the coast guard .

on february 4 , 2002 , the administration submitted its formal fy2003 budgetrequest to congress .

the administration proposed $396.8 billion for the nationaldefense budget function , about $46 billion above the estimated fy2002 level ( notincluding supplemental fy2002 appropriations of $14 billion proposed on march21 ) .

 ( 2 ) the increase between fy2002 and fy2003is the largest since at least the firstyears of the reagan administration .

and with supplemental counter - terrorismfunding for fy2001 and fy2002 included , the total increase in defense in the lastyear is the largest , in inflation - adjusted dollars , since the vietnam war .

theadministration projects continued growth in defense through fy2007 , though at amuch more modest pace - table b1 shows the long term trend in defense spendingunder the administration's plan .

the large increase requested for defense has not been enough , however , to allay the concerns of defense advocates in congress .

in their view , the budget is notadequate to accommodate needed increases in weapons procurement .

in the house,several members threatened to vote against the proposed budget resolution becauseit set aside $10 billion for defense in a reserve fund available only for costs of theglobal counter - terrorism campaign .

the administration requested the $10 billion asan unallocated contingency fund for costs of counter - terrorism operations in fy2003,but several members of the armed services committees both in the house and in thesenate have said they would prefer using that money to increase spending on majorweapons programs , especially shipbuilding .

table b1 .

national defense budget function and department of defense budget , fy2000-fy2007 , administrationprojections ( current and constant fy2003 dollars in billions ) sources : u.s. office of management and budget , historical tables: budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2003 , february 2002 .

constant dollar figuresare crs calculations using deflators from dod comptroller .

notes: this and other tables in this report use omb data that reflect enacted and proposed changes in accounting for retirement benefits .

figures reflect ( 1 ) enactedaccrual accounting for health care benefits for over - 65 military retirees beginning infy2003 ; ( 2 ) proposed accrual accounting for health care benefits for under - 65 militaryretirees beginning in fy2004 ; and ( 3 ) proposed accrual accounting for all civilianretirement pension and health benefits beginning in fy2003 .

omb has also adjustedfy2001 and fy2002 to be consistent with fy2003 and later treatment of civilianretirement benefits .

data in these tables also reflect omb scoring of funds provided inthe emergency terrorism response ( etr ) supplemental appropriations act approvedin september 2001 .

omb figures do not show the allocation of $9.8 billion of fundingprovided for defense in the etr supplemental .

 table c1 .

congressional action on defense authorization by title ( budget authority in billions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

107-436 ; s.rept .

107-151 ; h.rept .

107-772 .

note: derf allocation as shown by the senate armed services committee in s.rept .

107-151 .

table c2 .

congressional action on defense appropriations by title ( budget authority in billions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

107-532 , s.rept .

107-213 , h.rept .

107-732 .

note: derf request as shown in the appropriations conference report is reduced by $716.849 million that is transferred to military construction appropriations .

derf allocation is as shown bythe senate armed services committee in s.rept .

107-151 .

table c3: summary of congressional action on defense and military construction appropriations ( budget authority in millions of dollars ) source: summary tables of appropriations conference reports in congressional record , october10 , 2002 , pp .

7807 and 7816 .

