congress plays a direct role in formulating and implementing u.s. international trade policies .

during the 108 th , - 112 th congresses , this role gained increased importance as the united states negotiated an unprecedented number of trade agreements .

the 113 th congress may also address two of the largest regional trade agreements proposed to date and the issue of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which expired on july 1 , 2007 .

under this authority , congress grants the president the authority to enter into certain reciprocal trade agreements .

currently , the united states is involved in multilateral negotiations in the doha development agenda under the auspices of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

on a regional level , the united states signed the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , and is pursuing bilateral trade agreements with malaysia , the united arab emirates , and thailand .

it has concluded agreements with australia , bahrain , canada , chile , dominican republic , israel , jordan , mexico , morocco , oman , peru , and singapore , and the five countries of the central american common market ( guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , el salvador , and costa rica ) .

the united states also concluded free trade agreements with south korea , columbia , and panama .

the obama administration has initiated trade agreements with a broad collection of countries through the trans - pacific partnership and with the europe through the eu - u.s. transatlantic trade and investment partnership .

building a broad - based public consensus on international trade issues often has proven to be difficult , especially as certain industries and labor groups within the economy have been adversely affected by international competition .

based on previous experiences with international trade agreements , members of congress and the public may view proposed agreements with varying degrees of support and opposition .

while few critics are likely to oppose outright all of the trade agreements being negotiated , critics are likely to oppose some aspects of the agreements , because certain groups within the economy will incur a disproportionate share of the adjustment costs associated with each trade agreement .

economists and others have developed economic models that utilize advanced techniques to assess the economic impact of trade agreements on the economy as a whole and on specific sectors within the economy .

to help congress evaluate the potential economic effects , this report examines a sampling of these studies and offers an assessment of the estimates they have generated .

in the current highly globalized economy , international trade has come to represent a complex set of transactions .

nations not only trade goods and services , but they also trade a broad range of financial products .

in addition , liberalized capital flows and floating exchange rates have greatly expanded the amount of capital that flows between countries .

basically , trade represents an exchange of goods or services between two or more willing parties .

such trade allows nations to use their resources more efficiently in order to maximize the total amount of goods and services that are available to their citizens , a common definition of a nation's standard of living .

as a result of this maximization process , nations trade because it serves their national interests .

in the same way that individuals gain by specializing in activities that use their strongest skills and then trade with others , nations specialize in the production of certain goods and then trade with other nations for the goods they do not produce .

essentially , nations export in order to import goods and services they do not produce , or cannot produce efficiently .

while it is not always possible to measure the effects of international trade precisely , most economists believe that the net effect of international trade on the national economy as a whole is positive , i.e. , that the total gains exceed the total costs .

the united states currently is involved in negotiating an assortment of trade agreements .

these agreements range from bilateral agreements with trading partners that account for very small shares of total u.s. trade to regional and multinational trade agreements that could have a significant effect on certain u.s. workers , industries , and businesses .

at some point , congress may well be asked to consider legislation that implements these agreements .

in doing so , it may consider a number of different , and perhaps conflicting , objectives and it will be presented with data and information that emphasize differing viewpoints on how the agreements will affect the economy and the nation .

econometric modeling , aided by recent advances , can assist policymakers in analyzing the economic effects of trade agreements .

these models are particularly helpful in exploring the effects of trade liberalization in such sectors as agriculture and manufacturing where the barriers to trade are identifiable and subject to some quantifiable estimates .

in most cases , these barriers are represented by tariffs or quotas that can be adjusted on a reciprocal basis .

barriers to trade in the services sector , however , are proving to be more difficult to identify and , therefore , to quantify in an econometric model .

although progress is being made , it likely will be some time before the models can provide realistic estimates of the effects of trade liberalization in this sector .

the models , however , do provide a sense of the magnitude of economic effects that can be expected to occur across sectors in the economy .

this is especially helpful in identifying which sectors likely will experience the greatest adjustment costs .

there are drawbacks to using the econometric models .

such modeling is highly sensitive to the assumptions that are used to establish the parameters of the model and are hampered by a serious lack of comprehensive data in the services sector .

such shortcomings likely will not be as apparent in analysis of bilateral trade agreements between the united states and another trading partner , but they likely will become important when the analysis involves a large number of countries , such as in a regional or multilateral trade agreement .

in addition , these models likely understate the adjustment costs that are inevitably involved in liberalizing trade and they may well understate the positive effects of trade liberalization over the long run , because such effects are beyond the time - frame of the estimates .

as a result , it is possible that trade liberalization may have a larger positive impact on the u.s. economy over the long term than most economic models indicate .

nevertheless , even if the derived benefits from multilateral negotiations were twice as great as the most optimistic estimates indicate , except for unilateral reductions in trade barriers in all countries , the overall impact on the u.s. economy is expected to be modest , at best , relative to the size of the u.s. economy .

the effects on the economy from liberalizing trade on a regional basis through proposed trade and investment arrangements may well yield numerous gains for the u.s. economy as a whole .

congress may choose to reject any trade agreement in favor of maintaining the status quo , or it may choose to circumvent the arduous task of negotiating multilateral trade agreements and unilaterally remove all barriers to u.s. trade .

while unilaterally removing all trade barriers would please economic purists , it is unlikely given the issues it would raise and the prospects that it would leave u.s. negotiators with few bargaining chips during trade negotiations .

such an action likely would engender a public backlash , particularly from those labor and trade groups that would be most directly affected by such a policy .

in addition , the task of demonstrating the benefits of liberalizing trade is complicated by the fact that the short term adjustment costs associated with trade liberalization are difficult to equate clearly with the benefits that accrue slowly over time .

this means that it is difficult to demonstrate conclusively at the early stages of negotiations that the long - term benefits of trade liberalization will outweigh the short - term adjustment costs .

given these prospects , it seems likely to assume that policymakers will weigh the benefits of greater trade liberalization against the anticipated dislocations for workers and industries and determine whether to accept or reject each agreement on the basis of a broad set of factors .

while such analyses cannot forecast every outcome , they can aid policymakers in assessing which industries and sectors likely will experience the highest adjustment costs and , therefore , which industries and groups may need assistance in receiving training or other assistance .

often , congress has addressed trade - induced changes through trade adjustment assistance for workers and firms displaced as a result of trade agreements and trade liberalization .

such assistance has often been promoted as a principle of fairness by spreading out the adjustment costs beyond those most directly affected , and as a method for persuading those who are affected to buy into the changes by reallocating some of the gains from those who benefit to those who bare the greatest share of the adjustment costs .

these adjustment costs likely will rise if the scope of trade agreements expands beyond single trading partner to incorporate large numbers of trading partners .

