this report ( 1 ) provides background information and discusses potential issues for congress on the topic of portsecurity , which has emerged as a significant part of the overall debate on u.s. homelandsecurity .

 ( 2 ) the terroristattacks of september 11 , 2001 heightened awareness about the vulnerability to terrorist attack ofu.s .

ports and the ships in them .

the issue for congress is providing oversight on port security andproposals for improving it .

port security legislation can have significant implications for publicsafety , the war on terrorism , the u.s. and global economy , and federal , state , and local homelandsecurity responsibilities and expenditures .

the challenge of port security raises several potential issues for congress .

some membersof congress , who have introduced their own versions of maritime security legislation , are concernedthat mtsa does not go far enough in its requirements .

in addition to considering further portsecurity legislation , congress is debating whether the federal government is providing enough fundsto port authorities and border agencies for improving port security .

congress is also considering howto pay for port security .

several proposals have been introduced in the 109th congress to improve port security .

inthe house , h.r .

163 , introduced by representative millender - mcdonald , would createa pilot program for the sealing of empty containers .

h.r .

173 , introduced byrepresentative millender - mcdonald , would amend the criminal code to include certain terroristrelated acts in the marine environment as unlawful , require the attorney general to coordinateport - related crime data collection , as well as other port security related provisions .

h.r .

478 , introduced by representative millender - mcdonald , authorizes federal port security grants andthe issuance of letters of intent to fund port security projects .

h.r .

785 , introduced byrepresentative stearns , would create a federal database for the collection of cargo crime data .

h.r .

1731 , introduced by representative harman , authorizes federal port security grantsto be funded from customs import duties .

h.r .

1817 , the dhs authorization act forfy2006 , which passed the house on may 18 , 2005 , contains numerous provisions related to portsecurity .

in the senate , s. 3 , introduced by senator gregg , makes unlawful certain actsrelated to maritime security .

s. 12 , introduced by senator biden , would accelerate thedeployment of radiation detection portal equipment at u.s. and foreign seaports and establish atanker security initiative , among other provisions .

s. 376 , introduced by senatorhutchinson , requires the dhs to develop a strategy to ensure the security of intermodal shippingcontainers , whether imported , exported , or shipped domestically and requires that no less than halfof all imported containers be equipped with "smart box" technology by 2007 .

s. 378 ,introduced by senator biden , and reported by the committee on the judiciary on april 21 , 2005,increases penalties for certain maritime crimes .

s. 744 , introduced by senator nelson,requires the maritime administration to create a caribbean basin port security assistance program .

s. 855 , introduced by senator collins , parallels h.r .

1731 .

s. 1052 , introduced by senator stevens , would establish additional joint harbor operational centers forport security , establish a deadline of january 1 , 2006 for the issuance of the twic card , requireimporters to submit additional manifest data as part of the 24 hour rule , increase the number of csiinspectors , establish and develop a plan for the random inspection of shipping containers , requiredhs to conduct a study on the desirability of creating a user fee for funding port security , as wellas other provisions related to port security .

