 table 1 .

estimates of children in economic activity , child labor , and hazardous work , 2000 ( in thousands ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labor table 2 .

estimated number of children in worst forms of childlabor , 2000 ( in thousands ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labo .

according to ilo estimates , the largest number of child workers under 14 years old are in theasia - pacific region .

however , sub - saharan africa is estimated to have the highest proportion ofworking children , with nearly 30% of its children engaged in some form of economic activity .

aboutone in three children below the age of 15 is economically active in the region .

 ( 6 ) the child work ratiosin other major world regions are all projected to be below 20 percent .

 ( 7 ) furthermore , every fourthchild in sub - saharan africa appears to start work before the age of 10 .

 ( 8 ) africa's relatively highpoverty rate , as well as its relatively high proportion of individuals both residing and employed inrural areas , may contribute to the large number of children at work .

according to a world bankreport , child labor participation rates are much higher in rural than in urban areas , and three - quartersof working children work in family enterprises .

 ( 9 ) thereport further emphasizes that child labor is,and will continue to be , common in a large number of countries until poverty is substantiallyreduced .

the ilo estimates that nearly half ( 48.5% ) of all economically active children were engaged in hazardous work , which it defines as "any activity or occupation which , by its nature or type has , orleads to adverse effects on the child's safety , health and moral development" .

 ( 10 ) much agriculturalwork is included in this category because it may involve the use of heavy machinery or exposure topesticides .

an ilo report concluded that 55% of children below 12 years of age were working ina hazardous occupation or situation in 2000 .

children between 12 years old and 14 years old werethe largest age group working in a hazardous occupation or situation .

sixty - six percent of all childlaborers aged 12 through 14 were reported to be engaged in hazardous work .

 ( 11 ) the ilo chart below delineates the activity of those engaged in child labor , who comprise nearly 70% of all economically active children .

an overwhelming majority ( 69.5% ) of these child laborersis engaged in hazardous work .

the deceptively small percentage of child laborers ( 3.4% ) engagedin the "worst forms of child labor" represents 8.4 million children .

the remaining 27% of the childlaborers were not working in either hazardous conditions or the worst forms of child labor , but theywere still engaged in forms of child labor which , according to the ilo , "must be abolished. .

 ( 12 ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labor .

a significant number of children ( 8.4 million ) were estimated to be involved in the "unconditional worst forms of child labor," which includes prostitution and pornography , trafficking,forced and bonded labor , armed conflict , and other illicit activities .

 ( 13 ) of the 8.4 million ensnaredin the worst forms of child labor a great majority ( 5.7 million ) were either in forced or bonded labor,with another 1.8 million engaged in prostitution or pornography .

the ilo estimates that some 1.2million children were trafficked in 2000 , while 600,000 were engaged in illicit activities and 300,000participated in armed conflict .

most child soldiers were found in africa and the asia - pacificregion .

 ( 14 ) the chart below shows the distributionof children engaged in the worst forms of childlabor .

source: every child counts: new global estimates on childlabo .

there are a number of other international organizations and international non - governmentalorganizations ( ngos ) that address child labor , but this report focuses on the international effortsof the international labor organization .

 ( 28 ) since1919 the international labor organization ( ilo ) has adopted some 20 conventions and recommendations that seek to set minimum labor standardsfor children .

 ( 29 ) the conventions are treaties andare binding on countries that have ratified them .

theilo offers countries technical assistance in implementing and ratifying convention 138: minimumage for employment , and convention 182: elimination of the worst forms of child labor ( 30 ) throughthe declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and its follow - up .

established in1998 , the declaration commits all ilo members to respect , promote and realize workers' basicrights , even if they have not ratified the corresponding conventions .

 ( 31 ) workers' basic rights are: the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation ; the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsorylabor freedom of association ; and the abolition of child labor .

 ( 32 ) the declaration and its follow - up incorporate no direct enforcement powers .

however , the ilo monitors and reports on international child labor practices .

the programs established under thedeclaration rely on two things to eliminate international child labor: annual reports fromparticipating countries and technical assistance programs .

all states participating in the declarationprogram are required to submit an annual report that illustrates their progress towards respecting,promoting and realizing the standards in the corresponding conventions that they have not ratified .

 ( 33 ) the declaration and its follow - up also commits the ilo to provide technical assistance to memberstates that will assist them in implementing the fundamental principles and rights at work .

the ilo has a number of technical assistance programs that address child labor .

the first is theinternational program to eliminate child labor ( ipec ) , which became operational in 1992 .

ipechas mobilized more resources than any other declaration technical assistance program.. ( 34 ) eighty - twocountries now participate in the ipec program , up from the initial six , and the program has attracted27 donor countries , up from the original one ( germany ) .

 ( 35 ) ipec accounted for 12.8% of the totalilo extra - budgetary technical cooperation expenditure in 1998-1999 .

by 2000-01 , 27.5% of totalilo extra - budgetary technical cooperation expenditure came from ipec .

 ( 36 ) this initiative targetschildren engaged in hazardous work and the worst forms of child labor .

to enhance sustainabilityand maximize impact , ipec works with participating governments to remove children fromhazardous work and offers children and their families education , income and employmentalternatives .

the program also seeks to prevent other children from becoming child laborers .

 ( 37 ) thetraining component of ipec program helps member states to: determine the nature and extent of the child labor problem ; devise national policies and protective legislation ; establish mechanisms to provide in - country ownership and operation ofnational programs ; create awareness about child labor in communities and workplaces ; and enhance workplace monitoring and social protectionprograms .

 ( 38 ) a second technical assistance initiative is the time bound programs ( tbp ) .

the tbp seeks to assist member states to implement convention 182 and eradicate the worst forms of child laborwithin five to ten years .

the ilo expects tbps to have a significant impact on sustainabledevelopment largely because its methodology incorporates all members of society , and because itrequires that states demonstrate commitment to eradicating the worst forms of child labor .

recognizing the link between poverty and child labor , tbps seek to incorporate strategies for theabolition of the worst forms of child labor into participating countries' national poverty reductionstrategy papers and national labor market policies and processes .

 ( 39 ) a third technical assistance program , the statistical information and monitoring program on child labor ( simpoc ) , helps states identify the incidence , scope and causes of child labor .

dataon the scope and magnitude of child labor practices is scarce and is often not collected .

furthermore,the data that is available , including ilo data , has some margin of error .

 ( 40 ) simpoc providestechnical and financial support to countries to carry out child labor surveys , sets up national databanks and disseminates information .

 ( 41 ) .

while child labor has proven extremely difficult to eliminate , the united states has consistentlystrengthened its efforts to combat child labor .

it has increased the number of u.s. agencies withmandates to fight the phenomenon , augmented its allocations to anti - child labor efforts , and attachedchild labor criteria to its international agreements and foreign assistance programs .

in addition toits increasingly important role in developing programs that counter the spread of child labor , theunited states has enhanced its role in the global fight against child labor through legislation andinternational agreements .

one such international agreement is convention 182 on the worst formsof child labor .

as of 2002 , one hundred twenty - nine countries have ratified convention 182 , dueto rapid senate action the united states was the third .

 ( 42 ) the united states is also committed to the1990 world declaration education for all initiative .

this initiative seeks to ensure that by 2015 allchildren , particularly girls , have access to and are able to complete free and compulsory primaryeducation of good quality .

 ( 43 ) by virtue of its goalof global education for all , this initiative is seenas a tool to fight child labor .

a number of u.s. agencies have a mandate to address international child labor .

below is a brief description of some activities that the u.s. department of labor , the u.s. department of treasury,the u.s. agency for international development , and the u.s. department of state implement toaddress child labor .

congressional support for the abolition of child labor , particularly the worst forms of child labor,is very strong .

congress has acted to fund programs to combat child labor , expand the united states'role in the global fight against child labor , and include clauses that require action on eliminatingchild labor in trade agreements .

in 1993 , congress directed the u.s. department of labor ( usdol ) international child labor program ( iclp ) to investigate and report on child labor around the world.since then , congress has continued to fund the usdol - iclp research and reporting efforts .

it hasexpanded the iclp's mandate to include administering grants to organizations engaged in effortsto eliminate child labor and to improve access to quality basic education ; and raising publicawareness and understanding of child labor issues .

 ( 64 ) appropriations for the iclp have grown to $82million in fy 2002 .

congress has also greatly enhanced u.s. efforts to fight child labor by addingchild labor responsibilities to a host of u.s. agencies including , usaid , u.s. department of state,and u.s. customs service .

congress has also advanced the u.s. role in countering the worst forms of child labor through legislation , such as section 634 of p.l .

105-61 , which restricts the importation of goods producedby forced or indentured child labor .

congress also added child labor stipulations to foreign aidlegislation through the export - import bank reauthorization act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-121 ) .

this billintegrates child labor into the list of criteria for denying credit by the export - import bank .

anotherbill targeting child labor abuses is the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) .

the legislation provides punishment for traffickers , as well as assistance andprotection to trafficking victims , with a special emphasis on women and children , both in the u.s.and abroad .

 ( 65 ) recognizing that international child labor could serve as an artificial barrier to trade , as countries that do not rely on child labor in export production could have difficulty competing against countriesthat do , congress has used international trade agreements to fight child labor .

the generalizedsystem of preferences ( gsp ) is a program that extends duty - free entry to a wide range of productsfrom more than 140 countries and territories .

the trade and development act of 2000 ( p.l.106-200 ) expanded the gsp eligibility criteria to include the worst forms of child labor .

the actprohibits any country from gsp consideration if "[s]uch country has not implemented itscommitments to eliminate the worst forms of child labor. .

 ( 66 ) the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) amended the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) to add child labor criteria .

 ( 67 ) the northamerican agreement on labor cooperation ( naalc ) , the labor supplement to the north americanfree trade agreement ( nafta ) , also has a child labor component .

the agreement seeks topromote fundamental labor standards , including those addressing child labor , compliance with laborlaws , and the enforcement of those laws in each country .

the office of the u.s. traderepresentative states that the naalc has enhanced transparency and public debate on labor law andenforcement issues more than any previous bilateral or trilateral cooperative agreement .

 ( 68 ) .

although congress has consistently supported american efforts to eliminate child laborworld - wide , proponents of these efforts say that a number of issues continue to complicate theseinitiatives , including: ineffective enforcement mechanisms , sparse monitoring systems , and insufficient funding for programs that alleviate poverty , decrease incidences of hiv / aids , andincrease access to relevant education .

some argue that until international enforcement mechanismsare established , global monitoring systems are enhanced and funding for programs that combatpoverty , hiv / aids and illiteracy are boosted , child labor will continue to flourish .

the ilo divides child labor into three categories: labor performed by a child who is under the minimum age ; children engaged in hazardous work ; and children in the unconditional worst forms of child labor labor that is performed by a child under the minimum age is unacceptable because this work is likely to impede on a child's education and full development ( 74 ) , and thus the ilo considers it to bethe first form of child labor to be immediately abolished .

the ilo estimates that in 2000approximately 246 million children between 5 and 17 years old were engaged in child labor thatrequires elimination .

 ( 75 ) children in hazardous work is defined as children participating in any activity or occupation which , by its nature or type has , or leads to , adverse effects on the child's safety , health ( physical ormental ) , and moral development .

hazards could be as a result of excessive workloads , physicalconditions of work , and / or work intensity ( duration or hours of work even if the activity is deemednon - hazardous or safe ) .

 ( 76 ) the ilo estimates thatin 2000 more than two - thirds of those in childlabor were engaged in hazardous work .

an estimated 171 million children between ages 5 and 17were estimated to work in hazardous conditions in 2000 .

 ( 77 ) t he unconditional worst forms of child labor includes: all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery , such as sale and trafficking of children , debt bondage and serfdom and forced or compulsory labor , including forced orcompulsory use of children in armed conflict ; the use , procuring or offering of a child for prostitution , for the production ofpornography , or for pornographic performances ; and the use , procuring or offering of a child for illicit activities , particularly in theproduction and trafficking of drugs .

 ( 78 ) table 3 .

usdol - funded child labor technical assistanceprojects , fy1995-fy2001 source: u.s. department of labor , bureau of international affairs , office of the international child labor program .

table 4 .

estimates of economically activechildren in 2000 ( in thousands ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labor .

