one of the most common methods for redistributing spending priorities in appropriations bills on the house floor is through offset amendments .

house offset amendments generally change spending priorities in a pending appropriations measure by increasing spending for certain activities ( or creating spending for new activities not previously included in the bill ) and offsetting the increase ( s ) by decreasing or striking funding for other activities in the bill .

for example , an amendment increasing funding for one agency funded in the bill by $3 million and decreasing funding for another agency by the same amount in the same bill would be an offset amendment .

these amendments may transfer funds between two activities or among several activities .

in addition , certain offset amendments may reduce funding with across - the - board spending reductions .

representatives use offset amendments for a variety of reasons , including to ( 1 ) ensure that proposals increasing funding for certain activities in any appropriations measure do not violate parliamentary rules enforcing certain spending ceilings ; ( 2 ) comply with the prohibition against increasing total spending in a general appropriations bill ; ( 3 ) garner support for efforts to reduce funding for certain activities by transferring those funds to popular programs ; and ( 4 ) provide a focal point for discussion of a particular issue .

this report is an introduction to selected house rules and practices governing the consideration of offset amendments to appropriations measures considered in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ( or committee of the whole ) .

it analyzes the parliamentary context providing the need for offset amendments ; the two types of offset amendments , clause 2 ( f ) and reachback ( or fetchback ) offset amendments , including procedural factors regarding each ; and the mechanisms for waiving house rules .

the report concludes with highlights on the procedural advantages of each offset amendment type .

this report is not an official statement of house procedures .

the house parliamentarian advises the presiding officer on procedural issues regarding offset amendments and other matters .

although this report provides useful background information , it should not be considered a substitute for consultation with the parliamentarian on specific procedural problems and opportunities .

offset amendments are needed to ensure amendments increasing funding for certain activities in a regular appropriations bill , supplemental appropriations bill , or continuing resolution do not also cause spending ceilings associated with the annual budget resolution to be exceeded .

additionally , a separate order of the house prohibits amendments increasing the total spending level in a general appropriations bill .

there are two types of offset amendments , clause 2 ( f ) and reachback ( or fetchback ) amendments , available during consideration of regular and supplemental appropriations bills in the committee of the whole .

clause 2 ( f ) refers to clause 2 ( f ) of house rule xxi , which establishes some of the parliamentary procedures governing the consideration of such amendments .

parliamentary rules may be suspended or waived to consider offset amendments that violate these rules , typically by house adoption of a special rule .

however , this approach has been used infrequently .

there are certain procedural advantages of clause 2 ( f ) amendments over reachback amendments and vice versa .

there are generally three limited opportunities to suspend or waive the rules governing consideration of an offset amendment: ( 1 ) if no one raises a point of order ; ( 2 ) if the house adopts a special rule explicitly waiving points of order against the amendment ; or ( 3 ) if the house agrees by unanimous consent to waive the rules .

otherwise , if the presiding officer sustains a point of order against an amendment for violating the parliamentary rules previously discussed , the amendment falls .

first , house rules are not generally self - enforcing .

a representative must raise a point of order that an amendment violates a specific rule .

if no one opposes an amendment , a point of order does not have to be raised .

second , under current practice , the house rules committee usually reports a special rule setting additional procedural parameters for the consideration of appropriations measures .

the house typically adopts the special rule and then considers the particular appropriations measure pursuant to it .

if an offset amendment would violate one or more parliamentary rules , the sponsor may ask the rules committee to include a waiver protecting the amendment from the point ( s ) of order .

special rules generally do not provide special protection for offset amendments to appropriations bills .

third , a member might ask to consider an amendment violating the rules by unanimous consent .

a single member , however , can prevent such consideration by simply objecting to the unanimous consent request .

to attain their policy objectives , sponsors of offset amendments generally select either a clause 2 ( f ) or reachback amendment and work within the rules governing their consideration .

appropriations bills typically include some unauthorized appropriations .

generally , the house rules committee reports a special rule adopted by the house , waiving the prohibition against unauthorized appropriations for most or all unauthorized appropriations in a reported bill .

clause 2 ( f ) amendments can increase those unauthorized appropriations allowed to remain .

reachback amendments , however , can only increase authorized appropriations in the bill to their authorized level ( if there is one ) .

in some cases , entire bills or significant portions of bills have consisted of unauthorized appropriations .

as a result , reachback amendments could not increase those amounts .

for example , many of the lump - sum appropriations provided in the committee - reported regular defense appropriations bills have typically been unauthorized because of the timing of consideration of the annual defense authorization bill .

the house has adopted special rules regarding each bill waiving the application of clause 2 of house rule xxi .

as a result , clause 2 ( f ) amendments to those bills were in order , but reachback amendments were limited to the few , if any , authorized appropriations .

the timing of clause 2 ( f ) amendments is sometimes an advantage over reachback amendments because clause 2 ( f ) amendments are offered earlier in a bill's consideration .

by the time reachback amendments are considered , there may be fewer politically appealing offset options available .

amendments , including clause 2 ( f ) amendments , may have already been adopted that reduced the account a reachback amendment sponsor selected for offsets .

the account might be reduced to a point where there is no support for further reductions .

reachback amendments may add new lump - sum appropriations and set - asides within certain restrictions .

clause 2 ( f ) amendments , by contrast , are limited to transferring appropriations among objects already in the bill .

reachback amendments may include as an offset an across - the - board spending cut , but clause 2 ( f ) amendments may only directly change amounts in the bill .

another limited advantage of reachback amendments is that for most appropriations bills , reachback amendments must offset only new budget authority .

clause 2 ( f ) amendments must offset both new budget authority and outlays .

in practice , however , this advantage of reachback amendments over clause 2 ( f ) amendments is limited because sponsors sometimes provide offsets in both budget authority and outlays to garner political support for reachback amendments .

