the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , title xiv of the public health service act , is the key federal law for protecting public water supplies from harmful contaminants .

first enacted in 1974 and substantially amended in 1986 , 1996 , and 2016 , the act is administered through programs that establish standards and treatment requirements for public water supplies , finance drinking water infrastructure projects , promote water system compliance , and control the underground injection of fluids to protect underground sources of drinking water .

the 1974 law established the current federal - state arrangement in which states may be delegated primary implementation and enforcement authority for the drinking water program .

the state - administered public water supply supervision ( pwss ) program remains the basic program for regulating the nation's public water systems , and 49 states have assumed this authority .

in the sdwa amendments of 1996 , congress reauthorized appropriations for most sdwa programs through fy2003 .

although the authorization of appropriations has expired for most provisions , congress has continued to appropriate funds for the ongoing sdwa programs .

enacted in december 2016 , the water infrastructure improvements for the nation ( winn ) act , p.l .

114-322 , made numerous amendments to the sdwa , with significant focus on addressing lead in public water systems and increasing compliance assistance for small or disadvantaged communities .

table 1 identifies the original enactment and subsequent amendments .

this report summarizes the act's major provisions , programs , and requirements and provides statistics on the universe of regulated public water systems .

located at the end of the report , table 2 cross - references sections of the act with the major u.s. code sections of the codified statute , and table 3 identifies authorizations of appropriations under the act .

as indicated by table 1 , the sdwa has been amended several times since enactment of the safe drinking water act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-523 ) .

congress passed this law after nationwide studies of community water systems revealed widespread water quality problems and health risks resulting from poor operating procedures , inadequate facilities , and uneven management of public water supplies in communities of all sizes .

the 1974 law gave the epa substantial discretionary authority to regulate drinking water contaminants and gave states the lead role in implementation and enforcement .

the first major amendments ( p.l .

99-339 ) , enacted in 1986 , were largely intended to increase the pace at which the epa regulated contaminants and to increase the protection of ground water .

from 1974 until 1986 , the epa had regulated just one additional contaminant beyond the 22 standards previously developed by the public health service .

the 1986 amendments required the epa to ( 1 ) issue regulations for 83 specified contaminants by june 1989 and for 25 more contaminants every three years thereafter , ( 2 ) promulgate requirements for disinfection and filtration of public water supplies , ( 3 ) limit the use of lead pipes and lead solder in new drinking water systems , ( 4 ) establish an elective wellhead protection program around public wells , ( 5 ) establish a demonstration grant program for state and local authorities having designated sole - source aquifers to develop ground water protection programs , and ( 6 ) issue rules for monitoring underground injection wells that inject hazardous wastes below a drinking water source .

the amendments also increased the epa's enforcement authority .

congress again amended sdwa with the lead contamination control act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-572 ) .

these provisions were intended to reduce exposure to lead in drinking water by requiring the recall of lead - lined water coolers and requiring the epa to issue a guidance document and testing protocol for states to help schools and day care centers identify and correct lead contamination in school drinking water .

after the regulatory schedule mandated in the 1986 amendments proved to be unworkable for the epa , states , and public water systems , the 104 th congress made sweeping changes to the act with the sdwa amendments of 1996 ( p.l .

104-182 ) .

as over - arching themes , the amendments targeted resources to address the greatest health risks , increased regulatory flexibility , and authorized funding for federal drinking water mandates .

congress revoked the requirement that the epa regulate 25 new contaminants every three years and created a risk - based approach for selecting contaminants for regulation .

among other changes , congress added some flexibility to the standard - setting process , required the epa to conduct health risk reduction and cost analyses for new rules , authorized a drinking water state revolving loan fund ( dwsrf ) program to help water systems finance infrastructure projects needed to comply with sdwa regulations and protect public health , added programs to improve small system compliance , expanded consumer information requirements , increased the act's focus on pollution prevention with a state source water assessment program , and streamlined the act's enforcement provisions .

p.l .

104-182 authorized appropriations under the act through fy2003 .

authorizations of appropriations under the sdwa are identified in table 3 .

in 2002 , several drinking water security provisions were added to the sdwa through the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) .

title iv of that act included requirements for community water systems serving more than 3,300 individuals to conduct vulnerability assessments and prepare emergency response plans .

the law increased criminal and civil penalties for tampering with water supplies and required the epa to conduct research on preventing and responding to terrorist or other attacks .

signed into law on january 4 , 2011 , the reduction of lead in drinking water act , p.l .

111-380 , tightened the sdwa definition of "lead free" and added specific exemptions from the ban on the use or sale of lead pipes and plumbing fittings and fixtures that are not lead free .

 ( a subsequent amendment [ p.l .

113-64 ] explicitly exempted fire hydrants from coverage under the act's lead plumbing restrictions. ) .

enacted august 7 , 2015 , the drinking water protection act ( p.l .

114-45 ) directed epa to develop a strategic plan to assess and manage the risks associated with algal toxins in public drinking water supplies .

enacted december 11 , 2015 , the grassroots rural and small community water systems assistance act ( p.l .

114-98 ) revised and reauthorized the small system technical assistance program and extended the authorization of appropriations for the program through fy2020 .

in december 2016 , congress made numerous revisions to the sdwa through the wiin act ( p.l .

114-322 ; title ii , the water and waste act of 2016 ) .

among other amendments , the wiin act authorized new grant programs to ( 1 ) help public water systems serving small or disadvantaged communities meet sdwa requirements ; ( 2 ) support lead reduction projects , including lead service line replacement ; and ( 3 ) establish a voluntary program for testing for lead in drinking water at schools and child care programs .

federal drinking water regulations apply to the approximately 152,700 privately and publicly owned water systems that provide piped water for human consumption to at least 15 service connections or that regularly serve at least 25 people .

these water systems vary greatly in size and type , ranging from large municipal systems to homeowner associations , schools , and campgrounds .

some 51,350 of the regulated public water systems are community water systems ( cwss ) that serve the same residences year - round .

these water systems provide water to more than 299 million people .

all federal regulations apply to these systems .

most community water systems ( 82% ) are relatively small , serving 3,300 or fewer individuals .

despite this large percentage , these systems provide water to just 9% of the total population served by community water systems .

fully 92% of cwss serve populations of 10,000 or fewer , and 55% serve populations of 500 or fewer .

in contrast , 8% of cwss serve populations of 10,000 or more but provide water to 82% of the population served ( more than 246 million individuals ) .

among the community water systems , 71% rely on ground water , and 29% rely on surface water .

another 18,178 public water systems are non - transient non - community water systems , such as schools or factories , which have their own water supplies and generally serve the same individuals for more than six months but not year - round .

most drinking water regulations apply to these systems .

of these water systems , 99% serve populations of 3,300 or fewer and provide water to 83% of the population served by these systems .

nearly 83,200 other public water systems are transient non - community water systems , such as campgrounds and gas stations , which provide their own water to transitory customers .

only regulations for contaminants that pose immediate health risks apply to these systems .

approximately 95,800 of the nearly 101,400 non - community water systems ( transient and non - transient systems combined ) serve 500 or fewer people .

these statistics give some insight into the scope of financial , managerial , and technological challenges small public water systems may face in meeting federal drinking water regulations and maintaining water infrastructure to ensure the delivery of safe and sufficient water supplies .

 ( figure 1 provides statistics on community water systems , non - transient non - community water systems , and transient non - community water systems. ) .

a key component of sdwa is the requirement that epa promulgate national primary drinking water regulations for contaminants that may pose health risks and are likely to be present in public water supplies .

section 1412 instructs epa on how to select contaminants for regulation and specifies how and when the epa must establish regulations once a contaminant has been selected .

the regulations apply to privately and publicly owned "public water systems" that provide piped water for human consumption to at least 15 service connections or that regularly serve at least 25 people .

the epa has issued regulations for more than 90 contaminants , including regulations setting standards or treatment techniques for drinking water disinfectants and their byproducts , microorganisms ( eg , cryptosporidium and legionella ) , radionuclides , organic chemicals ( eg , benzene and many pesticides ) , and inorganic chemicals ( eg , arsenic and lead ) .

section 1413 authorizes states and indian tribes to assume primary oversight and enforcement responsibility ( primacy ) for public water systems when epa determines that statutory criteria are met .

currently , 55 of 57 states and territories have primacy authority for the public water system supervision ( pwss ) program .

too assume primacy , a state must adopt regulations at least as stringent as national requirements , develop adequate procedures for enforcement ( including conducting monitoring and inspections ) , adopt authority for administrative penalties , conduct inventories of water systems , maintain records and compliance data , and make reports as epa may require .

further , a state must develop a plan for providing safe drinking water under emergency circumstances .

to help states cover the costs of administering the pwss program , congress authorized to be appropriated $100 million annually ( fy1997-fy2003 ) for epa to make grants to the states ( section 1443 ) .

epa is required to allot the sums among the states "on the basis of population , geographical area , number of public water systems , and other relevant factors. .

additionally , states may use a portion their annual dwsrf grant under section 1452 to cover the costs of administering the pwss program .

the sdwa requires public water systems to monitor their water supplies to ensure compliance with drinking water standards and to report monitoring results to the states .

states review monitoring data submitted by public water systems , and also conduct their own monitoring , to determine system compliance with drinking water regulations .

epa monitors public water system compliance primarily by reviewing the violation data submitted by the states .

section 1414 requires that , whenever epa finds that a public water system in a state with primary enforcement authority does not comply with regulations , the agency must notify the state and the system and provide assistance to bring the system into compliance .

if the state fails to commence enforcement action within 30 days after the notification , epa is authorized to issue an administrative order or commence a civil action .

in a nonprimacy state , epa must notify an elected local official ( if any has jurisdiction over the water system ) before commencing an enforcement action against the system .

the 1996 amendments strengthened enforcement authorities , streamlined the process for issuing federal administrative orders , increased administrative penalty amounts , made more sections of the act clearly subject to epa enforcement , and required states ( as a condition of primacy ) to have administrative penalty authority .

the amendments also provided that no enforcement action may be taken against a public water system that has a plan to consolidate with another system .

several sdwa provisions specifically address lead in drinking water .

in addition to the public notification provisions discussed above , the sdwa strictly limits the amount of lead in pipes and plumbing materials used to provide drinking water , imposes public notice and education requirements on states and epa , and includes two grant programs ( authorized in the wiin act ) .

these provisions are outlined below .

the 1996 amendments added two state - administered programs aimed at improving public water system compliance with drinking water regulations: the operator certification program and the capacity development program .

section 1419 required states to adopt programs for training and certifying operators of community and non - transient non - community systems ( eg , schools and workplaces that have their own wells ) .

epa is required to withhold 20% of a state's annual dwsrf grant unless the state adopts and implements an operator certification program .

relatedly , section 1420 required states to establish capacity development programs , also based on epa guidance .

congress specified that the programs must include ( 1 ) legal authority to ensure that new systems have the technical , financial , and managerial capacity to meet sdwa requirements ; and ( 2 ) a strategy to assist existing systems that are experiencing difficulties to come into compliance .

epa is required to withhold a portion of srf grants from states that do not have capacity development strategies .

the agency has not had to withhold funds under either of these programs .

the 1996 amendments expanded the act's pollution prevention focus to embrace protection of surface water as well as ground water .

section 1453 required epa to publish guidance for states to implement source water assessment programs that delineate boundaries of the areas from which systems receive water and identify the origins of regulated contaminants ( and also any contaminants selected by the state ) in those areas to determine systems' susceptibility to contamination .

states with approved assessment programs may adopt alternative monitoring requirements for water systems as provided for in section 1418 .

section 1452 ( k ) ( 1 ) ( c ) authorized states to use up to 10% of their dwsrf capitalization grant for fy1996 and fy1997 to delineate and assess source water protection areas .

section 1454 authorized a source water petition program based on voluntary partnerships between state and local governments .

states may establish a program under which a community water system or local government may submit a petition to the state requesting assistance in developing a voluntary source water quality protection partnership to ( 1 ) reduce the presence of contaminants in drinking water , ( 2 ) receive financial or technical assistance , and ( 3 ) develop a long - term source water protection strategy .

this section authorized $5 million each year for grants to states to support petition programs .

also , states may use up to 10% of their dwsrf grant to support various source water protection activities , including the petition program .

in 1996 , congress authorized the dwsrf program to help systems finance improvements needed to comply with sdwa regulations .

epa is authorized to make grants to states to capitalize dwsrfs , which states may then use to make loans to public water systems .

states must match 20% of the federal grant .

grants are allotted based on the results of needs surveys .

each state and the district of columbia must receive at least 1% of the appropriated funds .

drinking water srfs may be used to provide loans for expenditures that epa has determined will facilitate compliance or significantly further the act's health protection objectives .

states must make available 15% of their annual allotment for loan assistance to systems that serve 10,000 or fewer persons to the extent that funds can be obligated for eligible projects .

states may use up to 30% of their dwsrf grant to provide loan subsidies ( including forgiveness of principal ) to help economically disadvantaged communities .

also , section 1452 ( g ) authorizes states to use a portion of funds for technical assistance , source water protection and capacity development programs , and operator certification .

the law authorized appropriations of $599 million for fy1994 and $1 billion per year for fy1995 through fy2003 for dwsrf capitalization grants .

epa was directed to reserve , from annual dwsrf appropriations , 0.33% for financial assistance to several trusts and territories , $10 million for health effects research on drinking water contaminants , $2 million for the costs of monitoring for unregulated contaminants , and up to 2% for technical assistance .

the epa may use 1.5% of funds each year for making grants to indian tribes and alaska native villages .

the wiin act ( p.l .

114-322 ; section 2113 ) made several amendments to the dwsrf provisions .

among other changes , the amendments increased the portion of the annual dwsrf capitalization grant that states may use to cover program administration costs .

further , the wiin act amended section 1452 ( a ) to require , with some exceptions , that funds made available from a state dwsrf during fy2017 may not be used for water system projects unless all iron and steel products to be used in the project are produced in the united states .

the 107 th congress passed the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) to address a wide range of security issues .

title iv of the bioterrorism act amended the sdwa to address threats to drinking water security .

key provisions are summarized below .

the 104 th congress included a variety of drinking - water - related provisions in the 1996 sdwa amendments that did not amend the sdwa .

several of these provisions are described below .

section 302 authorized states to transfer as much as 33% of their annual drinking water state revolving fund grant to the clean water act ( cwa ) srf or an equivalent amount from the cwa srf to the dwsrf through fy2001 .

in several subsequent conference reports for epa appropriations , congress authorized states to continue making transfers between the two funds , and in p.l .

109-54 , congress made this authority permanent .

section 303 of the 1996 amendments authorized epa to make grants to the state of alaska to pay 50% of the costs of improving sanitation for rural and alaska native villages .

grants are for construction of public water and wastewater systems and for training and technical assistance programs .

appropriations were authorized at $15 million for each of fy1997 through fy2000 .

 ( in p.l .

106-457 , congress reauthorized appropriations for these rural sanitation grants at a level of $40 million for each of fy2001 through fy2005. ) .

section 305 revised section 410 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act to require the secretary of health and human services to issue bottled drinking water standards for contaminants regulated under sdwa within 180 days after epa promulgates the new standards unless the secretary determines that a standard is not necessary .

section 307 authorized epa to make grants to colonias for wastewater treatment works .

appropriations were authorized at $25 million for each of fy1997 through fy1999 .

 ( see also " drinking water assistance to colonias ." ) .

section 401 authorized additional assistance , up to $50 million for each of fy1997 through fy2003 , for a grant program for infrastructure and watershed protection projects .

