the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the federal budget deficit for fy2009 was $1,414 billion , triple the $459 billion deficit recorded in fy2008 .

cbo expects the deficit for fy2010 to be $1,349 billion .

cbo estimates that , in fy2009 , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) resulted in additional outlays of $112 billion and a drop in revenues of $88 billion , which raised the budget deficit $200 billion above what it otherwise would have been .

the budget deficit in fy2009 was , in dollar terms , unprecedented .

compared to the overall economy , the $1.4 trillion budget deficit equaled 9.9% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

in 1943 , the budget deficit reached 30.3% of gdp .

since 1946 and before now , the largest the budget deficit had been , relative to the overall economy , was 6% of gdp in 1983 .

as recently as fy2001 , the budget registered a surplus .

between 1992 and 1998 , a combination of budget policy and a booming economy entirely eliminated the deficit .

but after four successive years of surpluses , outlays again exceeded revenues in 2002 and the budget has been in deficit since then .

in an economic downturn , deficit reduction is usually not an immediate consideration .

the economy is expected to begin to recover in 2010 , but deficits are likely to remain high for some time both because of continued countercyclical fiscal policy and because reducing the deficit as soon as the economy begins to recover could have an undesired contractionary effect .

in the longer run , however , continued deficits at current levels could ultimately reduce the long - run rate of economic growth .

although both the severity of the current downturn and the size of the projected deficits surpass what most policymakers have experienced , experience remains a guide to policy .

economists are not necessarily changing their views about the economic effects of budget deficits even though those views may have been established in less trying times .

this report examines the economics the budget deficit .

the share of income that is saved depends in part on relative preferences for current and future consumption .

from an economic standpoint , there is no optimal rate of saving .

nonetheless , raising the national rate of saving is an oft - stated goal of policymakers .

most economists , however , believe the capacity of public policy to influence private saving behavior is limited .

the one certain way to raise the national saving rate through public policy is to increase the public sector saving rate , and that is what happened in the 1990s .

the national saving rate rose after 1995 because increases in public saving more than offset falling private saving .

in recent history , budget surpluses have been rare , and a succession of surpluses rarer still .

in every year between fy1969 and fy1998 , the federal budget was in deficit ; that is , outlays exceeded receipts .

beginning in 1929 and until 1969 , the budget was in surplus for a total of nine years , and during that time was never in surplus for more than three years in a row .

figure 1 presents figures for federal budget outlays , receipts , and the surplus beginning in 1979 .

rather than showing dollar amounts , each of the three series is expressed as a percentage of gdp .

showing the figures in this way focuses attention on the size of the budget aggregates relative to the economy as a whole .

an economic downturn began in mid - 1981 and ended in late 1982 , and the budget deficit grew to 6.0% of gdp in 1983 .

since then , with a brief reversal attributable to an economic contraction in 1990 and 1991 , the deficit shrank and turned into a surplus which increased steadily until 2000 .

in 2001 , the surplus fell from 2.4% of gdp the previous year to 1.3% of gdp .

in 2002 , there was a budget deficit of 1.5% of gdp and by 2004 it had reached 3.5% of gdp .

the u.s. economic expansion came to an end in december 2007 and in 2008 the deficit increased to 3.2% of gdp .

for 2009 , the deficit reached 9.9% of gdp , is projected by cbo to stay above 9% of gdp for 2010 .

the federal budget and the economy are closely interrelated .

the strength or weakness of the overall economy substantially affects the levels of outlays and receipts .

the budget also has significant effects on the economy , both in terms of how fast the economy grows , and also in terms of the overall allocation of resources .

perhaps the most obvious effect of the federal government budget surpluses of the 1990s was a decline in the amount of federal debt .

from an economic perspective , however , the measure of debt that matters more is not the absolute level in dollar terms , but rather the debt relative to total output , or gdp .

from this perspective , the debt began to fall in 1993 .

in the short run , over a period of just a few years , debt may grow more rapidly than gdp without causing much alarm .

even the large increases in debt contemplated for the next few years , while they may seem alarming , are not sufficient to cause significant economic instability as long as they are perceived to be temporary .

it would take some time before debt reaches historic levels relative to gdp .

in 1946 , federal debt held by the public was 108.6% of gdp .

at the end of 2009 that ratio was 53% .

as long as the federal debt grows faster than gdp , however , interest payments on that debt will constitute an ever - increasing share of total federal spending and of gdp .

if investors should come to expect that the debt would grow faster then gdp indefinitely , and that the debt - to - gdp ratio would continue to rise , they might eventually become unwilling to buy new issues of federal debt .

in that case , the federal reserve might be the only buyer and that would likely lead to an accelerating rate of inflation .

in the long run , the relationship between the growth rate of the federal debt and the overall rate of economic growth is important .

perpetual debt growth in excess of the rate of economic growth is an inherently unstable situation .

it is likely that investors would become unwilling to buy federal debt issues long before all of gdp was accounted for by the interest payment on the federal debt , because of growing doubts about the government's ability to raise sufficient revenue to pay just the interest on that debt .

whether the debt - to - gdp ratio is on such an explosive path depends on the rate of interest and the rate of growth of gdp .

consider the case where the budget is in balance except for the interest payment on the debt .

that is , the budget deficit is equal to the interest payment .

in this example , the debt would grow each year by an amount equal to the interest cost of financing the debt ; thus the growth rate of the debt would equal the interest rate .

if the interest rate on the federal debt remained above the economic growth rate , then the debt would grow faster than gdp and the ratio of debt to national output would rise .

the converse is also true ; as long as the interest rate on the debt remains below the growth rate of gdp , then the ratio of debt to income will fall .

thus even with a budget deficit , the ratio of debt to national income can fall .

for the united states , the previous recent peak level of the federal debt relative to gdp was reached in 1993 at 49.3% , when the budget deficit was $255 billion .

in 1994 , even though the deficit was still over $200 billion , the debt fell relative to gdp .

by 2001 , federal debt had fallen to a low of 32.5% of gdp .

in 2002 , the ratio of debt to gdp began to rise for the first time in eight years , and continued rising through 2005 , when it stood at 36.9% .

between 2005 and 2007 , the ratio fell briefly , but it jumped to 53.0% in 2009 .

figure 4 shows the level of the debt - to - gdp ratio since 1979 .

during the period shown in figure 4 , the budget was in deficit most of the time .

clearly , variations in the ratio of debt to gdp do not depend solely on whether the budget is in surplus or deficit .

as long as the budget is in deficit , however , the ratio cannot fall to zero .

for the sake of long term economic stability , what matters most is that the ratio is not perpetually rising .

economics , generally speaking , is neutral with respect to whether one saving rate is better than another .

ultimately , it is an expression of the public's relative preference for present versus future consumption .

for the time being , however , the public sector can also have important effects on the pool of savings .

whether it is better to have a budget surplus or a deficit , the budget has clear - cut consequences for the economy .

in the short run , whether the budget is in surplus , makes little difference to economic performance .

in the short run , it is changes in the surplus or deficit that can affect the rate of economic growth .

a reduction in the deficit would tend to be contractionary , while an increase in the deficit would tend to be stimulative .

those effects , however , are likely to be short lived .

in the long run , a shift from a budget surplus to a deficit represents a reduction to national saving .

less saving means a shift from future to present consumption .

consuming more now means less investment now , a lower level of output of goods and services in the future , and thus , less to consume in the future than otherwise would have been the case .

to the extent that investment is financed by importing capital from abroad , some of that higher output will be paid to foreigners .

even with a budget deficit , the outstanding federal debt may still fall , relative to gdp , but that depends on the size of the deficit , and of the interest payment on the outstanding debt .

a rising debt - to - gdp ratio eventually poses the risk of accelerating inflation .

