prior to 1996 , foreign states were immune from civil liability in u.s. courts for injuries caused by acts of terrorism carried out by their agents and proxies .

in 1996 , congress amended the foreign sovereign immunities act ( fsia ) to allow civil suits by u.s. victims of terrorism against certain states responsible for , or complicit in , such terrorist acts as torture , extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , and hostage taking .

the amendment enjoyed broad support in congress , but was initially resisted by the executive branch .

president clinton signed the amendment into law after the cuban air force shot down a civilian plane over international waters , an incident that resulted in one of the first lawsuits under the new fsia exception .

after a court found that the waiver of sovereign immunity did not itself create a private right of action , congress passed the flatow amendment to create a cause of action .

numerous court judgments awarding plaintiffs substantial compensatory and punitive damages were to follow , until the d.c .

circuit in 2004 interpreted the provisions in a way that made further awards somewhat more difficult for plaintiffs to win .

plaintiffs thereafter largely relied on domestic state law to provide a cause of action , which resulted in some disparity in the amount and type of relief available to different victims of the same terrorist attacks .

although the defendant state sponsors of terrorism have frequently declined to appear in court to defend against the lawsuits , the litigation has nevertheless proven contentious , often leading to the perception on the part of plaintiffs that the u.s. government is their most formidable adversary .

nevertheless , u.s. courts have awarded victims of terrorism more than $19 billion against state sponsors of terrorism and their officials , most of which remains uncollected .

the scarcity of assets within u.s. jurisdiction that belong to states subject to economic sanctions has made judgments against terrorist states difficult to enforce .

efforts by plaintiffs to attach frozen assets and diplomatic or consular property , while receiving support from congress , have met with opposition from the executive branch .

the total amount of judgments against terrorist states far exceeds the assets of debtor states known to exist within the jurisdiction of u.s. courts .

the use of u.s. funds to pay portions of some judgments has drawn criticism .

calls for a more effective and fair means to compensate victims of terrorism have not yielded an alternative mechanism .

the issue has pitted the compensation of victims of terrorism against u.s. foreign policy goals and some business interests .

congress passed a rider to the national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( h.r .

1585 ) , to provide a cause of action against terrorist states and to facilitate enforcement of judgments , and to permit some plaintiffs to refile claims that were unsuccessful under the previous law .

the provision also permits the filing of new cases related to terrorist incidents that have been the subject of previous cases , in order to permit the filing of cases in which the plaintiffs were previously ineligible to file or had missed the filing deadline , or perhaps in order to garner higher damages .

after the president vetoed the bill based on the possible impact the measure would have on iraq , congress passed a new version , h.r .

4986 , this time authorizing the president to waive its provisions with respect to iraq .

the president signed the bill into law , p.l .

110-181 , and promptly issued a waiver with respect to iraq .

the administration now seeks a waiver for libya and other states whose designation may be lifted .

however , the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit has ruled that the waiver with respect to iraq does not affect pending cases , which are permitted to go forward under the fsia as it was in effect prior to the fy2008 ndaa .

this report provides background on the international law doctrine of foreign state immunity and the fsia ; summarizes the 1996 amendments creating an exception to state immunity under the fsia for suits against terrorist states ; details the subsequent cases and the legislative initiatives to assist claimants in efforts to collect on their judgments ; sets forth the legal and policy arguments that were made for and against those efforts ; summarizes the decision in roeder v. islamic republic of iran and efforts to help the plaintiffs and override the algiers accords ; describes the administration's actions vesting title to iraq's frozen assets in the united states and making them unavailable to former pows in acree v. republic of iraq and other plaintiffs who have won judgments against iraq ; discusses an effort by iran to void a judgment against it ( ministry of defense v. elahi ) ; notes the laws in certain terrorist states that allow suits against the u.s. for similar acts ; and concludes that the issue of providing fair compensation to victims of terrorism is not one that will likely dissipate any time soon .

the report also contains two appendixes: appendix a lists the cases covered by § 2002 of the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) , the amount of compensation that has been paid in each case , and the source of the compensation .

it provides a separate list of judgments handed down later that are not covered by the compensation schemes set forth in earlier legislation , whose creditors will likely compete with each other to satisfy claims out of scarce blocked assets .

appendix b lists the amount of the assets of each terrorist state blocked by the united states as of the end of 2006 , as compared to the current sum of judgments that remain to be satisfied .

the report will be updated as events warrant .

customary international law historically afforded sovereign states complete immunity from being sued in the courts of other states .

in the words of chief justice marshall , this immunity was rooted in the "perfect equality and absolute independence of sovereigns" and the need to maintain friendly relations .

although each nation has "full and absolute" jurisdiction within its own territory , the chief justice stated , that jurisdiction , by common consent , does not extend to other sovereign states: one sovereign being in no respect amenable to another ; and being bound by obligations of the highest character not to degrade the dignity of his nation , by placing himself or its sovereign rights within the jurisdiction of another , can be supposed to enter a foreign territory only under an express license , or in the confidence that the immunities belonging to this independent sovereign station , though not expressly stipulated , are reserved by implication , and will be extended to him .

this perfect equality and absolute independence of sovereigns , and this common interest impelling them to mutual intercourse , and an interchange of good offices with each other , have given rise to a class of cases in which every sovereign is understood to waive the exercise of a part of that complete exclusive territorial jurisdiction , which has been stated to be the attribute of every nation .

during the last century , however , this principle of absolute sovereign immunity gradually came to be limited after a number of states began engaging directly in commercial activities .

to allow states to maintain their immunity in the courts of other states even while engaged in ordinary commerce , it was said , "gave states an unfair advantage in competition with private commercial enterprise" and denied the private parties in other nations with whom they dealt their normal recourse to the courts to settle disputes .

as a consequence , numerous states immediately before and after world war ii adopted the "restrictive principle" of state immunity , which preserves sovereign immunity for most cases but allows domestic courts to exercise jurisdiction over suits against foreign states for claims arising out of their commercial activities .

the united states adopted the restrictive principle of sovereign immunity by administrative action in 1952 , and the state department began advising courts on a case - by - case basis whether a foreign sovereign should be entitled to immunity from a u.s. court's jurisdiction based on the nature of the claim .

in 1978 congress codified the principle in the foreign sovereign immunities act ( fsia ) , so that the decision no longer depended on a determination by the state department .

the fsia states the general principle that "a foreign state shall be immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the united states and of the states" and then sets forth several exceptions .

the primary exceptions are for cases in which "the foreign state has waived its immunity either expressly or by implication," cases in which "the action is based upon a commercial activity carried on in the united states by the foreign state," and suits against a foreign state for personal injury or death or damage to property occurring in the united states as a result of the tortious act of an official or employee of that state acting within the scope of his office or employment .

for most types of claims covered , the fsia also provides that the commercial property of a foreign state in the united states may be attached in satisfaction of a judgment against it regardless of whether the property was used for the activity on which the claim was based .

however , assets belonging to separate instrumentalities of a foreign government are not generally available to satisfy claims against the foreign government itself or against other agencies and instrumentalities in which that government has an interest .

in 1996 congress added another exception to the fsia to allow the u.s. courts , federal and state , to exercise jurisdiction over foreign states and their agencies and instrumentalities in civil suits by u.s. victims of terrorism .

the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( aedpa ) amended the fsia to provide that a foreign state is not immune from the jurisdiction of u.s. courts in cases in which money damages are sought against a foreign state for personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture , extrajudicial killing , aircraft sabotage , hostage taking , or the provision of material support or resources ... for such an act if such act or provision of material support is engaged in by an official , employee , or agent of such foreign state while acting within the scope of his or her office , employment , or agency.... as predicates for such suits , the aedpa amendment required that the foreign state be designated as a state sponsor of terrorism by the state department at the time the act occurred or later so designated as a consequence of the act in question , that either the claimant or the victim of the act of terrorism be a u.s. national , and that the defendant state be given a prior opportunity to arbitrate the claim if the act on which the claim is based occurred in the territory of the defendant state .

the act also provided that the terrorist states and their agencies and instrumentalities would be liable for compensatory damages , and the agencies and instrumentalities for punitive damages as well .

the act further allowed the commercial property of a foreign state in the united states to be attached in satisfaction of a judgment against that state under this amendment regardless of whether the property was involved in the act on which the claim was based .

after previously opposing similar proposals , the clinton administration agreed to these changes in the fsia .

after a court found that the terrorism exception to sovereign immunity did not itself create a cause of action , congress passed the civil liability for acts of state - sponsored terrorism ( known as the "flatow amendment" ) to clarify that a cause of action existed against the officials , employees , and agents of states whose sovereign immunity was abrogated pursuant to the exception .

the flatow amendment gives parties injured or killed by a terrorist act covered by the fsia exception , or their legal representatives , a cause of action for suits against "an official , employee , or agent of a foreign state designated as a state sponsor of terrorism" who commits the terrorist act "while acting within the scope of his or her office , employment , or agency ...." if a u.s. government official would be liable for similar actions .

this measure was adopted as part of the omnibus consolidated appropriations act for fiscal 1997 without apparent debate .

several suits were quickly filed against cuba and iran pursuant to the new provisions .

neither state recognized the jurisdiction of the u.s. courts in such suits , however ; and both refused to appear in court to mount a defense .

the fsia provides that a court may enter a judgment by default in such a situation if "the claimant establishes his claim or right to relief by evidence satisfactory to the court. .

after making the proper finding , several federal trial courts entered default judgments holding iran and cuba to be culpable for particular acts of terrorism and awarding the plaintiffs substantial amounts in compensatory and punitive damages .

neither iran nor cuba had any inclination to pay the damages that had been assessed in these cases .

as a consequence , the plaintiffs and their attorneys sought to attach certain properties and other assets owned by the states in question that were located within the jurisdiction of the united states to satisfy the judgments .

in the case of flatow v. islamic republic of iran , plaintiffs sought to attach the embassy and several diplomatic properties of iran located in washington , dc , the proceeds that had accrued from the rental of those properties after diplomatic relations had been broken in 1979 , and an award that had been rendered by the iran - u.s. claims tribunal in favor of iran and against the u.s. government but which had not yet been paid .

the clinton administration opposed these efforts , arguing that the diplomatic properties and the rental proceeds were essentially sovereign non - commercial property that remained immune to attachment pursuant to the fsia .

in addition , the administration argued that it was obligated to protect iran's diplomatic and consular properties under the vienna convention on diplomatic relations and the vienna convention on consular relations and that using such properties to satisfy court judgments would expose u.s. diplomatic and consular properties around the world to similar treatment by other countries .

the clinton administration further argued that the funds set aside to pay an award to iran by the decision of the claims tribunal were still u.s. property and , as such , were immune from attachment due to u.s. sovereign immunity .

the court agreed and quashed the writs of attachment .

efforts were also mounted in both the flatow case and in alejandre v. republic of cuba ( the brothers to the rescue case ) to attach assets of iran and cuba in the united states that had been blocked by the u.s. government pursuant to sanctions regulations .

iran's assets in the united states had been frozen under the authority of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) at the time of the hostage crisis in 1979 .

however , under the algiers accords reached to resolve the crisis , most of those assets had either been returned to iran or placed in an escrow account in england subject to the decisions of the iran - u.s. claims tribunal , an arbitral body set up by the algiers accords to resolve remaining disputes between the two countries or their nationals .

cuba's assets in the united states had been blocked since the early 1960s under the authority of the trading with the enemy act ( twea ) .

the clinton administration opposed the efforts to allow access to these assets as well .

it argued that such assets are useful , and historically have been used , as leverage in working out foreign policy disputes with other countries ( as in the iranian hostage situation ) and that they will be useful in negotiating the possible future re - establishment of normal relations with iran and cuba .

the administration also contended that numerous other u.s. nationals had legitimate ( and prior ) claims against these countries that would be frustrated if the assets were used solely to compensate the recent victims of terrorism .

the administration also argued that using frozen assets to compensate victims of state - sponsored terrorism exposes the united states to the risk of reciprocal actions against u.s. assets by other states .

after congress passed the flatow amendment in 1996 , providing for a cause of action against foreign officials for terrorist conduct , the judge in the flatow case held iran itself liable under a theory of respondeat superior , and awarded compensatory as well as punitive damages .

many trial courts followed the flatow precedent , awarding both compensatory and punitive damages against a foreign state despite the textual limitations in the fsia exception with respect to punitive damages .

however , the court of appeals for the district of columbia held in 2004 that the amendment does not provide a cause of action against terrorist states themselves , including governmental agencies and separate commercial "agencies and instrumentalities" under the fsia .

moreover , although the flatow amendment created a cause of action against an "official , employee , or agent of a [designated terrorist state] while acting within the scope of his or her office , employment , or agency," the court held that it did not create a cause of action against foreign officials in their official capacities .

the cicippio - puleo case involved claims for damages brought by the adult children and siblings of joseph cicippio , a hostage victim who had previously won a $30 million default judgment against iran for financing the hezbollah terrorists who kidnapped him in beirut and held him hostage there for some five years .

the children and siblings had not participated in the original lawsuit , but filed suit in 2001 for intentional infliction of emotional distress and the loss of solatium they suffered as a result of mr. cicippio's ordeal .

the district court judge dismissed the case for failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted , holding that the prevailing common law rule governing third party claims for outrageous conduct causing severe emotional distress prevented plaintiffs' recovery .

the appellate court requested a briefing from the u.s. government explaining its interpretation of the relevant statutes , and , at the government's urging , held that neither the fsia exception nor the flatow amendment created a cause of action against a foreign state .

the court remanded the case to the district court to permit the plaintiffs to amend their complaint to state a valid cause of action .

on remand , the judge awarded the plaintiffs $91 million in compensatory damages for intentional infliction of emotional distress under pennsylvania law .

with respect to lawsuits against individual officials and employees of foreign governments , the court agreed with the u.s. government that "insofar as the flatow amendment creates a private right of action against officials , employees , and agents of foreign states , the cause of action is limited to claims against those officials in their individual , as opposed to their official , capacities. .

this interpretation was said to follow from supreme court holdings establishing that an official - capacity claim against a government official is in substance a claim against the government itself , inasmuch as the government would be responsible to pay any damages awarded against its officials .

nevertheless , some judges have continued to award punitive damages against foreign officials acting in their official capacity .

some judges have found foreign officials liable in their personal capacities , awarding treble damages against those officials under the antiterrorism act ( ata ) , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2333 ( despite the limitation in 18 u.s.c .

§ 2337 making that cause of action unavailable against u.s. and foreign officials "acting within his or her official capacity or under color of legal authority" ) .

the cicippio - puleo ruling complicated plaintiffs' efforts to sue designated state sponsors of terrorism by requiring them to identify a source of law outside the fsia to provide a substantive cause of action .

some plaintiffs who had already been awarded default judgments were obliged to amend their complaints to identify a basis for liability .

plaintiffs have , with a few exceptions , had little difficulty establishing a cause of action under various u.s. state laws without relying on the flatow amendment .

however , the application of state tort law has resulted in some disparity in the availability or amount of damages to which plaintiffs may be entitled .

for example , in one case , damages for intentional infliction of emotional distress were denied to plaintiffs domiciled in pennsylvania and louisiana because those states' tort laws impose a presence requirement for third party plaintiffs to recover for emotional distress .

the application of federal statutes outside the fsia has also resulted in a lower amount of damages than might have been awarded under earlier court interpretations of the flatow amendment .

plaintiffs suing for damages related to the terrorist attack on the u.s.s .

cole in 2000 were awarded a cumulative sum less than $8 million for economic damages , and were not entitled to damages for pain and suffering , because the judge found the death on the high seas act to provide the only remedy .

although iran has not appeared in court to defend itself in any of the terrorism cases brought against it , it did nonetheless challenge a decision that allowed a judgment - holder to collect part of a judgment against iran out of an award owed to iran by a third party .

the ministry of defense and support for the armed forces of the islamic republic of iran ( mod ) asked the supreme court to overturn a decision that allowed the respondent , dariush elahi to attach a $2.8 million arbitral award issued in iran's favor by the international chamber of commerce for a breach of contract that occurred in 1979 .

elahi had been awarded a default judgment of $311.7 million in a lawsuit against iran and its ministry of intelligence and security ( mois ) based on the 1990 the assassination of his brother , dr. cyrus elahi , a dissident who was shot to death in paris by agents of the iranian intelligence service .

dariush elahi and another judgment - holder , stephen flatow , both attempted to intervene in mod's suit against cubic defense systems , inc. to attach iran's award in partial satisfaction of their judgments against iran .

flatow's petition was denied after the court found that he had waived his right to attach such assets by accepting payment under section 2002 of the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( vtvpa ) .

elahi's lawsuit was one of those cases added later to section 2002 of the vtvpa , however ; and since he was only able to collect a portion of the compensatory damages from u.s. funds , he retained the right to pursue satisfaction of the rest of the compensatory portion of his claim from iranian blocked assets not at issue before the u.s. - iran claims tribunal .

iran argued that its judgment retained immunity under the fsia as military property .

the court rejected iran's contention , noting that mod did not assert that the judgment would be used for military purposes , but instead stated the money would be deposited in iran's central bank .

the court also rejected iran's contention that the judgment is protected as "the property ... of a foreign central bank or monetary authority held for its own account" within the meaning of section 1611 ( b ) ( 1 ) , because it found that language to apply only to money held by a foreign bank "to be used or held in connection with central banking activities. .

mod also sought to invoke the blocking regulations as a bar to the attachment of the judgment , but the court rejected that argument as well , pointing out that the transaction was permitted under a general license .

finally , mod sought to bring a collateral attack against elahi's default judgment , contesting the jurisdiction of the court that issued it on the basis of the alleged invalidity of the fsia terrorism exception under the cicippio - puleo decision , supra .

the court , construing the jurisdictional question as one of personal jurisdiction rather than subject - matter jurisdiction , found that mod could have attempted to void the judgment on this basis at the district court level , but had waited too long to raise the issue during collateral proceedings .

because mod was unable to show that the district court that issued the default judgment in favor of elahi acted in a manner inconsistent with due process , or that the district court lacked subject - matter jurisdiction over the case , the court affirmed the decision in favor of elahi .

mod petitioned for certiorari to the supreme court to review the decision on several bases .

mod challenged the ninth circuit's assumption that mod is an "agency or instrumentality" of iran rather than an integral part of the iranian government without separate juridical status .

this distinction has bearing under the fsia as to how its assets are treated and whether it can be held liable for the debts of the ministry of intelligence and security ( mois ) .

mod also challenged the assessment that the judgment due it on a military contract is not military property under the fsia .

as to the collateral attack on elahi's judgment , iran argued that in the context of the fsia , questions of personal jurisdiction and subject - matter jurisdiction over a foreign sovereign are so intimately linked as to be inseparable , which would allow mod to dispute the validity of elahi's default judgment by asserting it was founded on an invalid cause of action .

based on the recommendation of the solicitor general , the supreme court granted certiorari only with respect to the issue of mod's status as an "agency or instrumentality" of iran .

in a per curiam opinion , the court vacated the decision below on the grounds that mod had not had an opportunity to present argument on the issue .

the ninth circuit had erred , according to the court , because it had either mistakenly relied on a "concession" by the plaintiff that mod was an "agency or instrumentality," or it had simply assumed that there was no relevant distinction between those entities and a foreign state proper .

the fsia provides an exception to the immunity from execution of the property of a foreign state only if such property is used for commercial purposes .

by contrast , the property of an "agency or instrumentality" of a foreign state is not immune from execution if the entity is engaged in commercial activity in the united states , regardless of whether the property is used for the commercial activity .

on remand , the appellate court found that mod is a foreign state rather than an agency or instrumentality of a foreign state , so that the judgment owed to mod in the cubic defense arbitration would have to qualify as property used for commercial activity in order for the fsia exception to sovereign immunity to apply .

the court did not regard the judgment as commercial property ; however , the court found that it was a "blocked asset" within the meaning of tria § 201 because it represented an interest in military equipment that iran had acquired prior to 1981 , and permitted the judgment holder to attach the entire sum .

one judge dissented , arguing that the judgment should be considered "at issue" before the iran - u.s. claims tribunal in a case involving iran's claims against the united states for non - delivery of military equipment .

although the judgment itself is not at issue , judge fisher reasoned , it could be used by the united states as an offset in the event iran is eventually awarded compensation .

if the judgment were considered to be at issue before the iran - u.s. claims tribunal , the plaintiff would have relinquished his right to attach it in satisfaction of his judgment against iran by accepting partial payment of compensatory damages from the u.s. treasury pursuant to tria § 201 .

iran again petitioned for certiorari , which the supreme court granted , to review whether the arbitral award is a "blocked asset" within the meaning of tria § 201 and whether it is "at issue" before the iran - u.s. claims tribunal and thus off - limits to elahi .

the solicitor general had filed a brief supporting certiorari on the first issue but advising against a review of the second on the basis that a determination in iran's favor would merely mean that the award would be used to satisfy a judgment against iran where the plaintiff had not relinquished his right to attach such assets .

in addition to the bills addressing the acree decision , ( h.r .

1321 and h.con.res .

93 , discussed supra ) and one bill to provide compensation in the roeder case ( h.r .

3358 ) , two other bills in the 109 th congress were introduced in an effort to untangle the state of litigation against terrorist states .

h.r .

865 / s. 1257 , 109 th congress , would have repealed the flatow amendment and enacted a new subsection ( h ) after the current 28 u.s.c .

§1605 to provide an explicit cause of action against foreign terrorist states as well as their agents , officials and employees , making them liable "for personal injury or death caused by acts of that foreign state , or by that official , employee , or agent while acting within the scope of his or her office , employment , or agency , for which the courts of the united states may maintain jurisdiction under subsection ( a ) ( 7 ) for money damages. .

the bill would have authorized money damages for such actions to include economic damages , solatium , damages for pain and suffering , and punitive damages , and it would have made a foreign state vicariously liable for the actions of its officials , employees , or agents .

it also contained provisions to facilitate the attachment of property in aid of execution of such judgments .

the bill would have provided that the removal of a foreign state from the list of designated foreign state sponsors of terrorism would not terminate a cause of action that arose during the period of such designation , and would have made the above amendments effective retroactively to permit some plaintiffs to revive dismissed cases .

h.r .

6305 / s. 3878 ( 109 th congress ) would have directed the president to set up a claims commission to hear claims on behalf of u.s. nationals who were victims of hostage - taking by a foreign state or other terrorist party , permitting awards of up to $500,000 , adjusted to reflect the annual percentage change in the consumer price index .

the iran hostages and family members who were named in the roeder case would have been eligible for additional compensation .

plaintiffs with unsatisfied judgments against terrorist states would have been permitted to bring a claim for compensation ; however , recipients of compensation would have been unable to commence or maintain a lawsuit against a foreign state or its agencies and instrumentalities based on the same conduct .

members of the armed services taken hostage after august 2 , 1990 , would not have been eligible to seek compensation under the plan .

payment of awards was to come from the hostage victims' fund , into which the president would have been authorized to allocate blocked assets , any funds recovered by the united states against persons for improper activity in connection with the oil for food program of the united nations , and any amounts forfeited or paid in fines for violations of various laws and regulations .

at least two of the states affected by the fsia exception appear to have enacted legislation allowing their citizens to file suit against the united states for violations of human rights or interference in the countries' internal affairs .

cuba reportedly allows such suits for violations of human rights ; and at least two judgments assessing billions of dollars in damages against the u.s. have apparently been handed down .

iran reportedly has authorized suits against foreign states for intervention in the internal affairs of the country and for terrorist activities resulting in the death , injury , or financial loss of iranian nationals ; and at least one judgment for half a billion dollars in damages has been handed down against the united states .

the judgment was awarded to a businessman who brought suit against the united states for "kidnapping , false imprisonment , using force , battering , abusing and ultimately inflicting physical and psychological injuries" in connection with his arrest by undercover u.s. customs agents in the bahamas for violating u.s. sanctions regulations .

the judgment creditor in the case reportedly sought to attach the defunct u.s. embassy in tehran to satisfy the judgment .

the 1996 amendments to the fsia allowing victims of terrorism to sue designated foreign states for damages in u.s. courts were enacted with broad political support in congress .

but subsequent difficulties in obtaining payment of the substantial damages assessed for the most part in default judgments by the courts , and subsequent efforts in congress to facilitate or allow such payment out of the defendant states' frozen assets in the united states , have raised issues fraught with both emotion and complexity .

matters of effectiveness , fairness , diplomacy , and possible reciprocal action against u.s. assets abroad have all entered the debate .

in addition , the issue has pitted the compensation of victims of terrorism against u.s. foreign policy goals , including compliance with specific international obligations and the decision to use funds for the reconstruction of iraq .

u.s. courts have awarded victims of terrorism more than $19 billion in judgments against state sponsors of terrorism and their officials under the terrorism exception to the fsia .

some claimants were able to collect portions of their judgments under §2002 of the victims of trafficking act , while those not covered have been left largely to compete with each other to lay claim to the blocked assets of terrorist states for satisfaction of the compensatory damages portions of their judgments .

in the case of iran — the defendant in the largest number of suits filed , those blocked assets are virtually non - existent ; and presidential determination 2003-23 made iraq's blocked assets unavailable to pay subsequently awarded judgments against iraq .

most of the cuban assets made available by § 2002 to satisfy judgments have also been liquidated to pay to judgment creditors .

an appellate court decision in 2004 holding that no cause of action exists under the fsia to sue terrorist states themselves , as opposed to their employees , officials , and agents , led courts to apply domestic state tort law to lawsuits against terrorist states based on the domicile of the victim , resulting in some disparity of relief available to victims .

confusion about the definition of an "agency or instrumentality" of a foreign state also brought uncertainty to these lawsuits .

the supreme court in the elahi case clarified the importance of distinguishing between "agencies and instrumentalities" and foreign states themselves , but did not address any of the other issues raised by the terrorism exception to the fsia .

section 1083 of the fy2008 national defense appropriations act will likely clarify the existence of a federal cause of action against state sponsors of terrorism , but u.s. nationals with outstanding causes of action against iraq may call on congress for some form of redress .

the total amount of judgments against state sponsors of terrorism and former state sponsors of terrorism is likely to increase more rapidly , especially if § 1803 ( c ) is deemed valid to permit the refiling of cases , the reinstatement of vacated judgments , or the upward amendment of final awards , as well as the filing of new cases for which the statute of limitations has already expired .

whether more assets of those states will become available to satisfy those judgments is less certain .

making the assets of separate agencies and instrumentalities available to satisfy judgments may increase the total assets available for levy in the short term , but may also lead such entities to avoid future transactions that would put their assets at risk .

an increase in transactions with debtor states is likely to occur only with respect to those states that are no longer subject to anti - terrorism sanctions , in which case the use of any assets that come into the jurisdiction of the united states to satisfy judgments may act as a barrier to trade notwithstanding the lifting of sanctions .

on the other hand , if the terrorism exception to the fsia results in a decrease in terrorist attacks affecting the interests of u.s. persons , such judgments should become less common with the passage of time and the statute of limitations .

appendix a .

judgments against terrorist states appendix b .

assets of terrorist state .

