the expedited procedure for resolutions of repository siting approval , which appears at 42 u.s.c .

10135,generally conforms to the model just sketched .

the actsets forth procedures for the house and senate separately , but the following discussion treats both together at eachstage of the legislative process .

this treatmentpermits emphasis on possible relations between actions in each chamber .

the only exception is the floorconsideration stage , where the procedures prescribed bystatute for house and senate are adapted to the divergent general rules of the two chambers .

the preceding discussion identifies a number of difficulties that might arise in the course of consideration ofa resolution of repository siting approval under theexpedited procedure of the nwpa .

in particular , the senate might amend its approval resolution in such a way thatits text no longer met the statutoryrequirements for a resolution of repository siting approval .

the amended measure might accordingly be heldineligible for further consideration under theexpedited procedure .

also , because of such amendment or for other reasons , the texts of the approval resolutionsoriginating in the house and the senate mightdiffer .

this situation might make the automatic procedure to clear an approval resolution for the presidentunavailable in either chamber .

the previous section addresses whether , if an approval resolution were to be amended into a form other thanthat prescribed by the nwpa , it would continue tobe eligible for consideration under the expedited procedure of the act .

certain provisions of the act , however,suggest that if the measure were enacted in such aform , it might raise additional questions as well .

pursuant to this language , it might be argued that unless a measurehad the form prescribed for an approvalresolution , it might not suffice to authorize construction of the repository .

related passages could be used to arguethat even if the measure had the prescribedform , it might not achieve its purpose if congress did not pass it during the prescribed 90-day period .

expedited procedure statutes commonly permit congress to approve ( or disapprove ) a specified action by using the expedited procedure to enact the measure forwhich the statute provides .

they do not purport to require congress to use , for this purpose , the means of approval ( or disapproval ) they provide .

the language ofthe nwpa appears to reflect an intent to go farther , and prohibit construction of a civilian nuclear waste repository unless congress enacts the resolution ofapproval in the prescribed form within the specified 90-day period .

specifically , subsection ( b ) of 42 u.s.c .

section 10135 states that once a state "notice of disapproval has been submitted , the designation of such site shall not beeffective except as provided under subsection ( c ) ...." subsection ( c ) provides that under these conditions,the "site shall be disapproved unless , during the ... [prescribed 90-day] period ... the congress passes a resolution of repository siting approval in accordance withthis subsection approving this site ...." ( italicsadded throughout ) .

the text that a resolution of repository siting approval must possess is prescribed , as alreadynoted , by subsection ( a ) .

by no statutory language , of course , could congress vitiate its own capacity subsequently to pass any legislation within its constitutional power .

it could hardly bequestioned that if , independent of the provisions of the nwpa , legislation were enacted specifically providing thata repository be constructed at a given site , theenactment would legally suffice for the purpose .

any conceivable uncertainty could be removed if the enablingstatute explicitly superseded or repealed pertinentprovisions of the nwpa .

an argument might be raised , however , that outside the context of the statutory procedure , a measure containing the language prescribed for an approvalresolution would not suffice for this purpose .

a resolution of repository siting approval is to state only that "therehereby is approved the site" specified .

the actrequires this approval in order for the site designation to become "effective. .

it gives meaning to this term bydirecting that when the site designation is effective,the secretary of energy is to apply to the nuclear regulatory commission for authorization to construct the site .

 ( 42 ) on this basis , it might be argued that only incontext of the act does "approval" have specific meaning in relation to establishment of the repository .

by this argument , if a resolution was couched in the terms required by the act , but also had been amended to include other language , or was not passed within therequired 90-day period , it might not constitute statutory authorization to proceed with establishment of therepository .

instead , it might be contended , the processof establishing the repository cannot go forward unless congress passes either ( 1 ) the approval resolution in the formand within the time required by the nwpa,or ( 2 ) legislation independent of the requirements of the act and explicitly directing that the repository beconstructed ( or , for example , that the secretary apply forthe construction authorization ) .

a contrary interpretation of the language of the statute might hold that congressional "approval" of a site designation entails authorization to proceed with therepository , even independently of the statutory mechanism of the nwpa .

to preclude such contentions altogether,however , any approval resolution passed eitherin amended form , or outside the statutory time frame ( or both ) , might have to be amended also to contain languageexplicitly authorizing construction ( orapplication for authorization to construct ) , and perhaps explicitly superseding the statutory process of the nwpaas well .

these questions of the potential force and effect of an approval resolution under the nwpa are separate from those that might be raised about the eligibility of theresolution for consideration under the expedited procedure of the act .

the nwpa attempts to require that anapproval resolution must be passed in a specifiedform , and within specified time constraints , in order to permit establishment of the repository to go forward .

it doesnot require that the approval resolution beenacted in accordance with the expedited procedure itself .

the provisions of section 10135 quoted earlier requireaction in accordance with subsections ( b ) and ( c ) , but not with subsections ( d ) and ( e ) , which set forth the expedited procedure .

it accordingly appears that , for example , the senate might amend its approval resolution , then continue considering the measure without regard to the constraintsof the expedited procedure on debate and other procedural actions , and ultimately pass in lieu thereof an unamendedcompanion previously received from thehouse .

this process would result in an approval resolution becoming law in the form prescribed by statute , but notin accordance with the expedited procedure .

the language of the act would not seem to cast any doubt on the force and effect of a resolution of siting approvalenacted under those conditions .

similarly , aslong as congress passed an approval resolution having the prescribed form within the required 90 days ofcontinuous session , the measure would apparentlysuffice to approve the site designation even if congress did not consider it in accordance with the expeditedprocedure .

it is , in any case , most doubtful that a statute could effectively require action pursuant to a specified expedited procedure as a condition of the effectiveness of anapproval resolution .

if either house departed from the prescribed procedures in its consideration of the resolution,its action presumably would amount to animplicit exercise of the chamber's power to alter the expedited procedure in its application to the specific instance .

such alterations in statutory procedures areimplicitly understood as authorized by the rulemaking clause of the constitution , even where not explicitlyauthorized by the rulemaking language of the statuteitself .

conversely , however , it does not appear that congress could in any way use the rulemaking power to establish the effectiveness of an approval resolution that didnot meet the statutory requirements of form and timing .

the act gives the status of congressional rules only to theprovisions of subsections ( d ) and ( e ) thatgovern congressional action on an approval resolution from introduction through final action .

the provisions ofsubsections ( a ) through ( c ) , which specify therequired wording and timing of an approval resolution and establish its effects , are not declared to have this status .

nor is it clear that they could be appropriatelyconstrued as having this status , for their effects go beyond procedural implications internal to congress .

accordingly , if an approval resolution did not meet thestatutory requirements of form and timing , then congress might prefer to include in the resolution an explicitstatement of its intended force and effect , in order toensure that it would have that force and effect .

finally , if congress determined to authorize construction of a nuclear waste repository by means of legislation that did not meet the requirements of form andtiming provided by the nwpa , that legislation would presumably be ineligible , under the statute , for considerationunder the expedited procedure .

the act makesthat procedure available only for measures meeting the statutory requirements of form for a resolution of repositorysiting approval .

presumably , as a result,approval legislation of any alternate kind would not be subject to the restrictions imposed by the statute oncommittee action , calling up , debate , amendment , andother procedural actions .

it would instead have to be considered under the general procedures of each house .

itcould , accordingly , be considered underprocedures equivalent to the expedited procedure , but only if each house , using its general practices of makingprocedural decisions , so determined .

