under current tax law , firms may expense ( or deduct as a current rather than a capital expense ) up to $1 million of the total cost of new and used qualified assets they purchase and place in service in tax years beginning in 2018 under section 179 of the federal tax code .

they also have the option under section 168 ( k ) of expensing the entire cost of qualified assets they acquire and place in service between september 28 , 2017 , and december 31 , 2022 .

many of the assets that qualify for the section 179 expensing allowance are also eligible for the section 168 ( k ) expensing allowance ( which is also known as bonus depreciation ) .

expensing is the most accelerated form of depreciation .

it has the potential to stimulate business investment by reducing the cost of capital for favored investments and by increasing the cash flow of firms undertaking such investments .

as a result , economists view the two allowances as significant investment tax subsidies , especially since firms are allowed to take advantage of both allowances in the same tax year .

p.l .

115-97 ( known informally as the tax cuts and jobs act of 2017 ) made several notable changes in both tax provisions .

specifically , the new tax law permanently increased the annual dollar limitation for expensing under section 179 to $1 million , raised the phaseout threshold to $2.5 million , indexed both amounts for inflation , and expanded the range of assets eligible for the allowance .

p.l .

115-97 also increased the section 168 ( k ) bonus depreciation allowance to 100% of the cost of eligible assets acquired and placed in service from september 28 , 2017 , through the end of 2022 and made certain changes in the property eligible for the allowance .

this report examines the current status , legislative history , and main economic effects ( including their efficacy as a tool for economic stimulus ) of the section 179 and bonus depreciation allowances .

many lawmakers view the section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances as effective policy tools for promoting the growth of small firms and stimulating the economy during periods of slow or negative growth .

and many business owners think of the two allowances as valuable and desirable instruments for increasing their cash flow and simplifying tax accounting .

but many economists have a more nuanced understanding of the effects of those allowances .

in their view , the disadvantages of the allowances may outweigh the advantages .

specifically , they maintain that the allowances have the potential to promote an inefficient allocation of capital among domestic industries and investment opportunities , and to lessen the federal tax burden on upper - income business owners , who account substantial shares of noncorporate business profits and corporate stock ownership and dividends .

at the same time , many economists acknowledge that expensing can reduce the cost of tax compliance , especially for smaller firms .

these effects correspond to three traditional criteria used by economists to evaluate actual or proposed tax policies: efficiency , equity , and simplicity .

each effect is examined below .

the discussion begins with a review of what is known about the effectiveness of the section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances as policy instruments for economic stimulus .

since 2003 , congress has passed eight bills that either temporarily enhanced the section 179 expensing allowance and its phaseout threshold or included a temporary or permanent extension of an already enhanced allowance .

and since 2002 , 10 bills have been enacted that extend or enhance the bonus depreciation allowance .

each extension or enhancement was largely intended to spark increases in business investment in equipment and machinery , relative to a baseline reflecting prior law .

when congress first took these steps in 2002 and 2003 , many assumed the measures would boost short - term business investment in qualified assets , imparting a needed boost to domestic gdp .

this expectation rested on the knowledge that expensing lowered the user cost of capital for investment in such assets and expanded the cash flow of companies that relied on internal sources of financial capital to make such investments .

the user cost ( or rental price ) of capital is one of the key influences on business investment decisions .

it combines the opportunity cost of an investment ( i.e. , the highest pretax rate of return a company could earn by investing in a low - risk asset like a u.s. treasury bond ) with its direct costs , such as depreciation , the actual cost of the asset , and income taxes .

in effect , the user cost of capital determines the after - tax rate of return an investment must earn in order to be profitable — and thus worth undertaking .

in general , the larger the user cost of capital , the fewer projects companies can profitably undertake , and the lower their desired capital stock .

in theory , when a change in tax law decreases the user cost of capital , businesses can be expected to increase the amount of capital they wish to own , boosting business investment in the short run , all other things being equal .

how does expensing affect the user cost of capital ? .

as the most accelerated form of depreciation , expensing lowers this cost by reducing the tax burden on the discounted returns to an eligible investment .

this reduction can be considerable .

expensing the cost of an asset is equivalent to the u.s. treasury providing a firm with a tax rebate equal to the firm's marginal tax rate multiplied by the cost of the asset .

it leads to a marginal effective tax rate of 0% on the returns to eligible investments .

several studies have concluded that investment in equipment is somewhat sensitive to changes in the user cost of capital .

estimates of the price elasticity of demand for equipment ( which measures the percentage change in spending on equipment divided by the percentage change in its user cost of capital ) range from - 0.25 to - 0.66 .

some economists argue that the elasticity is probably close to - 0.50 , though a recent study of the impact of bonus depreciation that took into effect frictions in the financing of investment came up with a much larger elasticity estimate: 1.6 .

an elasticity of that size means that a 10% decline in the user cost of capital should result in a 16% rise in business spending on equipment in the short run , all other things being equal .

another significant influence on business investment decisions is cash flow .

there are several reasons why a company may finance new investments largely or entirely from retained earnings .

it may wish to limit the company's exposure to external debt and the risk of default it carries .

or the company may have to rely on retained earnings since it has limited access to debt and equity markets .

younger firms investing in the development of new commercial technologies may find it hard to raise the needed capital in debt or equity markets when the owners know more about the sales and growth potential of their services and products than investors and lenders do .

for companies in such a situation , the cost of internal funds would be lower than the cost of external funds , so they clearly would be better off financing new investments out of retained earnings .

expensing can increase a profitable firm's cash flow in the short run because it allows the firm to deduct the full cost of qualified assets in the tax year when they are placed in service , reducing its tax liability .

but expensing has no such benefit for firms with net operating losses .

while cash flow's role as a driver of business investment makes sense in theory , its actual contribution to such investment has proven difficult to measure or verify in practice .

the contribution of cash flow to business investment ( especially small business investment ) remains unclear .

a few studies have found a significant positive correlation between changes in a firm's net worth and its investment spending , and this correlation was strongest for firms with limited or no access to debt and equity markets .

yet these findings do not prove that firms with relatively high retained earnings relative to net worth invest more than firms with relatively low or negative amounts .

a strong correlation between two factors does not necessarily mean that one caused the other .

in the case of cash flow and business investment , a plausible explanation for the strong correlation was that firms with relatively high cash flows invested more , on average , than firms with relatively low cash flows for reasons that have nothing to do with the relative cost of internal and external funds .

what can be said with certainty is that the relationship between cash flow and business investment is complicated , and that additional research may be needed to assess the impact of the former on the latter .

in theory , full or partial expensing should boost business investment in qualified assets relative to a baseline scenario with no expensing .

this raises the question of how effective ( and cost - effective ) the section 179 and bonus depreciation allowances have been in stimulating business investment , especially during the severe recession of 2007 to 2009 .

several studies have analyzed the effects of the allowances on short - run business investment .

their findings indicated that the allowances did spur a rise in business investment in equipment and standardized software .

but the studies differed over the extent of this increase , among other things .

according to the results of a 2005 study by matt knittel from the department of the treasury , small businesses did not increase their use of the section 179 expensing allowance and the bonus depreciation allowance after both were expanded in 2003 .

specifically , knittel found that the share of small firms claiming the section 179 allowance changed little from 2001 or 2002 to 2003 , when it rose from $25,000 to $100,000 .

similarly , 39% of noncorporate business owners and 54% of small corporations claimed bonus depreciation in 2002 , but these shares actually decreased to 33% for noncorporate business owners and 49% for small corporations in 2003 , even though the bonus depreciation allowance rose from 20% of the cost of qualified assets placed in service in 2002 to 30% in 2003 .

a 2006 study by darrel cohen and jason cummings found that although over half of all c and s corporations claimed bonus depreciation from 2002 to 2004 , only 10% of those companies deemed the allowances an important consideration in determining the timing or amount of qualifying investments .

these findings raised the possibility that many of the investments that benefited from bonus depreciation would have been undertaken without it , but their timing was altered so they would qualify for the allowance .

moreover , the study showed that bonus depreciation had no discernible effect on investment in short - lived assets , such as computer hardware and software .

in another 2006 study , christopher house and matthew shapiro estimated that bonus depreciation had a minor impact on gross domestic product and employment in 2002 and 2003 .

according to their findings , bonus depreciation "probably" led to a cumulative increase in gdp of 0.07% to 0.14% , and in total employment of 100,000 to 200,000 workers , during that period .

in a related analysis , house and shapiro also found that the allowance had a strong impact on investment in qualified assets relative to other assets , and on investment in longer - lived qualified assets relative to those with relatively short depreciation lives .

they estimated an investment price - elasticity of supply for those capital goods that ranged from 6% to 14% .

in a 2007 study , knittel estimated that the take - up rate for the bonus depreciation allowance among corporations from 2002 to 2004 was substantially below 100% , but that the rate did rise over that period .

the take - up rate measures ( as its name implies ) the share of eligible investment for which the allowance was claimed .

according to the results of the study , the take - up rate ranged from 54% in 2002 to 61% in 2004 for c corporations and from 65% in 2002 to 70% in 2004 for s corporations .

though the analysis did not investigate why so many corporations opted to forgo bonus depreciation when they could have taken it , knittel cited two possible explanations .

first , many corporations had net operating losses from 2002 to 2004 , so bonus depreciation offered no immediate benefit to them , or to companies that had loss or credit carry - forwards or claimed new credits .

second , many states disallowed bonus depreciation allowances for the purpose of computing state income tax liability , and that may have deterred some companies from claiming it for federal income tax purposes .

knittel also found that the take - up rate was highest for industries where a small number of companies accounted for most of the investment in long - lived assets , such as telecommunications .

a 2017 study of the impact of bonus depreciation on business investment by eric zwick and james mahon came up with strikingly different results .

using a model that accounted for "frictions" or imperfections in capital markets , they estimated that the allowance had a significant impact on investment in qualifying assets , boosting it by 10.4% from 2001 to 2004 , and by 16.9% from 2008 to 2010 .

these estimates were consistent with the response found by house and shapiro but greater than the results of other studies of the impact of bonus depreciation on business investment .

zwick and mahon noted that their analysis produced higher estimates of the effects of the allowance because it allowed for financial frictions , which caused firms to "sharply discount future deductions , making bonus depreciation more appealing .

the study also found that small and medium - sized firms were much more responsive to bonus depreciation than larger firms .

finally , firms that relied on internal cash reserves were more responsive to the incentive than firms that used debt and equity to finance new investments in qualified property .

there are at least five reasons why it is likely that the allowances had a modest impact on the u.s. economy as a whole since the early 2000s .

first , the design of each allowance limits their impact on the level of overall economic activity .

neither allowance applies to investments in inventory , structures , and land .

and the section 179 allowance phases out once a company's total investment in qualified assets in a tax year exceeds a specified dollar amount ( $2.5 million in 2018 ) .

second , spending on the assets eligible for the two expensing allowances tends to account for a relatively small slice of u.s. business investment .

one measure of this relationship is the value of depreciation allowances claimed by businesses in a tax year .

according to irs data , corporations claimed a total of $621.0 billion in depreciation allowances in the 2013 tax year .

of that amount , section 179 allowances amounted to $13.2 billion ( or 2.1% of the total amount ) and bonus depreciation allowances came to $217.1 billion ( or 35.0% of the total amount ) .

in total , the two allowances represented less than 40% of total corporate depreciation allowances that year .

third , expensing is likely to impart less of a stimulus when an economy is mired in a recession than when it is expanding .

this is because business investment generally is driven more by current economic conditions and the short - term outlook for sales and earnings than it is by tax considerations .

an increase in expensing when an economy is contracting and many companies are burdened with excess capacity and increasing debt is likely to affect the timing of some planned investments .

still , the increase by itself is unlikely to spur a permanent increase in the domestic capital stock under those conditions .

some companies may accelerate planned investments to take advantage of the enhanced expensing , but that does not necessarily mean that a short - term increase in net investment reflects an increase in the desired capital stock of the many companies experiencing declines in profits or financial losses .

fourth , an investment tax subsidy like expensing offers no immediate benefit to companies with nols .

in this case , a company claiming an expensing allowance would simply increase the size of its nol .

fifth , the firm - level benefit from the section 179 expensing and section 168 ( k ) bonus depreciation allowances depends on the length of a qualified asset's recovery period .

the house - shapiro study found that the bonus depreciation allowances enacted for 2002 and 2003 boosted business investment , but the increase was concentrated among long - lived equipment .

and the cohen - cummins study concluded that the same provisions had no effect on investment in eligible short - lived assets .

this difference in investment stemmed from the fact that the net present value of the tax benefit was proportional to the recovery period of the qualified assets .

the forces shaping the stimulative potential of section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation have affected their cost - effectiveness as a means of boosting economic activity .

other approaches may produce better results , especially those that quickly put more money in the hands of unemployed individuals .

a 2010 analysis by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) shed light on the comparative benefits of alternative policies for economic stimulus .

for example , it estimated that increasing financial aid to the unemployed would have increased gdp from $0.70 to $1.90 for each $1.00 of budgetary cost from 2010 to 2015 ; by contrast , allowing full or partial expensing of investment costs would have raised gdp from $0.20 to $1.00 for each $1.00 of budgetary cost .

efficiency lies at the core of economic theory and analysis .

it refers to the allocation of resources in an economy and how that allocation affects the welfare of consumers and of producers .

an allocation of resources is considered efficient when it yields the greatest possible economic surplus ( which is the total value to consumers of the goods and services they purchase minus the total cost to sellers of providing the goods and services ) , given existing constraints on the supply of labor and capital and the productivity of that capital .

but when the allocation becomes inefficient , some of the possible gains from exchanges among buyers and sellers are not realized .

for example , an allocation of resources is deemed inefficient when most suppliers of a good fail to produce it at the lowest marginal cost permitted by current technology .

in this case , a shift in supply from high - cost producers to low - cost producers , driven by consumers seeking greater value , would lower the economic cost of providing the good , perhaps increasing any economic surplus .

expensing is equivalent to exempting from taxation the normal returns on investment .

as such , it would be the preferred method of capital cost recovery under a consumption tax , such as a flat tax or a value - added tax .

but under an income tax , expensing becomes a tax preference because it allows those normal returns to go untaxed .

when this happens , new opportunities for tax arbitrage open up .

expensing allows taxpayers to borrow funds to purchase new depreciable assets , deduct the full cost of those assets in the year they are placed in service , and deduct interest payments on the debt incurred to acquire the assets , leading to a negative marginal effective tax rate on the returns to those investments .

how does the expensing allowance affect the allocation of capital within an economy ? .

in theory , all taxes , except lump - sum taxes , generate inefficient economic outcomes because they influence the decisions of consumers and producers in ways that leave one group or the other , or both , worse off .

income taxes have this effect because they distort the economic choices facing individual and business taxpayers , leading them to allocate resources on the basis of how the taxes affect the costs and benefits of the goods and services they buy and sell , rather than according to their actual costs and benefits .

such a distortion entails what economists call a deadweight loss: a condition where the amount of revenue raised by a tax is less than the loss of economic welfare associated with it .

the section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances distort the allocation of resources in an economy by driving a wedge between the return on investment in favored assets and the return on investment in all other assets .

other things being equal , expensing increases the after - tax rates of return for investments in favored assets relative to the after - tax rates of return for investments in all other assets .

as a result , it could encourage inefficient levels of investment in favored assets , at least in the short run , depriving more productive investments with lower after - tax rates of return of needed capital .

in general , how beneficial is expensing to companies ? .

one way to illustrate the potential tax benefit is to show how expensing affects the marginal effective tax rate on the returns to an investment .

this rate encapsulates the tax provisions that affect the returns on an investment and is calculated by subtracting the expected after - tax rate of return on a new investment from the expected pretax rate of return and dividing by the pretax rate of return .

under expensing , the pretax and after - tax rates of return are the same for the investment , which means that expensing produces a marginal effective tax rate of 0% .

this equivalence reflects a key effect of expensing: it reduces the total after - tax return over the life of an eligible asset and its total cost by the same factor: an investor's marginal tax rate .

for example , if a small business owner's income is taxed at a rate of 35% , and the entire cost of a depreciable asset is expensed , the federal government effectively becomes a partner in the investment with a 35% interest .

through the tax code , the federal government assumes 35% of the cost of the asset by allowing its entire cost to be deducted in the first year of use , but it shares in 35% of the income earned by the investment in subsequent years , assuming no change in the owner's tax rate .

by the same token , expensing allows the small business owner to receive 65% of the returns from the investment over its lifetime but to bear only 65% of the cost .

is there evidence that the two section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances have caused shifts in the size and composition of the domestic capital stock in recent decades ? .

this question is difficult to answer , largely because no studies have been done that assess the impact of either allowance on capital formation in the period they have been available .

given that the expensing allowance lowers the cost of capital and can boost the cash flow of firms claiming it , and that investment in many of the assets eligible for the allowance seems at least somewhat sensitive to changes in the cost of capital , it would be reasonable to conclude that the allowance may have caused domestic investment in those assets to be greater than it otherwise would have been .

but it can also be argued that much of this additional investment would have taken place in any event , and that the main effect of expensing is to accelerate the timing of those investments so the firms making them can take advantage of the tax subsidy .

most economists would agree that investment in the assets eligible for the section 179 expensing allowance is driven more by expectations for future growth in sales and profits by firms that purchase these assets , the nature of the assets , and conditions in debt and equity markets than by tax considerations .

this view finds some support in the available data on use of the expensing allowance: although 22% of corporations filing federal tax returns claimed the allowance from 1999 through 2003 , the total value of section 179 property placed in service was equal to 5% of gross domestic investment in equipment and computer software .

when seen through the lens of economic theory , expensing has efficiency effects that may worsen the deadweight loss associated with the federal tax code .

under the reasonable assumption that the amount of capital in the economy is fixed in the short run , a tax subsidy like the allowance is likely to divert some capital away from relatively productive uses and into tax - favored ones .

according to standard economic theory , in an economy free of significant market failures and ruled by competitive markets , a policy of neutral or uniform taxation of capital income minimizes the efficiency losses associated with business income taxation .

but the section 179 and section 168 ( k ) allowances encourage firms to invest in a specific set of assets .

as such , they represent a departure from the norm of neutral taxation .

in addition , expensing arguably distorts a firm's incentives to grow .

like any subsidy targeted at firms of a certain size , the section 179 allowance gives smaller firms an incentive to limit their investment so they can continue to benefit from the allowance .

such an effect is the result of the rise in the marginal effective tax rate on the income earned by qualified assets over the allowance's phaseout range ( $2.5 million to $3.5 million in 2018 ) .

douglas holtz - eakin , a former director of the congressional budget office , has labeled this incentive effect a "tax on growth by small firms. .

equity is another basic concept in economic analysis .

it generally refers to the distribution of income among the individuals or households .

in the field of public finance , equity usually denotes the distribution of after - tax income among households or individuals .

economists who analyze the equity effects of income taxes focus on two kinds of equity: horizontal equity and vertical equity .

a tax is considered horizontally equitable if it imposes similar burdens on individuals with similar incomes or living standards .

and a tax system is said to be vertically equitable if the burdens it imposes vary according to an individual's or household's ability to pay .

the principle of vertical equity provides the intellectual foundation for a progressive income tax system .

under such a system , an individual's tax liability , measured as a fraction of income , rises with income .

the current federal income tax system may lean more in the direction of vertical equity than horizontal equity .

many individuals with similar incomes before taxes end up in the same tax bracket .

but because of existing tax preferences ( eg , deductions , preferential rates , deferrals , exclusions , exemptions , and credits ) , a substantial number of individuals with similar before - tax incomes end up being taxed at different effective rates .

at the same time , the income received by those with relatively high pretax incomes is generally taxed at higher rates than the incomes of those with relatively low pretax incomes .

how does the expensing allowance affect vertical and horizontal equity ? .

to answer this question , one must consider who the main recipients of the tax benefits associated with the expensing allowance are and how those benefits affect the recipients' federal income tax burden .

the main direct tax benefit from the allowance is a reduction in the marginal effective tax rate on the income earned by eligible assets .

how much of a reduction depends on the proportion of an asset's cost that is expensed .

as was noted earlier , if the entire cost is expensed , then the marginal effective rate on the returns falls to zero .

yet the allowance does not change the actual marginal rates at which this income is taxed .

accelerated depreciation does not reduce the federal taxes paid on the stream of income earned by an asset over its useful life .

rather , it delays or defers the payment of taxes on that income by enabling firms to take a larger share of depreciation deductions for the asset in its first year or two of use than would be possible under the macrs .

this front loading of depreciation allowances increases the present discounted value of the tax savings from depreciation relative to other depreciation schedules such as the macrs .

most assets eligible for the section 179 allowance are held by smaller firms .

therefore , any gains in profits due to the allowance go to small business owners .

since the tax benefits associated with capital income tend to be concentrated in upper - income households , it can be argued that the expensing allowance tilts the federal income tax away from vertical equity .

the allowance lowers the effective tax burden on small business income relative to other sources of income .

while this effect makes investment in qualified assets more attractive , it does not change the fact that the allowance itself has no effect on the nominal taxes paid by small business owners over time on the income from eligible assets .

over the useful life of such an asset , the stream of depreciation deductions remains the same , regardless of whether its cost is expensed or not .

as a result , it seems fair to conclude that the allowance has no lasting effect on the distribution of after - tax incomes .

yet another policy issue raised by the section 179 and section 168 ( k ) expensing allowances concerns their impact on the cost of tax compliance for business taxpayers .

most public finance economists agree that a key element of a desirable income tax system is that it imposes relatively low costs for administration and compliance .

research indicates that those costs hinge on three factors: ( 1 ) the records that must be kept in order to comply with tax laws , ( 2 ) the complexity of those laws , and ( 3 ) the types of income subject to taxation .

most public finance economists would also agree that the federal income tax system fails this test on all counts .

in their view , the costs of complying with tax laws and regulations and of collecting income taxes and enforcing compliance with those laws are needlessly high , and the primary cause is the growing complexity of the federal tax code .

p.l .

115-97 appears to have done little to counter that trend and may have worsened it , particularly with regard to the new 20% deduction for passthrough business income under section 199a .

a large number of small business owners have long complained about the costs imposed on them by the record keeping and filings required by federal income and employment taxes .

the two expensing allowances address this concern by simplifying tax accounting for depreciation .

it takes less time and less paperwork to write off the entire cost of a depreciable asset in its first year of use than it does to write off that cost over a longer period using allowable depreciation schedules .

but this advantage does come with a cost of its own: the rules governing the use of the allowances complicate the tasks of administering and complying with the tax code .

tax simplification is a long - standing policy objective for many small business owners .

the relatively high cost of complying with federal tax laws for many small businesses lies behind this stance .

according to a study prepared for the office of advocacy at the small business administration ( sba ) , the estimated cost per u.s. employee for tax compliance in 2000 was $665 for all firms , $1,202 for firms with fewer than 20 employees , $625 for firms with 20 to 499 employees , and $562 for firms with 500 or more employees .

similarly , a study by four researchers of 2004 business tax return data , which was included in the proceedings of the national tax association's 100 th annual conference on taxation , found that the direct monetary cost per employee of complying with the federal income tax ranged from $805 for firms with less than $10,000 in total assets to $264 for firms with more than $1 million in assets .

and a 2010 study by two economists from lafayette college ( also prepared for the sba ) estimated that the federal tax compliance cost per employee in 2008 was $1,584 for firms with fewer than 20 employees , $760 for firms with 20 to 499 employees , and $517 for firms with 500 or more employees .

these findings demonstrate that the cost of business tax compliance is inversely proportional to firm size .

