the budget has become a central issue in american politics because it reflects decisionsconcerning how big the federal government should be and priorities for what the government shoulddo .

how those decisions should be made , by whom and under what constraints has also become apart of the modern political dialog .

although the basic framework for budgeting has remainedrelatively stable in recent years , there has been a recurring reexamination of the budget process todetermine if it works to meet the changing demands of government .

 ( 1 ) in an earlier era of government reform , william f. willoughby , the director of the institutefor government research , wrote that: among the specific problems of public administrationnone exceeds in importance that of the establishment of an orderly and efficient system for thehandling of the financial affairs of the government .

 ( 2 ) arguably , this is no less true today than it was then , and its salience is illustrated by thenumber and variety of proposals made to change one or more aspects of the budget process in recentyears .

this report includes five reform issues on which congress has consistently demonstrated ahigh level of interest , focused on specifically defined reform proposals .

some of these issues , suchas biennial budgeting , have extensive legislative histories .

these proposals represent just a part ofthe total spectrum of proposals that have been discussed , both inside and outside of congress .

thisreport does not include those reform issues that are primarily conceptual in nature .

such issuesreflect a level of dissatisfaction with the current process , but they generally are not focused on aspecific single reform option .

examples of these include: authorization / appropriations issues , which concern the relationship betweenauthorizations and appropriations , including timing and sequencing issues ; reconciliation process issues , which concern the amount of time available forconsidering reconciliation bills , the specificity allowed for reconciliation instructions , whetherreconciliation may be used only to create budgetary savings , and the application of the byrd ruleprohibiting extraneous provisions in reconciliation bills in the senate ; impoundment reform issues , which concern amended deferral rules or anexpedited rescission process ; and budget presentation and structure issues , which concern separate presentationsfor regulatory , capital , or tax expenditure budgets , as well as other issues related to the timing orcontents of the president's budget or mid - session review .

this report also does not include proposals to reform the budgetary mechanisms for specificprograms , such as instituting off - budget status for trust funds or establishing a lock - box mechanismas part of social security and medicare reform proposals .

finally , this report does not include reform proposals based on amending the u.s.constitution , such as presidential item veto authority , a limitation on the authority of the federalgovernment to raise taxes , or a balanced budget requirement .

 ( 3 ) for a more comprehensive accounting of current budget process reform measures and theirlegislative history , see crs report rl31479 ( pdf ) , federal budget process reform: proposals andlegislative actions in the 107th congress , by [author name scrubbed .

although the constitution requires that "all bills for raising revenue shall originate in thehouse of representatives," it is otherwise silent regarding specific guidelines for the considerationof revenue or spending legislation .

 ( 4 ) the constitution , however , does provide congress authority "tolay and collect taxes , duties , imposts and excises , to pay the debts and provide for the commondefence and general welfare of the united states" ( 5 ) and requires that "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , butin consequence of appropriations made by law. .

 ( 6 ) through these provisions , the constitution grants congress the"power of the purse. .

this general authority has been subsequently fleshed out through a numberof laws and congressional rules that underpin the federal budget process .

 ( 7 ) two statutes in particularprovide much of the basic legal framework .

the first key statute is the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( p.l .

13 , 67th congress , 42stat .

20-27 ) .

now codified in title 31 of the united states code , this act established the statutorybasis for an executive budget process .

it gives the president responsibility for submitting tocongress a proposed budget for the entire federal government at the beginning of each year .

it alsocreated the bureau of the budget ( reorganized as the office of management and budget ( omb ) in1970 ) to assist him in carrying out his responsibilities , and the general accounting office ( gao ) to assist congress as the principal auditing agency of the federal government .

the second key statute is the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 , 88 stat .

297-339 ) .

the provisions of this act have been modified on a number ofoccasions , but it remains the statutory basis for the congressional budget process .

the act providesfor the annual adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget as a mechanism for coordinatingand facilitating congressional budgetary decision making .

it also established the house and senatebudget committees with jurisdiction over the annual budget resolution , and created thecongressional budget office ( cbo ) to provide budgetary information and analysis to congressindependent of the executive branch .

in addition , the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended ( title ii of p.l .

99-177 , 99 stat .

1038-1101 ) , has had significant impact on budgetary procedures andoutcomes by creating additional control mechanisms .

this act established the sequester mechanismas a means to enforce statutory budget requirements .

currently , there are separate mechanisms tocontrol direct spending and revenues ( the pay - as - you - go , or paygo , process ) and discretionaryspending ( spending caps ) .

 ( 8 ) the budgetary impact of all legislation is scored by omb , and reported three times each year ( apreview with the president's budget submission , an update with the mid - session review of thebudget , and a final report within 15 days after congress adjourns ) .

if the final report for either thepaygo or spending caps indicates that the statutory requirements of that mechanism have beenbreached , the president is required to issue an order making across - the - board cuts of nonexemptspending programs subject to that control mechanism .

most of the budget enforcement mechanisms under the congressional budget act arepermanent .

 ( 14 ) incontrast , key enforcement procedures first established by the budget enforcement act ( bea , titlexiii of p.l .

101-508 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ) expire at the end of fy2002 ( i.e. , september 30 , 2002 ) .

under the bea , budget legislation is constrained by statutory limits ondiscretionary spending and a "pay - as - you - go" ( paygo ) requirement for direct spending and revenuelegislation .

the spending caps and paygo requirement are enforced by sequestration - - whichinvolves automatic , largely across - the - board spending cuts - - and by points of order while legislationis considered on the senate floor .

the discretionary spending sequestration process and the senatepoints of order expire at the end of fy2002 .

the paygo requirement also expires at the end offy2002 , but the paygo sequestration process covers the net effects , through fy2006 , of newdirect spending and revenue legislation enacted before the end of fy2002 .

in his fy2002 budget,president bush proposed to extend the bea enforcement procedures for several years .

in hisfy2003 budget , however , president bush did not explicitly advocate an extension of theseprocedures , but indicated that his "administration will work with congress ... to develop budgetenforcement mechanisms," including extending the bea procedures .

 ( 15 ) .

conflict is inherent in budgeting because decisions are made regarding who receives benefitsand who does not , and who pays and who does not .

by itself the process in which these decisionsare made cannot eliminate substantive differences in budgetary goals within congress or betweencongress and the president .

a structure for consideration of budgetary decisions , however , cansometimes reduce or exacerbate budgetary conflict .

some members of congress argue that theannual adoption of the congressional budget in the form of a concurrent resolution , without theformal involvement of the president , discourages cooperation between congress and the presidentearly in the process .

they argue that this contributes to the recurring inability of congress and thepresident to enact spending and tax legislation by the beginning of the fiscal year .

some membersof congress , as well as president bush , ( 29 ) have proposed to transform the annual congressional budget froma concurrent resolution to a joint resolution , and thereby formally and directly involve the presidentin congressional deliberations on the budget early in the process .

like bills , joint resolutions are alegislative form used to make law .

in recent years , some members of congress have shown an interest in changing the waycongress and the executive budget for emergencies or unanticipated situations .

currently , congressprovides additional funds during the fiscal year , usually in supplemental appropriations , to respondto specific natural disasters and other emergency , or unanticipated , situations .

congress and thepresident usually designate the additional spending as an "emergency requirement," effectivelyexempting it from budget constraints established under the budget enforcement act ( bea ) of 1990,as amended .

 ( 40 ) somemembers of congress , as well as president george w. bush , ( 41 ) have proposed to changethis practice by creating a reserve fund for emergencies , with the appropriation of such funds tiedto meeting specific criteria regarding what constitutes an emergency .

delays in the consideration and enactment of appropriations have been a source of chronicdifficulties in the budget process .

when delays prevent the enactment of regular appropriationsbefore the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) , congress and the president typically enact stop - gapfunding in the form of continuing resolutions ( crs ) .

if neither the regular appropriation for anagency nor a continuing resolution is enacted , funding will lapse for that agency .

such a lapse , orfunding gap , will result in a shutdown of the affected agency .

one possible reform of the budgetprocess that has been proposed is to provide for the automatic continuation of appropriations at thestart of a fiscal year in the absence of an agency's regular appropriation , to avert shutdowns .

 ( 60 ) in some ways , an automatic continuing resolution is an alternative to biennial budgeting asa method for dealing with delays in the consideration and enactment of budgetary legislation .

ratherthan provide a longer , defined period for consideration , an automatic continuing resolution wouldprovide an indefinite period , and alleviate the most dire consequence of failure to enactappropriations in a timely fashion .

one of the chief congressional complaints about the budget process in recent years has beenthe amount of time it requires .

despite the perceived or actual permanence of much federalspending , the process of formulating , enacting , and executing budgets has remained characteristicallyannual .

this annual budget cycle poses a dilemma for congress .

on the one hand , annual reviewof spending legislation can afford congress the opportunity to maximize its influence concerningthe operation of various programs and policies .

on the other hand , annual action on budgetarymatters consumes a significant amount of congress's time , resulting in a desire by some membersto reduce the number or frequency of budget measures that need to be considered .

one possiblereform that has been proposed to accomplish this is to change the budget cycle to 2 years from oneyear .

 ( 70 ) .

the efficient operation of an annual budget cycle is , in many ways , dependent on the timelyenactment of budgetary legislation .

consideration of budget questions in the form of concurrentresolutions on the budget , authorization measures , regular appropriations , supplementalappropriations , continuing resolutions , public debt legislation , revenue measures , and reconciliationbills are often closely linked so that delays in consideration of one measure will have an impact onseveral other budgetary measures .

one consequence of this is that budgetary legislation , particularlyfinal action on regular appropriations measures , has significantly contributed to the need forextended congressional sessions .

as shown in table 3 , final action in recent years on the lastregular appropriations bill ( either separately or as part of an omnibus measure ) has occurred anaverage of 75 days after the start of the fiscal year on october 1 .

considering budgetary legislationwith a duration of 2 years might be one way to reduce the likelihood that congress would need toendure extended sessions as frequently .

table 3 .

dates of enactment of last regular appropriationslegislation , fy1996-fy2002 source: calendars of the house of representatives .

one consistent source of support for biennial budgeting has been the presidency .

theadministrations of the past four presidents have all supported the idea of biennial budgeting .

 ( 71 ) one of the most visibleexamples of this occurred during the clinton administration .

the 1993 report of the nationalperformance review ( the gore report ) noted , "considerable time could be saved - - and used moreeffectively - - in both the executive and legislative branches of government if budgets andappropriations were moved to a biennial cycle. .

 ( 72 ) .

because budgeting for the federal government encompasses a number of processes , biennialbudgeting can have several meanings .

biennial budgeting can involve 2-year budget resolutions,2-year appropriations , and multiyear authorizations .

in addition , biennial budget proposals typicallyrequire that executive branch planning and performance reviews be revised so that they be based ona 2-year cycle .

typically , biennial budgeting proposals , such as h.r .

981 ( 107th congress , thebudget responsibility and efficiency act of 2001 ) , include all three aspects of congressionalbudgeting , although proposals embracing only one or two are possible options .

for example , thebiennial budgeting component of a reform proposal reported by the senate rules and administrationcommittee in 1994 ( s. 1824 , 103rd congress , the legislative reorganization act of1994 ) included 2-year budget resolutions and multiyear authorizations , but not 2-year appropriations .

another significant option concerns the period for which money will be appropriated .

one optionwould be to retain the current system of fiscal years , and enact budgetary legislation allocatedbetween two one - year periods .

alternately , biennial appropriations could provide funding for theentire 2-year fiscal period , increasing flexibility for apportioning money over the course of thebiennium .

advocates of biennial budgeting feel that reducing the number of times that congress hasto consider budget questions will likewise reduce the amount of time consumed by the process .

supporters project that the benefits of a 2-year cycle would include more time for congress toconduct agency and program oversight , and more time for budget planning within congress , as wellas better long - range planning by federal agencies and by state and local governments .

proposals to convert the federal budget process to a 2-year cycle are also favored by somewho believe that a 2-year cycle provides greater flexibility with regard to deadlines .

without thepressure to enact budgetary legislation every year , there would be greater time available for makingdecisions within the budget cycle , and more efficient coordination of budgetary decisions .

this , theyassert , would result in fewer delays and more timely enactment of necessary legislation .

supporters also point to the multiyear nature of the summit agreements between congressand the president that have been a part of the budget process for more than a decade as evidence ofthe efficacy of multiyear budgeting , and as a major factor in recent years for promoting moreefficient consideration of budgetary legislation .

critics of biennial budgeting have countered by arguing that some of the projected benefitscould prove to be illusory .

reducing the number of times that congress considers budget matters,they suggest , may only raise the stakes , and thereby heighten the possibility for conflict and increaseddelay .

in addition , enacting a budget resolution and spending legislation every other year could beeffective in reducing congressional workload or aiding longer - term planning only in the second yearof the cycle .

with only a limited ability to anticipate future conditions , critics argue that a 2-yearcycle could require congress to choose between allowing the president greater latitude for makingbudgetary adjustments , or engaging in mid - cycle corrections to a degree that could nullify anyanticipated time savings or planning advantages .

furthermore , they argue that annual review ofappropriations requests is an important part of oversight that would be lost under a biennial budget,with no guarantee that a separate oversight session would be effective .

almost from the time that the congressional budget act was enacted in 1974 , budget processreform has been a topic of congressional interest , and biennial budgeting was discussed at least asfar back as the 95th congress ( 1977-1978 ) .

 ( 73 ) hearings on the subject of budget process reform have oftenincluded testimony concerning biennial budgeting .

in addition , on several occasions both the houseand the senate have conducted hearings specifically on the topic of biennial budgeting .

 ( 74 ) in addition to hearings,congressional interest has been demonstrated by survey , ( 75 ) and by cosponsorship of those proposals that have beenintroduced .

 ( 76 ) in the house , jurisdiction over budget process reform generally is currently shared by thecommittees on rules and the budget .

both have considered the issue of biennial budgeting .

duringthe 106th congress , the house committee on rules conducted three days of hearings on the subjectof biennial budgeting .

 ( 77 ) the house subsequently considered a biennial budget proposal in the form of an amendment duringconsideration of h.r .

853 , the comprehensive budget process reform act .

 ( 78 ) on may 16 , 2000 , theamendment providing for a biennial budget was rejected , 201-217 .

 ( 79 ) in the 107th congress , a biennial budgeting proposal was reported and placed on the unioncalendar for the first time .

on march 13 , 2001 , h.r .

981 , the budget responsibilityand efficiency act , was introduced in the house by representative charles f. bass , and referred tothe committee on the budget for a period ending not later than april 13 , 2001 , and in addition tothe committee on rules and the committee on government reform for a period to be determinedsubsequently by the speaker .

the period of the referrals was extended on several occasions and themeasure was reported with an amendment by the committee on the budget on september 5 , 2001 ( h.rept .

107-200 , part 1 ) .

rather than put the federal budget on a 2-year cycle , the committeeamendment substituted a proposal for the creation of a commission on federal budget concepts thatwould evaluate and make recommendations on a number of budget process issues .

the committeeon rules subsequently reported the measure on november 14 , 2001 ( h.rept .

107-200 , part 2 ) , andthe committee on government reform was discharged from further consideration on the same day .

as reported by the committee on rules , h.r .

981 included 2-year budget resolutions,2-year appropriations , and multiyear authorizations .

in the senate , jurisdiction over the budget process is shared by the committees ongovernmental affairs and the budget under the order of august 4 , 1977 , which provides that if onecommittee reports a measure , the other has 30 days to report or be discharged from furtherconsideration .

proposals for a 2-year budget cycle have previously been reported by thegovernmental affairs committee in 1988 ( s. 2478 , s.rept .

100-499 ) ,1990 ( s. 29 , s.rept .

101-254 ) , and 1997 ( s. 261 , s.rept105-72 ) .

all three of these proposals took a comprehensive approach to biennial budgeting , andincluded 2-year budget resolutions , 2-year appropriations , and multiyear authorizations .

also , in 1993 , both the senate and house members of the joint committee on theorganization of congress included proposals for a 2-year budget cycle in their recommendations totheir respective chambers ( s.rept .

103-215 , vol .

1 , and h.rept .

103-413 , vol .

1 ) .

inthe senate , these recommendations were subsequently introduced as s. 1824 , referredto the committee on rules and administration , and reported in 1994 ( s.rept .

103-297 ) .

as noted above , in contrast to the comprehensive approach to biennial budgeting taken most biennialbudgeting proposals , s. 1824 , as reported , included 2-year budget resolutions andmultiyear authorizations , but not 2-year appropriations .

the most recent biennial budgeting measure to be reported in the senate is s. 92 ( 106th congress ) .

on january 19 , 1999 , two bills were introduced by senator pete v. domeniciincluding biennial budgeting provisions: s. 93 , the budget enforcement act of 1999,and s. 92 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act .

both were referred to the committeeon governmental affairs and the committee on the budget , jointly .

the two committees held a jointhearing on budget process reform on january 27 , 1999 , including the subject of biennial budgeting .

s. 92 was subsequently considered by the committee on governmental affairs on march 4 , 1999,and ordered reported with an amendment ( a complete substitute making a number of technicalcorrections ) .

a written report was filed on march 10 , 1999 ( s.rept .

106-12 ) .

the senate took nofurther action on the proposal in the 106th congress .

