lapses in the department of energy's ( doe ) security and counterintelligence program haveplagued doe since 1977 , when the department was established through the merger of 40government organizations , including the energy research and development administration and thefederal energy administration .

 ( 1 ) some policymakers expected the new agency to focus thegovernment's energy - related enterprises almost solely on the energy crisis .

others saw doe as anunsuccessful attempt to fuse vastly diverse organizations , many with significantly different , if notconflicting missions .

one legacy of its origin is that doe has struggled to balance open scientific inquiry with thesecurity under which some of those scientific inquiries must be conducted .

this inherent tension hasled many observers to question whether doe's highly classified weapons - related program hasreceived sufficient attention , particularly with regard to counterintelligence ( ci ) .

due to numerousproblems with the ci program , the clinton administration issued presidential decision directive61 ( pdd - 61 ) , which fundamentally restructured doe's ci program .

among other changes , pdd - 61mandated that the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) assume leadership of doe's ci program,an initiative which continues to this day .

in 1999 , congress took a further step and established thesemi - autonomous national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) to manage doe's nationalsecurity - related programs , including doe's sensitive weapons laboratories .

particularly concernedabout ci , congress provided nnsa with its own ci office , but maintained a separate ci office indoe .

though representing separate organizations , the two ci offices share resources , funds , andpersonnel for some programs .

doe and nnsa facilities have been and will continue to be a major target of foreignintelligence services , friendly , as well as hostile , according to the president's foreign intelligenceadvisory board ( pfiab ) .

 ( 2 ) although energy department officials are taking steps to confront this challenge , the current doeand nnsa bifurcated ci structure continues to raise questions about the effectiveness of such anapproach to address such threats to the u.s. national security .

 ( 3 ) .

march 1999 marked a turning point in doe's ci program when energy secretary billrichardson fired los alamos national security laboratory scientist wen ho lee because leeallegedly had failed a polygraph .

 ( 6 ) ( other allegations included that lee failed to notify officials aboutcertain contacts with people in the people's republic of china ( prc ) , to properly safeguardclassified material and to cooperate on security matters .

lee pled guilty to one felony count ofunlawful retention of national defense information ; the government dropped 58 additionalcounts .

 ( 7 ) ) in may , abipartisan house select committee released a declassified version of its report charging the prcwith having stolen nuclear weapons secrets from the united states .

finally , in june , the president'sforeign intelligence advisory board ( pfiab ) , for the first time in its more than 38-year history ofproviding the president counsel on intelligence matters , publicly released one of its reports .

itcriticized doe for the "worst" security record on secrecy that panel members said they hadencountered .

 ( 8 ) althoughdismissing assertions of wholesale losses of nuclear weapons technology through espionage , thepfiab panel did concur , on balance , with the intelligence community's assessment that the prc had obtained by espionage classified u.s. nuclear weapons information that probably acceleratedits program to develop future nuclear weapons .

 ( 9 ) in response , congress and the president approved legislationestablishing nnsa ( 10 ) to manage the department's national security - related nuclear programs .

 ( 11 ) as part of the restructuring , congress proposed creating dual ci offices in doe and nnsa.within doe , the already - existing office of counterintelligence ( oci ) was codified and maderesponsible for developing ci policy for both doe and nnsa ; but , was only authorized to implement that policy at non - nnsa facilities .

within nnsa , the office of defense nuclearcounterintelligence ( nnsa / odnci ) was created to implement ci policy , but only at nnsafacilities .

conferees stipulated in the statute that a presidentially appointed , senate confirmed undersecretary for nuclear security was designated to serve as nnsa administrator .

the nnsaadministrator would report to the energy secretary .

in urging reorganization , conferees cited the report by the president's foreign intelligenceadvisory board ( pfiab ) that blamed poor organization and a failure of accountability for doe'sci failures .

the report also criticized doe for being a dysfunctional bureaucracy incapable ofreforming itself .

 ( 12 ) one result of this dual office is a partially bifurcated ci structure ( the two offices shareresources , funds , and personnel for some programs ( 13 ) ) that has sparked debate over its effectiveness , particularly inlight of emerging non - traditional counterintelligence threats .

specifically , critics have warned thatinadequate communication and coordination between the two offices could threaten sensitive ci investigations .

supporters argue that a separate , dedicated ci office within nnsa is necessary ifcounterintelligence is to receive the focus it warrants .

observers have focused on two inter - related questions .

first , are doe and nnsaaccomplishing their ci missions ? .

second , is the current partially bifurcated ci managementstructure within doe and nnsa the most effective approach to ci management ? .

congress , of course , could choose to maintain the current organizational structure .

 ( 29 ) if congress , however,ultimately decides to modify the structure , a number of organizational approaches have beenproposed .

the range of alternatives currently being discussed include the following: ( 1 ) maintainthe status quo ; ( 2 ) completely separate doe and nnsa ; ( 3 ) consolidate ci implementation undernnsa , and leave ci policymaking in doe ; and ( 4 ) consolidate all counterintelligence - - bothpolicymaking and implementation - - either within doe , or , conversely , within nnsa .

doe's office of counterintelligence would continue to be responsible for developing cipolicy across doe ( including the nnsa ) but implementing that policy only at non - nnsa facilities .

 ( nnsa / odnci ) would continue to implement ci policy at nnsa facilities .

proponents of the status quo point to congressional concern in 1999 that doe was failingto focus necessary and appropriate attention on ci .

the semi - autonomous nnsa and its office ofnuclear counterintelligence , they argue , was established for the express purpose of having one entityoutside of doe focus on , and be held accountable for , implementing ci policy at doe's sensitivenuclear and national security programs , including its weapons labs .

the current structure , it issuggested , accomplishes that goal while maintaining a reasonably close integration of programactivities .

opponents counter that the current structure produces "inefficiency , confusion,unnecessary contention , and mis - communication. .

 ( 30 ) they also suggest that in some areas , the nnsa structure withindoe has exacerbated the general problem of too many layers in doe , particularly with respect tocounterintelligence .

 ( 31 ) .

this approach is a complete separation of doe and nnsa counterintelligence programs,with oci providing ci support to doe , and nnsa / odnci providing ci support to nnsa .

proponents suggest that this approach would establish clearer lines of authority for ci within doeand nnsa , which would improve communication and coordination .

opponents counter that suchan arrangement would produce chaos at the field level and could lead to future problems ofredundancy , coordination , communications , and relations with law enforcement .

 ( 32 ) .

the third approach consolidates all doe ci implementation under nnsa , leaving doe'soffice of counterintelligence in charge of formulating all ci policy .

proponents suggest that thisapproach would support an integrated and coordinated ci operational activity and result in a moreeffective allocation of resources by permitting nnsa to focus its resources on ci implementationand doe to target its efforts on policy formulation .

they also argue that nnsa oversees the mostsensitive classified activities within doe and therefore is best suited to implement all ci activitiesacross doe .

opponents counter that this approach would leave in place two ci offices , one withpolicymaking responsibilities and one with operational responsibilities , thereby contributing tocontinuing confusion as to roles and mission .

the final approach consolidates the two ci programs , either under the control of the energysecretary , or under the control of the nnsa administrator .

proponents of doe consolidation assertthat the importance of ci argues for a consolidated effort controlled by the energy secretary .

theyalso contend such a consolidation would highlight ci as a department - wide mission that includesprotecting leading - edge technologies , critical infrastructure , and national nuclear weapons secrets,as well as protecting doe facilities against international terrorist attacks .

they point out that muchof doe's national security - related work focuses on issues other than just those related to nuclearweapons and , therefore , is not limited to nnsa sites .

 ( 33 ) opponents counter that consolidating ci under doe control would be inconsistent withcongress' intent to maximize nnsa autonomy in all areas , and particularly with regard to ci,because of doe's perceived deeply rooted anti - security culture .

they trace doe's anti - security biasto the longstanding tension between science and security , and assert that only a semi - autonomousagency such as nnsa can establish a cultural environment that values security .

 ( 34 ) although both sides dispute where a consolidated program should be housed , neitherproponents or opponents question that consolidation will improve accountability , administration,communication , and coordination , all essential qualities , they suggest of an effective ciprogram .

 ( 35 ) .

