title i , part a , of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) authorizes federal aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other pupils attending schools with relatively high concentrations of pupils from low - income families in pre - kindergarten through grade 12 .

title i - a is the largest federal elementary and secondary education assistance program , with services provided to ( 1 ) over 90% of all leas ; ( 2 ) approximately 45,000 ( 48% of all ) public schools ; and ( 3 ) approximately 15.8 million ( 33% of all ) pupils , including approximately 167,000 pupils attending private schools .

four - fifths of all pupils served are in pre - kindergarten through grade 6 , while only 5% of pupils served are in grades 10-12 .

on january 8 , 2002 , the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba ) , an act to extend and revise the esea , was signed into law as p.l .

107-110 .

among other provisions , this act builds upon title i - a provisions adopted initially in the improving america's schools act ( iasa ) of 1994 , which required states to adopt curriculum content and pupil performance standards , and assessments linked to these , at three grade levels in reading and mathematics ; initiated steps toward identifying low - performing schools and leas ; attempted to increase targeting of funds on high - poverty leas and schools ; and increased flexibility .

it should be noted that all of the requirements described in this report apply only to states that participate in , and receive grants under , esea title i - a ( which currently includes all states , but this may not necessarily be the case in the future ) .

esea programs are authorized through fy2008 , and it is generally assumed that the 110 th congress will actively consider legislation to amend and extend the esea .

this report provides an overview of aspects of esea title i - a that were substantially amended by the nclba ; elements of the program that are important but that were not substantially revised by the nclba ( such as parental involvement requirements ) are not discussed in this report .

other current and forthcoming reports will provide more detailed discussions and analyses of selected major aspects of the program , including pupil assessments , accountability , and reauthorization issues likely to be considered by the 110 th congress .

major esea title i - a amendments adopted in the no child left behind act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-110 ) were focused on pupil assessment ; adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) requirements ; program improvement and corrective actions for schools and leas ; allocation formulas ; staff qualifications ; flexibility ; and services to private school pupils , staff , and parents .

each of these topics is discussed below .

issues regarding implementation of these requirements and other provisions are likely to be considered by the 109 th congress .

such debates may particularly occur as the congress considers a new high school initiative released by the administration in conjunction with its fy2006 and fy2007 budgets .

relevant aspects of this initiative are discussed below , at the end of the report section on pupil assessment .

this report concludes with a brief discussion of debate in some states and leas over continued participation in the title i - a program , and the potential effects of opting - out of participation in the program .

the iasa of 1994 required states participating in title i - a to develop or adopt curriculum content standards , pupil performance standards , and assessments linked to these , at least in the subjects of mathematics and reading / language arts , and for at least one grade in each of three grade ranges ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) .

in general , these standards and assessments were to be applicable to title i - a participants , as well as all other pupils in the state .

these requirements were adopted in part to raise expectations that title i - a participants would be required to meet challenging academic standards , and to link the program to standards - based reforms taking place in most states .

typically , such standards - based reform involves the establishment of explicit and "challenging" goals for state school systems , and alignment of curricula , assessment methods , pupil performance standards , teacher professional development , instructional materials , and other school system policies in support of the goals .

the deadline for adopting content and performance standards was the 1997-1998 program year , and for assessments was the 2000-2001 program year .

states were given several years to meet these requirements because many of them were at an early stage of standards - based reform in 1994 .

the u.s. department of education ( ed ) has been reviewing "evidence" that state standards and assessments meet the requirements of the title i - a statute ( eg , that assessments are linked to state content and pupil performance standards , or that disabled and limited english proficient ( lep ) pupils are assessed with appropriate accommodations or adaptations ) , but is not considering the substance of state standards and assessments .

as of the date of this report , 46 states have been approved by ed as meeting all of these "1994 requirements. .

for three of the remaining states , "timeline waivers" have been granted to allow them to complete the process of developing and implementing necessary assessments over the next couple of years .

"compliance agreements" have been negotiated between ed and the remaining three states that are farther from meeting these requirements .

p.l .

107-110 substantially expanded these previous title i - a assessment provisions .

in addition to the requirement for assessments at three grade levels in reading and mathematics , all participating states will be required to implement assessments , linked to state content and academic achievement standards , for all public school pupils in each of grades 3-8 in reading and mathematics by the 2005-2006 school year .

states will also have to develop and implement assessments at three grade levels in science by the 2007-2008 school year .

p.l .

107-110 requires assessments to be of "adequate technical quality for each purpose required under [this] act. .

all states receiving title i - a grants are required to participate in national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) tests in 4 th and 8 th grade reading and mathematics administered every two years , with costs paid by the federal government .

individual pupils may not be required to take or administer naep tests ; there are conflicting statutory and regulatory provisions regarding participation in naep tests by leas and schools .

pupils who have been in u.s. schools ( except those in puerto rico ) for at least three years must be tested ( for reading ) in english , and states are required to annually assess the english language proficiency of their lep pupils .

the revised esea authorizes ( in title vi - a - 1 ) annual grants to the states to help pay the costs of meeting the title i - a standard and assessment requirements added by the nclba .

these grants may be used by states for development of standards and assessments or , if these have been developed , for assessment administration and such related activities as developing or improving assessments of the english language proficiency of lep pupils .

the state assessment requirements that were newly adopted under the nclba are contingent upon the appropriation of minimum annual amounts for these state assessment grants ; for each of fy2002-fy2006 , at least the minimum amount was appropriated for these grants .

 ( for fy2006 , the minimum is $400 million , and the appropriation is $407,563,000. ) .

the nclba also authorizes competitive grants to states for the development of enhanced assessment instruments .

aided activities may include efforts to improve the quality , validity , and reliability of assessments beyond the levels required by title i - a , to track student progress over time , or to develop performance - or technology - based assessments .

funds appropriated each year for state assessment grants that are in excess of the "trigger" amounts described above for assessment development grants are to be used for enhanced assessment grants ; for fy2002 , $17 million was made available for this purpose .

in february 2003 , grants to nine states were announced .

the amount available for assessment enhancement grants was $4,484,000 under the fy2003 appropriation , but no funds were available for such grants under the fy2004 appropriation .

for fy2005 , $11.68 million was available for assessment development grants , and $7.6 million is available for fy2006 .

in addition , the department is to contract with an independent organization for a study of the assessments and accountability policies used by states to meet title i - a requirements .

issues regarding the expanded esea title i - a pupil assessment requirements include the following: what is the cost of developing and implementing the assessments , and have federal grants been sufficient to pay for them ? .

what might be the impact of the requirement for annual assessment of the english language proficiency of lep pupils ? .

what might be the impact on naep , as well as the impact of naep on state standards and assessments , of requiring state participation in naep , while not requiring participation by individual pupils and schools ? .

what are the likely major benefits and costs of the expanded esea title i - a pupil assessment requirements ? .

will they significantly increase the focus on assessments in public k - 12 education ? .

if so , will this enhance educational achievement and "quality," or will it undesirably limit instructional curricula or "drive out" assessments in subjects other than reading , mathematics or science ? .

under the nclba , the title i - a requirements for state - developed standards of ayp are substantially expanded in scope and specificity .

these standards serve as the basis for identifying schools and leas where performance is inadequate , so that these inadequacies may be addressed first through provision of increased support and , ultimately , a variety of "corrective actions. .

the nclba provisions regarding ayp were adopted largely in reaction to perceived weaknesses with the ayp requirements of the 1994 iasa .

the latter were frequently criticized as being vague , lacking a required focus on specific disadvantaged pupil groups , failing to require continuous improvement toward an ultimate goal , and being applicable only to schools and leas participating in title i - a , not to states overall or to all public schools .

before the enactment of the nclba , there was tremendous variation among the states in the impact of their ayp standards — i.e. , the number and percentage of title i - a schools and leas identified as failing to meet ayp standards .

in some states , a very large percentage of title i - a schools have been identified as needing improvement , while a small number of states had identified very few or even no such schools for at least some years preceding the enactment of the nclba .

as under the iasa , ayp is defined primarily on the basis of aggregate scores for various groups of pupils on state assessments of academic achievement .

however , under the nclba , state ayp standards must also include at least one additional academic indicator , which in the case of high schools must be the graduation rate .

ayp standards will now have to be applied separately and specifically to economically disadvantaged pupils , lep pupils , pupils with disabilities , and pupils in major racial and ethnic groups , as well as all pupils .

the only exception is that pupil groups need not be considered in cases where their number is so relatively small that achievement results would not be statistically significant or the identity of individual pupils might be divulged .

state ayp standards must also be applied to all public schools , leas , and states overall , although corrective actions for failing to meet ayp standards need only be applied to schools and leas participating in title i - a .

the ayp state standards will also have to incorporate a goal of all pupils reaching a proficient or advanced level of achievement within 12 years .

the primary basic structure for ayp under the nclba is specified in the authorizing statute as a "group status model. .

a "uniform bar" approach is employed: states are to set a threshold percentage of pupils at proficient or advanced levels of performance each year that is applicable to all pupil subgroups of sufficient size to be considered in ayp determinations .

the threshold levels of achievement are to be set separately for reading and math , and may be set separately for each level of k - 12 education ( elementary , middle , and high schools ) .

in addition , the nclba statute includes an alternative safe harbor provision , under which a school that does not meet the standard ayp requirements may still be deemed to meet ayp if it experiences a 10% reduction in the gap between 100% and the percentage in the preceding year for the specific pupil groups that fail to meet the "uniform bar," and those pupil groups also make progress on at least one other academic indicator included in the state's ayp standards .

this alternative provision adds "successive group improvement" as a secondary type of ayp model under the nclba .

a third basic type of ayp model , not explicitly mentioned in the nclba statute , is the individual / cohort growth model .

the key characteristic of this model is a focus on the rate of change over time in the level of achievement among cohorts of the same pupils .

growth models are longitudinal , based upon the tracking of the same pupils as they progress through their k - 12 education careers .

while the progress of pupils is tracked individually , results are typically aggregated when used for accountability purposes .

in general , growth models would give credit for meeting steps along the way to proficiency in ways that a status model typically does not .

in november 2005 , the secretary of education announced a growth model pilot program under which up to 10 states would be allowed to use growth models to make ayp determinations for the 2005-2006 school year .

according to ed , 20 states submitted applications to be allowed to use growth models to make ayp determinations beginning with either the 2005-2006 or 2006-2007 school years .

thus far , the proposals of two states ( north carolina and tennessee ) have been approved to participate in this pilot program , beginning with ayp determinations based on 2005-2006 assessment results .

finally , the nclba ayp provisions include an assessment participation rate requirement .

in order for a school to meet ayp standards , at least 95% of all pupils , as well as at least 95% of each of the demographic groups of pupils considered for ayp determinations for the school or lea , must participate in the assessments that serve as the primary basis for ayp determinations .

the nclba requires states and leas to identify schools or leas that fail to meet state ayp standards for two or more consecutive years as needing improvement , and to take a variety of corrective actions with respect to schools or leas that fail to meet ayp standards for four or more consecutive years .

while states are encouraged to establish unitary accountability systems affecting all public schools , the title i - a statute requires them only to take corrective actions regarding schools and leas that receive title i - a funds , not all schools and leas .

thus , the corrective actions described below need be taken with respect to a large majority of leas and approximately 58% of all public schools .

esea title i - a has four separate formulas — basic , concentration , targeted , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) — for the allocation of funds to states and leas .

however , once these funds reach leas , they are no longer treated separately — they are combined and used for the same program purposes .

the primary rationale for using four different formulas to allocate a share of the funds for a single program is that the formulas have distinct allocation patterns — providing varying shares of allocated funds to different types of localities .

in addition , some of the formulas contain elements that are deemed to have important incentive effects or to be significant symbolically — such as the equity and effort factors in the efig formula — in addition to their impact on allocation patterns .

in the discussion below , we begin with a general discussion of the characteristics of the title i - a allocation formulas , in order to provide context for the subsequent review of the title i - a formula amendments in the nclba .

as is the case with state pupil assessment policies , the nclba establishes new requirements regarding teacher qualifications for states and leas participating in title i - a that will affect public school systems overall .

the revised esea also contains expanded qualification requirements for teacher aides or paraprofessionals , although these provisions are limited to certain paraprofessionals paid with title i - a funds .

an additional major provision of the nclba regarding instructional staff is the requirement that leas are to use between 5% and 10% of their title i - a grants in fy2002-fy2003 , and at least 5% of their grants thereafter , for professional development activities .

separately , as noted earlier , individual schools identified as having failed to meet ayp standards for two or more consecutive years must use at least 10% of their title i - a grants for professional development .

other aspects of esea title i - a that were significantly modified by the nclba are discussed briefly below .

as implementation of the new title i - a requirements adopted under the nclba has proceeded , debate has arisen in some state legislatures , leas , and elsewhere over the federal role in k - 12 education , and the costs and benefits of participating in title i - a and other esea programs .

while all states continue to participate in esea title i - a , and therefore they continue to be subject to the requirements discussed in this report , bills have been considered in the legislatures of some states , and recently adopted in one state ( utah ) , that would attempt to limit or terminate state participation in esea title i - a , in order to avoid being required to implement some of these requirements .

in addition , a national association has filed a court suit , and the attorney general of at least one state has said he plans to do so , for relief from meeting title i - a requirements if doing so would require the expenditure of non - federal funds .

state legislative actions have thus far taken six forms: ( 1 ) resolutions expressing opinions that are critical of some aspects of the title i - a requirements under the nclba , but have no direct impact on state participation in the program ; ( 2 ) resolutions requesting exemptions or waivers of certain nclba requirements for a state ; ( 3 ) resolutions criticizing the level of funding for the nclba as being inadequate ; ( 4 ) bills attempting to prevent the state from spending its own funds on nclba implementation costs ; ( 5 ) bills requiring leas in a state to place higher priority on state accountability requirements than those of title i - a ( where they may conflict ) , and discouraging the spending of non - federal funds to meet title i - a requirements ; and ( 6 ) bills authorizing or requiring the state to terminate participation in title i - a in order to avoid being subject to its requirements .

one or more states have adopted bills in categories ( 1 ) - ( 5 ) ; as of this writing , no state has yet enacted opt - out legislation ( category 6 ) .

the legislation passed by the utah state legislature on april 19 , 2005 , is in category ( 5 ) above .

it would require school officials to place first priority on "meeting state goals , objectives , program needs , and accountability systems" and to "minimize additional state resources that are diverted to implement federal programs beyond the federal monies that are provided to fund the programs" ( h.b .

1001 , section 5 ) .

the practical implications of this state legislation , if signed by the governor and implemented , as well as the response by ed , remain to be seen .

in addition to actions by state legislatures , a suit has been filed by the national education association , and reportedly a similar suit is being considered by the attorney general of at least one state ( connecticut ) .

these actions focus largely on the provisions of esea section 9527 ( a ) — "nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize an officer or employee of the federal government to mandate , direct , or control a state local educational agency , or school's curriculum , program of instruction , or allocation of state or local resources , or mandate a state or any subdivision thereof to spend any funds or incur any costs not paid for under this act. .

both the nea suit , and reportedly the prospective connecticut suit , seek relief from meeting title i - a requirements that , they argue would require the expenditure of state and / or local funds to meet .

more specifically , connecticut seeks a waiver of the title i - a requirement for implementation of standards - based reading and mathematics assessments in grades 3 , 5 , and 7 ( in addition to such assessments already administered in grades 4 , 6 , and 8 ) beginning in the 2005-2006 school year .

as discussed earlier in this report , the esea title i - a requirements apply only to states that receive funds under this program .

if a state chose to terminate its participation in title i - a , none of the requirements discussed in this report would apply to that state .

of course , such a state would lose a significant amount of funding , since title i - a is the largest federal k - 12 education program .

in addition , as described in a 2004 letter by the then - acting deputy secretary of education , eugene w. hickok , to the utah superintendent of public instruction , such a state might also lose some or all of its funds under several other esea programs , under which grants are allocated to states using formulas that are linked to the title i - a formulas .

as with states , individual leas might choose to terminate their participation in title i - a , in order to attempt to avoid implementing the requirements discussed in this report .

however , even if it received no title i - a grants , most of the requirements discussed in this report would continue to apply to an lea if its state continues to participate in title i - a .

this includes the assessment , ayp , and report card requirements , which apply to all public schools and leas in states receiving title i - a grants .

an lea that refuses title i - a funds would be released only from the corrective action requirements discussed in this report .

in addition , as with states , such an lea would presumably lose funds under not only title i - a but also several other esea programs under which allocations are based on those under title i - a .

