four and a half months after announcing his decision to vaccinate military personnel and front - line civilianhealth workers against smallpox , 3 months after the vaccination program officiallybegan , and 7 weeks after senator gregg introduced the administration smallpox vaccine injurycompensation proposal , president george w. bush , on april 30 , 2003 , signed the smallpoxemergency personnel protection act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-20 ) .

compensation had emerged as a major obstacle to the implementation of the administration's smallpox vaccination program soon after it began .

the number of workers volunteering forvaccination was far smaller than the white house had anticipated .

one frequently cited reason wasthe concern of health workers that they would not be compensated if they experienced adversereactions to the vaccine .

under the administration's original plan , vaccinees who suffered adverseconsequences and sought redress had two options: apply to their state's workers' compensationprogram or sue the federal government for negligence .

some members from across the political spectrum favored responding with legislation .

while they differed on what should be in that legislation , there was bipartisan agreement that , given thepresident's request that health and safety workers volunteer for vaccination , the federal governmentshould guarantee to protect them against the possible adverse effects of smallpox vaccination .

somelegislators articulated a two - fold rationale: it is right to protect volunteers and , to recruit thosevolunteers , it is necessary .

this report first presents the reasons some members of congress , health care worker organizations , and others felt legislation was necessary ; summarizes the range of approaches thatcongress considered ; and describes the smallpox vaccine injury compensation provisions congressactually passed .

finally , it presents issues that congress might consider if it revisits the newlegislation .

on december 13 , 2002 , president bush announced his decision to vaccinate military personneland front - line civilian health workers against smallpox .

the department of defense began theprocess in early january 2003 and , as of march 31 , 2003 , has vaccinated over 350,000 militarypersonnel .

 ( 1 ) the civilian program , which is voluntaryin contrast to the military program , did notbegin until january 24 , 2003 , to coincide with the start of liability protections provided by congressin the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) to smallpox vaccine manufacturers and theinstitutions and individuals who administer the vaccine .

the president had hoped to vaccinate500,000 civilians , but , by june 6 , 2003 , only 37,478 civilians had been immunized .

 ( 2 ) to explain the reluctance of many health workers to volunteer to be vaccinated , many , including senator gregg , ( 3 ) pointed to the absence ofa compensation program for people who areinjured by the vaccine .

until the mid - 1970s when the world health organization announced theeradication of naturally occurring smallpox , it was accepted that , in the face of endemic infection,the side effects of the smallpox vaccine ( 4 ) are dwarfedby the benefits of immunization .

it is difficultfor some , however , to accept the risks of vaccine - associated illness and death when the risk ofinfection is perceived as theoretical .

the president , backed by many health and defense experts,sought an immunized core of first - responder and public - health personnel as a public good , allowingtreatment and vaccination of larger groups should smallpox infections appear .

at the same time,many public health officials , infectious disease experts , lawyers , and health care personnel unionsnoted the need for a compensation mechanism .

the administration has said that it expected workers' compensation programs to cover claims for the rare but anticipated side effects of the smallpox vaccinations .

 ( 5 ) soon , however , people noticedgaps in this approach .

other than the program that covers federal workers , workers' compensationin the united states is handled at the state level .

scope - of - employment and line - of - duty definitionsdiffer , as do rules of eligibility , coverage , and benefits .

in general , courts have found that workers'compensation is available for injuries resulting from employment - related vaccination .

 ( 6 ) however,not all employees are covered by workers' compensation programs and not all first - response healthcare providers are employees .

workers' compensation programs , as their names indicate , cover theworker and not an individual whom the worker , because of the worker's injury , injures .

this latteris a concern in planning for smallpox compensation because of the potential for secondarytransmission of vaccine - related infection to contacts of those vaccinated .

furthermore , even forworkers who do qualify for workers' compensation , the lost income benefit of most of theseprograms is two - thirds of income up to a yearly cap .

employers are the primary contributors toworkers' compensation funds and would be acquiring a new burden if called upon to cover smallpoxvaccine injuries .

 ( 7 ) some suggested that the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) provided access to compensation through the federal tort claims act , but it addresses only injuries associated withnegligence .

although necessary in certain circumstances , this coverage is not suitable for the injuriesanticipated from the nonnegligent administration of vaccine .

 ( 8 ) .

a month after the president announced the vaccination program and 1 week before the liabilityprotection provisions from the homeland security act were to begin , the institute of medicine ofthe national academies issued a letter report ( 9 ) inresponse to questions from the centers for diseasecontrol and prevention ( cdc ) .

the expert committee made two compensation - relatedrecommendations: ... that cdc and its state and local public health partners immediately work to clarify each state's worker's compensation program's position on coverage forsmallpox vaccine - related injuries and illnesses for workers covered under theirprograms .

... that cdc and the department of health and human services support all efforts , some of which might be administratively or legislatively bold andcreative , to bring this issue of compensation for smallpox vaccine adverse reactions - - includingthose reactions that occur despite non - negligent manufacture and administration of the vaccine - - to speedy resolution .

 ( p. 9 ) many other groups weighed in with other options .

the association of state and territorial health officials , the american public health association ( apha ) , and the national association ofcounty and city health officials issued a joint press release urging congress to create a nationalprogram to protect individuals or their survivors from the costs of illness , disability , and deathassociated with vaccine injury .

 ( 10 ) in a march 2003press release , apha specified the need forcompensation of medical costs , lost wages , a no - fault system that could provide quick compensation,health insurance , and the more basic assurance that health care would be available to those withouthealth insurance or with inadequate coverage .

 ( 11 ) in oral and written testimony to the senate health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) committee and in press releases , representatives of employee unions suggested numerouscomponents for congress to consider in creating a smallpox vaccine injury compensation program .

 ( 12 ) some items appeared on many lists , some remained the focus of one speaker .

one set of points involved vaccine policy not explicitly related to injury compensation policy yet the recommendations fit within a discussion of compensation .

these included free confidentialpre - vaccination screening for contraindications ; consistent pre - vaccination education ; freedom todecline vaccine without employment discrimination ; access to free medical treatment ; availabilityof countermeasures - - such as vaccinia immune globulin ( often referred to as vig ) - - to vaccineeffects ; safe needle use ; liability protection of vaccinee for injury of patients ; need for active andongoing surveillance and reporting ; and sufficient federal funding to states .

other suggestions addressed the structure , administration , and content of a compensation program: a fair , easily accessible , no - fault compensation program ; establishment of a vaccine injurytable for presumptive causation ; establishment of a mechanism to assert causation of other injuries ; compensation of unreimbursable medical costs ; compensation for pain and suffering ; paid sick leave ; lost earnings ; permanent , total disability benefit ; a death benefit ; and attorney fees .

beyond the testimony taken by the senate help committee , several existing compensation programs appear to have provided models for legislation .

in addition to relying on workers' compensation and traditional health insurance policies,congress has devised several national programs to meet unique compensation needs in particular setsof circumstances , usually involving the concept of no - fault .

these programs have defined benefits,funding structures , and eligibility rules .

two - - the public safety officers' benefits ( psob ) program and the national vaccine injury compensation ( nvicp ) program - - are particularlyrelevant because they appear as model structures for the smallpox vaccine compensation injuryproposals .

representative waxman introduced h.r .

865 , the smallpox vaccinecompensation and safety act of 2003 , on february 13 , 2003 .

subsequently , senator greggintroduced the administration's proposal , which went on to form the basis of the new legislation .

the new law addresses injuries incurred from activities of an immunization plan declared bythe hhs secretary as a national response to threat of biologic agent attack on the united states .

itcovers injuries that the secretary finds to be vaccine - related that occur in people who volunteer forvaccination under that plan or people who are infected after contact with those volunteers .

the new law specifies compensation for three things: ( 1 ) medical expenses ; ( 2 ) lost employment income due to temporary and permanent , partial and total disability ; and ( 3 ) death .

in discussing the need for legislation , many members and their constituents described the absence of a smallpox vaccine injury compensation package as a major obstacle to volunteering .

will the new law make people more likely to volunteer ? .

has the end of the war in iraq lessened thesense of urgency that may have compelled the congress to enact p.l .

108-20 ? .

an announcement from cdc the week after the bill's passage might also influence volunteer recruitment .

the agency now estimates the nation needs only 50,000 immunized public health andhealth care people to be prepared for a smallpox outbreak , not the 500,000 figure that had been madeup by summing the estimates that each state had submitted to cdc in december .

 ( 33 ) this new targetis closer to the 39,000 who have already volunteered for vaccination , but congress does not knowyet whether those volunteers are appropriately distributed across states and professions to meet theprogram goals .

regardless of the size of the program , the hhs secretary may need to clarify details that the law does not explicitly cover in order to implement the law .

examples include definitions,regulatory treatment of standards of medical evidence , and federal tax law .

the law describes a contact case as "... ( iii ) the individual has been in contact with an individual who is ( or who was accidentally inoculated by ) a covered individual. .

 ( 34 ) what evidence of contactwill the secretary require ? .

how would an unvaccinated person who nevertheless appears withvaccinia infection demonstrate that , for example , a particular , anonymous subway rider was thesource of infection ? .

because vaccinia infection would come only from a vaccinia vaccine source,it may not be necessary - - for compensation determination - - to show that the person had contactwith someone who had received the vaccine .

 ( knowing the chain of contact would be important,however , for public health reasons. ) .

the law gives the hhs secretary authority to create the table of injuries to list injuries presumed by law to be vaccine - related .

because the rules - - and art - - of causal inference thatepidemiologists use do not easily line up with legislative needs to assign responsibility , drafters oflegislation turn to phrases such as "preponderance of the evidence standard" ; "taking intoconsideration of relevant medical and scientific evidence" ; ( 35 ) or "credible evidence for the associationis equal to or outweighs the credible evidence against the association. .

 ( 36 ) the scientist's languageincludes an uncertainty that the law's presumptions override .

whether the new legislation providessufficient guidance to the secretary remains to be seen .

one could anticipate that individualclaimants will question whatever list the hhs secretary promulgates .

questions are also likely to arise regarding the tax status of the various benefit categories for various groups of recipients .

whether clarification responsibility rests with the hhs secretary orwith the internal revenue service , the issues may involve input from both or require congressionalclarification .

finally , some members of congress may want to consider what lessons they could learn from the nation's unprecedented foray into civilians' taking health risks to prepare to protect the u.s.homeland from risks of uncertain likelihood but certain ( and terrible ) potential consequence .

thepublic may have somewhat relaxed its concern , but , for public health and intelligence experts , therisks to the public remain real .

p.l .

108-20 addresses compensation of health care and emergency workers who volunteer and receive smallpox vaccine - related injuries resulting from an hhs secretary's declaration of the needto prepare for bioterrorist actions .

it does not , however , cover members of the general public whochoose vaccination and it applies only to vaccinia infections that occur before any smallpox case isreported .

should future events make the secretary's precaution unfortunately predictive and post - attack vaccinationbe recommended to the general population , how might congress view vaccine - injury compensation for that group ? .

congress may choose to discuss how it might modify thislegislation to allow its use in as yet unknown circumstances .

 ( 37 ) the president's pursuit of project bioshield legislation ( 38 ) to encourage private sectorparticipation in the development of other medical countermeasures to the intentional use of biologicagents against the u.s. population is one indication of a widespread view that new products arenecessary .

 ( 39 ) as health care workers face ( or areasked to face ) each new product - - whether vaccineor antitoxin , whether to protect against a viral hemorrhagic fever , tularemia , or glanders ( 40 ) - - theywill ask about compensation for potential injuries .

