unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) have been referred to in many ways: rpvs ( remotelypiloted vehicle ) , drones , robot planes , and pilotless aircraft are a few of the terms that have beenused .

most often called uavs , they are defined by the department of defense ( dod ) as powered,aerial vehicles that do not carry a human operator , use aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift,can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely , can be expendable or recoverable , and can carry a lethalor nonlethal payload .

ballistic or semiballistic vehicles , cruise missiles , and artillery projectiles arenot considered uavs by the dod definition .

 ( 1 ) drones differ from rpvs in that they are designed to flyautonomously .

uavs are either described as a single air vehicle ( with associated surveillancesensors ) , or a uav system ( uas ) , which usually consists of three to six air vehicles , a groundcontrol station , and support equipment .

the military use of uavs in recent conflicts such as iraq ( 2003 ) , afghanistan ( 2001 ) , andkosovo ( 1999 ) has opened the eyes of many to the advantages and disadvantages provided byunmanned aircraft .

uavs regularly make national headlines as they are used to perform taskshistorically performed by manned aircraft .

uavs are thought to offer two main advantages overmanned aircraft: they eliminate the risk to a pilot's life , and their aeronautical capabilities , such asendurance , are not bound by human limitations .

uavs may also be cheaper to procure and operatethan manned aircraft .

uavs protect the lives of pilots by performing the "3-d" missions - those dull,dirty , or dangerous missions that do not require a pilot in the cockpit .

however , the lowerprocurement cost of uavs must be weighed against their greater proclivity to crash , while theminimized risk should be weighed against the dangers inherent in having an unmanned vehicle flyingin airspace shared with manned assets .

there are a number of reasons why the employment of uavs has recently grown .

navigation and communication technology is now available that wasn't available just a few shortyears ago .

some say that the services' so - called "silk scarf syndrome" of preferring manned aviationover unmanned , has diminished as uavs entered the mainstream .

although only recently procured in significant numbers by the united states , uavs have hada century - old history in aviation .

first included in jane's all the world's aircraft in 1920 , uavswere tested during world war i , but not used in combat by the united states during that war .

however , it was not until the vietnam war that uavs such as the aqm - 34 firebee were used ina surveillance role .

the firebee exemplifies the versatility of uavs - - initially flown in the 1970s,it was modified to deliver payloads and flew its first flight test as an armed uav on december 20,2002 .

 ( 2 ) the israeli air force pioneered several uavs in the late 1970s and 1980s that wereeventually integrated into the united states's uav inventory .

u.s. observers noticed israel'ssuccessful use of uavs during operations in lebanon in 1982 , encouraging then - navy secretaryjohn lehman to acquire a uav capability for the navy .

interest also grew in other parts of thepentagon , and the reagan administration's fy1987 budget requested notably higher levels of uavfunding .

 ( 3 ) this markedthe transition of uavs in the united states from experimental projects to acquisition programs .

one of the uavs acquired from israel , pioneer , emerged as a useful source of intelligenceat the tactical level during operation desert storm .

pioneer was used by navy battleships to locateiraqi targets for its 16-inch guns .

following the gulf war , military officials recognized the potentialvalue of uavs , and the air force's predator became a uav on a fast track , quickly adding newcapabilities .

 ( 4 ) debutingin the balkans conflict , the predator performed surveillance missions such as monitoring area roadsfor weapons movements and conducting battle damage assessment .

operations in afghanistan havefeatured the air force's global hawk , as well as adding a new mission for predator that allows theuav to live up to its name - - armed reconnaissance .

there are currently five major uavs in theu.s .

inventory: the navy and marine corps's pioneer , the air force's global hawk and predator,and the army's hunter and shadow uavs .

reflecting a growing awareness and support in congress for uavs , investment in unmannedaerial vehicles has increased annually .

the fy2001 investment in uavs was approximately $667million , while the fy2003 funding totaled over $1.1 billion dollars .

the pentagon has asked for$1.6 billion in procurement and development funding for fy2006 , with much more planned for theout years .

congress's role in uav development has been one of strong encouragement tempered withconcern .

taking a proactive stance in uav program management , congress has in the past directedthe formation of joint program offices to ensure commonality between the services' uav programs .

congress has also expressed concern that dod's "growing enthusiasm may well lead to a situationin which there is no clear path toward the future of uavs" , and so has required dod to submit auav roadmap .

 ( 5 ) in someinstances , congress has advocated a more aggressive approach to fielding uavs .

for example , in1996 , the house armed services committee ( hasc ) supported legislation directing dod toweaponize both the predator and hunter , but dod opposed the initiative .

 ( 6 ) the scope of congress'ssupport and confidence in uav technology can be gleaned from a prediction in the reportaccompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 , which stated that,"within ten years , one - third of u.s. military operational deep strike aircraft will be unmanned. .

 ( 7 ) .

in recent years , the pace of uav development has accelerated , and the scope of uavmissions and applications has expanded .

how should these efforts be managed so that they arecost - efficient , effective , and interoperable ? .

in its eagerness to deploy uavs , does dod riskduplication of effort between various programs ? .

are dod uav acquisition plans responsive tocongressional direction ? .

investment priorities could change as the introduction of uavs into the u.s. inventory shiftsthe balance between manned and unmanned capabilities .

congress , as part of its defense oversightresponsibilities , may assess dod's current uav efforts to verify that they match up with newinvestment goals and strategies .

conventional wisdom states that uavs are cheap , or cost - effective .

is this true today ? .

how do uav costs compare to manned aircraft costs ? .

uavs have traditionally been used for reconnaissance and surveillance , but today they arebeing employed in roles and applications that their designers never envisioned .

the unanticipatedflexibility and capability of uavs has led some analysts to suggest that more , if not most , of themissions currently undertaken by manned aircraft could be turned over to unmanned aerial platforms,and that manned and unmanned aircraft could operate together .

congress may have to contemplatethe replacement of a significant portion of the manned aircraft fleet with unmanned aircraft that haveyet to be designed .

the defining characteristic of uavs is that they are "unmanned. .

if uavs are introducedinto the force in large numbers , might personnel issues arise ? .

recruitment and retention is aperennial congressional issue , that may be receiving increased attention due to the operationalstresses associated with the global war on terrorism .

what impact might wide spread deploymentof uavs have on military personnel ? .

industrial base issues also need to be considered .

if defense companies devote more of theirtime and expenses to develop unmanned aircraft , will the skills and technologies needed for mannedaircraft design erode ? .

those who argue that uavs will replace manned aircraft in the future are notas concerned with the industrial base issue as those who feel manned aircraft will still be needed tocombat future threats .

as u.s. companies compete for business in a growing international uav marketplace,concerns about the proliferation of these systems may grow .

are steps required - - and if so , whatmight they be - - to control the spread of uavs ? .

as part of its defense and foreign policy oversight,congress may examine whether a balance must be struck between supporting legitimate u.s. exportsand curbing the spread of uav technologies to dangerous groups or countries .

this section addresses the program status and funding of some of the most prominent uavprograms being pursued by dod , and most likely to compete for congressional attention .

thissection does not attempt to provide a comprehensive survey of all uav programs , nor to developa classification system for different types of uavs ( e.g .

operational vs developmental , singlemission vs multi mission , long range vs short range ) .

one exception is a short subsection belowtitled "small uavs. .

the uavs described in this section are distinguished from the proceedinguavs by being man - portable and of short range and loiter time .

these smaller uavs are notcurrently , and are unlikely to be , weaponized .

the services do not provide as detailed cost andbudget documentation for these uavs as they do for major uav programs .

individually , theseuavs appear very popular with ground forces , yet do not necessarily demand as much congressionalattention as larger uav programs like predator or global hawk .

as a whole , however , these small,man - portable uavs appear likely to increasingly compete with major uav programs forcongressional attention and funding .

through its high profile use in iraq and afghanistan and its multi - mission capabilities , themq - 1 predator has become the department of defense's most recognizable uav .

developed bygeneral atomics aeronautical systems in san diego , ca , the predator has helped to define themodern role of uavs with its integrated surveillance payload and armament capabilities .

consequently , predator has enjoyed accelerated development schedules as well as increasedprocurement funding .

the wide employment of the mq - 1 has also facilitated the development ofseveral closely related uavs ( described below ) designed for a variety of missions .

system characteristics .

predator is amedium - altitude , long - endurance uav , roughly half the size of an air force f - 16 falcon .

at 27 feetlong , 7 feet high and with a 48 foot wingspan , it has long , thin wings and a tail like an inverted "v".the predator typically operates at 10,000 to 15,000 feet to get the best imagery from its videocameras , although it has the ability to reach a maximum altitude of 25,000 feet .

each vehicle canremain on station , over 500 nautical miles away from its base , for 24 hours before returning home.the air force's predator fleet is operated by the 11th reconnaissance squadron out of the indianspring auxiliary field , nevada and the 15th and 17th reconnaissance squadrons out of nellis airforce base , nevada .

current reorganization efforts will make indian springs the home for all threesquadrons .

 ( 122 ) thecia reportedly possesses and operates several predators as well .

mission and payload .

the predator's primaryfunction is reconnaissance and target acquisition of potential ground targets .

to accomplish thismission , the predator is outfitted with a 450-lb surveillance payload , which includes twoelectro - optical ( e - o ) cameras and one infrared ( ir ) camera for use at night .

these cameras arehoused in a ball - shaped turret that can be easily seen underneath the vehicle's nose .

the predator isalso equipped with a multi - spectral targeting system ( mts ) sensor ball which adds a laserdesignator to the e - o / ir payload that allows the predator to track moving targets .

additionally , thepredator's payload includes a synthetic aperture radar ( sar ) , which enables the uav to "see"through inclement weather .

the predator's satellite communications provide for beyond line - of - sightoperations .

in 2001 , as a secondary function , the predator was outfitted with the ability to carry twohellfire missiles .

previously , the predator identified a target and relayed the coordinates to a mannedaircraft , which then engaged the target .

the addition of this anti - tank ordinance enables the uavto launch a precision attack on a time sensitive target with a minimized "sensor - to - shoot" time cycle .

consequently , the air force changed the predator's military designation from rq - 1b ( reconnaissance unmanned ) to the mq - 1 ( multi - mission unmanned ) .

 ( 123 ) the air vehiclelaunches and lands like a regular aircraft , but is controlled by a pilot on the ground using a joystick .

variants .

mq - 9 predator b .

the mq - 9 predator,or "predator b" , is general atomic's follow on to mq - 1 , or "predator a" .

the goal of the predatorb project is to build upon the strengths of the parent uav and to advance its mission capabilities .

the result is a medium - to - high altitude , long endurance predator optimized for surveillance , targetacquisition and armed engagement .

while the b - model borrows from the overall design of thea - model , the newest incarnation is longer by 13 feet in length and 16 feet in wingspan .

it alsofeatures a 900hp honeywell tpe 331-10 turbo propjet engine , which is significantly more powerfulthan the predator a's 115hp propjet engine .

these upgrades allow the predator b to reach amaximum altitude of 50,000 feet , a maximum speed of 225 knots , a maximum endurance of 32hours and a maximum range on 2000 nautical miles .

 ( 124 ) general atomics also upgraded the 17-inch diameter mtscamera gimbal to a 22-inch mts - b gimbal for extended range surveillance .

however , the featurethat most differentiates predator b from its predecessor is its ordinance capacity .

while the predatora is outfitted to carry two 100-pound hellfire missiles , predator b now can carry as many as 16hellfires , equivalent to the army's apache helicopter , or a mix of 500-pound weapons and smalldiameter bombs approximately equal to the munitions payload of an f - 16 .

additionally , raytheonhas experimented with a mini - uav known as "silent eyes" to be launched from the fuselage of thepredator b and to serve as a target identifier in supplement to the laser designator .

 ( 125 ) predator b - er , "mariner" .

the predator b - extended range or "mariner" is less of a nextgeneration predator and more of hybrid of the predator b and nasa's altair uav , also producedby general atomics .

the mariner was created as a result of general atomic's pursuit of the navy'sbroad area maritime surveillance ( bams ) program contract .

as an extended range uav , themariner retains the original airframe of the predator , but adds the 86 ft. wing from the altair and anincreased fuel capacity .

the subsequent combination has yielded a surveillance uav capable ofaltitudes of 50,000 feet and a flight endurance of 49 hours .

general atomic has partnered withlockheed martin system and sensors to integrate an exterior - mounted maritime radar that willadvance the surveillance capabilities of the mariner beyond the standard predator b payload .

themariner is expected to compete with northrop grumman's global hawk for the bams contract , andthe vehicle's proponents hope that mariner could have a flyaway cost as little $19 million pervehicle .

 ( 126 ) predator c. in addition to the mariner , general atomics is currently developing a thirdgeneration predator that uses a turbo - jet engine to fly long endurance , high altitude surveillancemissions .

the predator c will reportedly use the fuselage of the predator b , but will be similar tonorthrop grumman's global hawk in payload capacity and flight performance .

a spokesman forgeneral atomics stressed that the predator c will not be a direct competitor with the globalhawk .

 ( 127 ) i - gnat - er .

currently , the army uses the i - gnat as a temporary gap - filler for the rq - 5 hunterwhen that uav is removed from deployment to be overhauled or modified .

servicemen in the fieldhave characterized the i - gnat as a downsized version of the predator uav .

 ( 128 ) this medium altitude,long - endurance surveillance and reconnaissance platform is also manufactured by general atomicaeronautical systems and evolved as an upgraded derivation of the gnat - 750 .

the i - gnat - erfeatures nearly the same system , payload and performance characteristics as the mq - 1 predator awith a few exceptions .

the i - gnat - er can remain aloft for 30 hour , six hours longer than its airforce sibling , yet it lacks the sar and beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) capabilities and is engineeredfor a significantly shorter flight radius .

the army currently owns three i - gnat vehicles as the resultof an fy2004 congressional budget increase for er / mp conops development .

 ( 129 ) two additionalvehicles outfitted with satellite communications ( satcom ) data links , mts sensor / targetdesignators and hellfire missiles are expected to be delivered to the army by the end of 2005 .

 ( 130 ) according to dodcongressional testimony , the i - gnat will continue to augment hunter operations in iraq .

 ( 131 ) program status .

predator uavs are operated aspart of a system , which consists of four air vehicles , a ground control station , and a predator primarysatellite link .

the actual current year cost in fy2005 for one predator a system was approximately$18.0 million , while the current year cost ( cy05 ) for a predator b system was $46.8 million .

 ( 132 ) the air forcecurrently possesses 57 deployable mq - 1 predators and fields 12 systems .

the current inventory ofmq - 9 predator bs stands at six vehicles and initial pentagon plans anticipate the number to growto 46 by the end of fy2011 .

recent developments have led many to believe that both predators willcontinue to be some of the air force's most valued assets .

during a senate armed service hearing,air force chief of staff general john jumper said , "we're going to tell general atomics to buildevery predator they can possibly build. .

 ( 133 ) however , in order to avoid the logistical complicationsexperienced with the accelerated development of the predator a in the mid 1990s , the air forceannounced that the initial operation capability ( ioc ) of the predator b has been pushed back fromfy2006 to fy2009 .

the extra time will be used to ensure that trained operators , adequate supportinfrastructures and appropriate operation strategies are in place .

 ( 134 ) in fy2005 andfy2006 , congressional appropriators increased both predator r&d and procurement funding fromthe president's budget request .

in fy2006 , senate authorizers supported research into integrating"viper strike" munitions on the predator .

for complete budget activity , see table 7 below: table 5 .

predator a & b combinedfunding ( $ in millions ) source for all funding tables in this section : fy2005 auth: h.r .

4200 , p.l .

108-375 , h.rept .

108-767 fy2005 appro: h.r .

4613 , p.l .

108-287 , h.rept .

108-622 fy2005 emergency supplemental: h.r .

1268 fy2006 auth: h.r .

1815 , h.rept .

109-89 , s. 1042 , s.rept .

109-69 fy2006 appro: h.r .

2863 , h.rept .

109-119 , h.r .

2863 , s.rept .

109-14 .

the pioneer uav has gained distinction for its nearly twenty years of service to the navy,army and marine corps .

originally developed by israeli aircraft industries ( iai ) , rq - 2 pioneer wasacquired by the u.s. navy in 1986 .

subsequently , aircraft armaments incorporated out of huntvalley , md and iai jointly manufactured the pioneer for the navy , u.s. marine corp and the u.s.army .

the uav was often employed in 1991 during operation desert storm for reconnaissanceand naval gun spotting missions .

at the end of fy2002 the navy ended its use of the air vehicleand passed its assets to the marine corps , which intends to field the rq - 2 until either 2010 or untila vertical take off and landing uav ( vtuav ) is ready for operation .

 ( 135 ) many believe thatpioneer has remained useful during its service life by being durable - the marine corp unofficiallyrefers to the vehicle as "old reliable" - and by undergoing several progressive performanceupgrades .

 ( 136 ) system characteristics .

at 14 feet long , thepioneer is roughly half the size of the air force's mq - 1 predator a uav .

it can reach a maximumaltitude of 15,000 feet , but flies an optimal altitude of 5,000 feet above its target .

the vehicle canachieve flight by rocket - assisted takeoff ( rato ) , a catapult launcher , or traditional runway takeofffrom land or from ships .

pioneer is maintains a flight range of 100 nautical miles .

the propellerdriven sf - 350 piston engine keeps the uav aloft for up to five hours .

the pioneer can land on arunway or can be recovered using a retrieval net when a runway is unavailable .

since 1986 , pioneerhas flown over 36,500 hours in direct support of navy and marine corps operational commanders,including more than 7,500 flight hours during operation iraq freedom .

mission and payload .

the mission of the pioneeris to provide real - time intelligence and a reconnaissance capability to field commanders .

pioneer canbe used for over - the - horizon targeting , surveillance , naval gunfire spotting , and battle damageassessment .

its 75 lb payload consists of a combined e - o / ir camera .

other payloads that have beendemonstrated include a meteorological sensor , a mine detection sensor and a chemical detectionsensor .

program status .

the navy had planned to retirethe pioneer in 2004 and replace it with the vtuav .

however , when it quit that program , the navygave all of its pioneer systems to the marine corps .

the marine corps hopes keep them flyinganother 10 years through a product improvement program .

 ( 137 ) current procurementfunds are geared towards post - production support .

in fy2005 and fy2006 , dod's pioneerprocurement requests contained funding for upgrade kits only and no actual system or vehicleprocurement appropriations .

according to the office of the secretary of defense , in the final yearof production , the pioneer system , which includes five vehicles , a ground control station withsupporting equipment and launch / recovery devices , cost $17.2 million in fy2004 dollars .

themarine corps currently possesses 35 pioneer uavs operated out of mcas twenty nine palms , ca,mcas cherry point , nc and with the marine aviation detachment in paxtuxent river , md .

table 6 .

pioneer funding ( $ in millions ) .

recently , northrop grumman's rq - 4 global hawk has gained distinction as the largest andmost expensive uav currently in operation for the department of defense .

this large uavincorporates a diverse surveillance payload with performance capabilities that rival or exceed mostmanned spy planes .

the global hawk's surveillance achievements in demonstrations and over thebattlefield have led many to believe that the rq - 4a and its successor , the rq - 4b , play an importantrole in the future of isr .

however , the complex task of adding specific intelligence systems to thepayload configuration has helped to keep this high altitude , long endurance uav from advancingbeyond developmental stage despite extensive operational deployment .

many pentagon officials andcongressional members have become increasingly concerned with the program's burgeoning costand have subsequently slowed development progress until adequate program controls areimplemented .

 ( 138 ) system characteristics .

at 44 feet long andweighing 26 , 750 lbs , global hawk is about as large as a medium sized corporate jet .

global hawkflies at nearly twice the altitude of commercial airliners and can stay aloft at 65,000 feet for as longas 35 hours .

it can fly to a target area 5,400 nautical miles away , loiter at 60,000 feet whilemonitoring an area the size of that state of illinois for 24 hours , and then return .

global hawk wasoriginally designed to be an autonomous drone capable of taking off , flying , and landing onpre - programmed inputs to the uav's flight computer .

air force operators have found , however , thatthe uav requires frequent intervention by remote operators .

 ( 139 ) the rq - 4b resemblesthe rq - 4a , yet features a significantly larger airframe .

in designing the b - model , northropgrumman increased the global hawk's length from 44 feet to 48 feet and its wingspan from 116 feetto 132 feet .

the expanded size enables the rq - 4b to carry an extra 1000 lbs .

of surveillancepayload .

mission and payload .

the global hawk uavhas been called "the theater commander's around - the - clock , low - hanging ( surveillance ) satellite. .

 ( 140 ) theuav provides a long - dwell presence over the battlespace , giving military commanders a persistentsource of high quality imagery that has proven valuable in surveillance and interdiction operations .

the rq - 4a's current imagery payload consists of a 2,000-lb integrated suite of sensors much largerthan those found on the predator .

these sensors include an all - weather sar with moving targetindicator ( mti ) capability , an e - o digital camera and an ir sensor .

as the result of a january 2002air force requirements summit , northrop grumman expanded its payload to make it amulti - intelligence air vehicle .

the subsequent incarnation , the rq - 4b , is outfitted with anopen - system architecture that enables the vehicle to carry multiple payloads , such as signalsintelligence ( sigint ) and electronic intelligence ( elint ) sensors .

furthermore , the classifiedmulti - platform radar technology insertion program ( mp - rtip ) payload will be added in order toincrease radar capabilities .

these new sensor packages will enable operators to eavesdrop on radiotransmissions or to identify enemy radar from extremely high altitudes .

future plans include addinghyper - spectral sensors for increased imagery precision and incorporating laser communications toexpand information transfer capabilities .

 ( 141 ) the end goal is to field a uav that will work withspace - based sensors to create a "staring net" that will prevent enemies from establishing a tacticalsurprise .

 ( 142 ) inaugust of 2003 , the federal aviation administration granted the global hawk authorization to flyin u.s. civilian airspace , which further expanded the vehicles' mission potential .

 ( 143 ) this distinction , incombination with the diverse surveillance capabilities , has led many officials outside the pentagonto consider the global hawk an attractive candidate for anti - drug smuggling and coast guardoperations .

 ( 144 ) documentation from the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) indicates that the rq - 4a isexpected to reach initial operational capability ( ioc ) in 2006 .

 ( 145 ) program status .

developed by northropgrumman corporation of palmdale , ca , global hawk entered low - rate - initial - production infebruary 2002 .

the air force has stated that it intends to acquire 51 global hawks , at an expectedcost of $6.6 billion for development and procurement costs .

currently , the air force possesses 12rq - 4a vehicles .

according to the most recent select acquisition report , the current program - unitcost for the global hawk has reached $128.7 million .

 ( 146 ) in april 2005 , the air force reported to congress that theprogram had overrun by 18% as a result of an "increasing aircraft capacity to accommodaterequirements for a more sophisticated , integrated imagery and signals intelligence senor suite" .

 ( 147 ) a governmentaccountability office report in december 2004 noted that the program had increased by nearly $900million since 2001 and recommended delaying the purchase of future global hawks until anappropriate development strategy could be implemented .

 ( 148 ) the rising costs of theuav and accusations of air force mismanagement have caused concern among many in congressand in the pentagon as well as facilitating an overall debate on the air force's developmentstrategy .

 ( 149 ) theconferees of the fy2005 defense authorization bill [house report 108-767] admonished the airforce's management strategy for not using previously authorized funds for a counter - drugsurveillance evaluation program .

they noted that "the committee suspects the air force used the$18.0 million set aside in 2001 for the counter - drug demonstration to meet other requirements of theglobal hawk development program" .

 ( 150 ) as a result , the conferees recommended a cut of $18 millionto the president's r&d request for the global hawk .

the final appropriation bill [public law108-335] cut the r&d request by six million dollars .

in june of 2004 , the house appropriationscommittee expressed serious concern over air force's accelerated development strategy andconsequently cut the president's budget request for advanced procurement by $21.3 million andcurrent year procurement by $89.86 million .

 ( 151 ) the current year procurement cut transferred one rq - 4a tothe navy for fy2005 .

neither of the cuts survived conference and the air force's procurementbudget request was fully funded for fy2005 .

in december 2004 , michael wynne , acting undersecretary of defense for acquisitions , emphasized that dod would not purchase uavs that cost asmuch as manned aircraft of equivalent capabilities .

of the global hawk , wynne noted that thevehicle had gone from being "relatively inexpensive to [where it] now approaches what we have paidfor some bombers in the past" .

 ( 152 ) as a result of increasing cost criticism , the air force deviseda plan in early 2005 intended to restructure the global hawk program in an effort to facilitate iocby the end of 2005 .

the house appropriations committee cut the president's fy2006 current yearprocurement request by $110 million , advance procurement request by $10 million and increasedglobal hawk r&d by $21 million .

final appropriations and authorizations await the senatedefense appropriations and senate defense authorization ( s. 1042 , senate armedservices committee report 109-69 ) bills .

see table 9 for a complete overview of fy2005 andfy2006 funding .

table 7 .

global hawk funding ( $ in millions ) .

originally co - developed by israel aircraft industries and trw ( now owned by northropgrumman ) for a joint u.s. army / navy / marine corps short range uav , the hunter system has founda home as one of the army's principle unmanned platforms .

the service has deployed the rq - 5afor tactical isr in support of numerous ground operations around the world .

at one time , the armyplanned to acquire 52 hunter integrated systems of eight air vehicles a piece , but the hunter programhas experienced some turbulence .

the army canceled full - rate - production of the rq - 5a in 1996,but continued to use the seven systems already produced .

it acquired 18 mq - 5b hunter iis throughlow - rate - initial - production in fy2004 and fy2005 .

the mq - 5b's design includes longer enduranceand the capability to be outfitted with anti - tank munitions .

both variants are currently operated bythe 224th military intelligence battalion out of fort steward , ga ; by the 15th military intelligencebattalion out of ft .

hood , tx ; and by 1st military intelligence battalion out of hoenfel , germany .

system characteristics .

the rq - 5a can fly ataltitudes up to 15,000 feet , reach speeds of 106 knots , and spend up to 12 hours in the air .

weighing1,600 lbs , it has an operating radius of 144 nautical miles .

the mq - 5b includes an elongatedwingspan of 34.3 feet up from 29.2 feet of the rq - 5a and a more powerful mercedes high - fuelengine , which allows the hunter ii to stay airborne for three extra hours and to reach altitudes of18,000 feet .

 ( 153 ) mission and payload .

 .

during its years of service,the army has used the hunter system mostly for short and medium range surveillance andreconnaissance .

more recently , however , the army has explored the expansion of the hunter'smissions , including weaponization for tactical reconnaissance / strike operations and bordersurveillance for the department of homeland security .

the hunter primarily uses a gimbalede - o / ir sensor payload for its isr functions , yet a 2003 northrop grumman demonstrationshowcased a new ground operated sar / mti ( moving target indicator ) sensor on the hunter as partof a potential tactical unmanned aerial vehicle radar ( tuavr ) package .

 ( 154 ) the hunter ii is alsoset to receive an advanced software architecture in order to ease the integration of future payloadsand to extend the vehicle's service - life .

during the later half of 2004 , northrop grumman tested avariety of munitions as part of the hunter payload .

the viper strike precision guided munitions,which can designate targets either from the munition's laser , from another aerial platform or froma ground system , appears to be weapon of choice for the hunter system .

this weapon allows thehunter to provide accurate strikes at targets that elude the hellfire missile , and makes the hunter thearmy's first armed uav .

program status .

the army has halted productionon the rq - 5 hunter and now fills service gaps in the hunter force with the i - gnat - er .

as offebruary 2005 , all 32 hunter uavs are still in operation and periodically receive upgrades andmodifications .

the hunter system consists of eight aircraft , ground control systems and supportdevices , and launch / recovery equipment .

in fy2004 , the final year of hunter procurement , a huntersystem cost $26.5 million .

the fy2005 and fy2006 defense budgets contained no funds for theprocurement or r&d of any rq - 5 system .

an august 2005 announcement revealed that the armyawarded general atomic's warrior uav the contract for the extended range - multi purpose ( er - mp ) uav program over the hunter ii .

 ( 155 ) despite the loss , northrop grumman expects to continue tomarket the hunter ii to the rest of the services over the next few years .

 ( 156 ) .

the rq - 7 shadow found a home when the army , after a two decade search for a suitablesystem , selected aai's close range surveillance platform for its tactical unmanned aerial vehicle ( tuav ) program .

originally , the army , in conjunction with the navy explored several differentuavs for the tuav program , including the now - cancelled rq - 6 outrider system .

however , in1997 after the navy pursued other alternatives , the army opted for the low cost , simple design ofthe rq - 7 shadow 200 .

having reached full production capacity and an ioc in 2002 , the shadowhas become the primary airborne isr tool of numerous army units around the world and is expectedto remain in service through the decade .

system characteristics .

built by aai corporationof hunt valley , md , the shadow is 11 feet long with a wingspan of 13 feet .

it has a range of 68nautical miles , a distance picked to match typical army brigade operations , and an average flightduration of five hours .

although the shadow can reach a maximum altitude of 14,000 feet , itsoptimum level is 8,000 feet .

the shadow is catapulted from a rail - launcher , and recovered with theaid of arresting gear .

the uav also possesses automatic takeoff and landing capabilities .

theupgraded version , the rq - 7b shadow , features a greater wingspan by 16 inches and larger fuelcapacity that allows for an extra two hours of flight endurance .

mission and payload .

the shadow providesreal - time reconnaissance , surveillance and target acquisition information to the army at the brigadelevel .

a potential mission for the shadow is the perilous job of medical resupply .

the army isconsidering expanding the uav's traditional missions to include a medical role , where severalcrucial items such as blood , vaccines and fluid infusion systems could be delivered to troops viaparachute .

 ( 157 ) unlikethe rq - 5 hunter , the shadow will not be outfitted with weapons capabilities .

 ( 158 ) for surveillancepurposes , the shadow's 60-pound payload consists of an e - o / ir sensor turret which produces dayor night video , and can relay data to a ground station in real - time via a line - of - sight data link .

aspart of the army's future combat system plans , the shadow will be outfitted with the tacticalcommon data link currently in development to network the uav with battalion commanders,ground units and other air vehicles .

 ( 159 ) program status .

the army currently maintainsan inventory of 100 shadow uavs at ft. bragg , ft .

hood , ft. lewis , ft. stewart , ft. wainwright,at military bases in germany and korea , and with national guard units in baltimore , md and indiantown gap , pa. ( 160 ) the program cost for a shadow uav system - - which includes four vehicles , ground controlequipment , launch and recovery devices , remote video terminals , and high mobility multipurposewheeled vehicles for transportation - reached $16.4 million in current year dollars for fy2005 .

 ( 161 ) the army intends touse the shadow as the interim class iii tuav for the future combat systems project , which thearmy expects to reach ioc in 2014 .

 ( 162 ) in fy2005 the army procured eight tuav systems , but onlyrequested $26 million in fy2006 for retrofitting the existing shadow fleet with previously developedupgrades and modifications .

total rdt&e requests equalled $53.6 million in fy2005 and $139.6million in fy2006 .

in fy2005 , the appropriations conferees increased the request amount bynearly a third , while in fy2006 the house appropriators matched the request levels .

table 8 .

rq - 7 shadow funding ( $ millions ) **markup includes funding for rdt&e of an i - gnat er syste .

in the mid 1990s , the pentagon began developing a uav designed primarily for combatmissions .

the result was two separate unmanned aerial combat vehicles ( ucav ) programs , theair force's ucav and the navy's ucav - n demonstrator program .

the air force favored boeing'sx - 45 for its program , while northrop grumman's x - 47 pegasus and boeing's x - 46 competed for thenavy's project .

however , in june 2003 , the pentagon merged the two separated programs in orderto establish the joint unmanned combat air systems ( j - ucas ) project under the management ofthe defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) .

the objective of the j - ucas mergerwas to create a flexible offensive network in which the air and ground elements are adapted to meetspecific combat mission .

 ( 163 ) as part of program budget decision ( pbd ) 753 in december2004 , darpa was ordered to transfer administration of the j - ucas resources to air force , whichwill form a joint program planning committee with the navy .

 ( 164 ) while questionssurround the direction in which the air force will move the program forward , statements from thepentagon have indicated that the program will maintain a competitive environment between boeingand northrop grumman's vehicles .

 ( 165 ) system characteristics .

currently , j - ucasconsists of two variants from the navy and air force's previous programs .

featuring a length of 39feet and a wingspan of 49 feet , the x - 45c evolved as an enhanced cross - breed of the two evaluationx - 45a vehicles darpa inherited from the air force and the boeing's experimental x - 46asubmission for the navy program .

powered by general electric's ge f404-102d turbojet engine,the x - 45c is expected to achieve speeds of 450 knots and altitudes of 40,000 feet .

furthermore , thex - 45 can stay aloft for up to seven hours and operate at a range of 1,200 nautical miles .

whenengineering the x - 45c , boeing experimented with airframe designs that maximized the stealthcapabilities of the uav system .

they landed on the larger arrowhead design , which resembles fellowstealth aircraft like the b - 2 spirit bomber and f117a - nighthawk .

as the x - 45c's competitor,northrop grumman's x - 47b , an advanced version of the ucav - n's x - 47a , is nearly as long as thex - 45c , yet possess a significantly greater wingspan of 62 feet .

the increased wingspan incombination with the more powerful pratt & whitney f100-220u turbojet engine will allow x - 47ban endurance of nine hours and range of 1,600 nautical miles .

the speed and altitude of the pegasusis expected to match that of the x45-c .

the x - 47b retains a smooth and sleek design optimized forstealth but features folding wing - tips that cut down on size , making it more suitable for storageaboard an aircraft carrier .

 ( 166 ) designs are in place for the x - 47b's common operatingsystem , which is expected to accommodate both air force and naval technology .

 ( 167 ) both aircraft possessesautomated flight capabilities .

potential mission and payload .

initially , theseparate navy and air force programs envisioned ucav combat missions specific to the needs ofthe individual services .

the air force intended the x - 45's primary mission to be the suppressionof enemy air defenses ( sead ) and secondary mission of electronic attack warfare .

 ( 168 ) the navy planned touse its ucav for armed intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance .

 ( 169 ) the payloads of eachvehicle are expected to be tailored to the respective mission .

both boeing and northrop grumman'ssystems will possess internal weapons bays and will be capable of carrying guided weapons similarto those of conventional strike aircraft .

the current weapon choice for the x - 45c and the x - 47bis the gbu - 31 joint direct attack munitions ( jdam ) .

both vehicles will feature sars , electronicsupport measure sensor suites ( esm ) , and ground moving target indicators ( gmti ) .

additionally , the x - 47b's payload will include an e - o / ir camera combination in order to augmentits surveillance and reconnaissance missions .

program status .

since its inception , the ucavprograms have experienced a constant change in administration and organization , which manybelieve will affect the pace of development .

in 2003 , the air force and navy's respective ucavprojects were combined under the darpa controlled j - ucas program in order to facilitateinteroperability and development synergy .

in september of 2004 , darpa hired the johns hopkinsuniversity applied physics laboratory as a not - for - profit integrator / broker in charge of promotingcooperation for common vehicle architectures .

 ( 170 ) in a move viewed by several observers as an abrupt reversal,the office of the secretary of defense instructed the air force to take control over the project .

thesubsequent fluctuation of j - ucas management appears to complicate forecasting of the program'sfuture .

development of the combat uav has been advanced via the spiral developmentprocess .

 ( 171 ) currently , the j - ucas aircraft inventory includes two x - 45a air vehicles and one x - 47a airvehicle .

osd plans indicate that three x - 45cs three and the x - 47bs will be delivered by the endof 2006 .

operational flight assessments of both vehicles are expected to begin in 2007 .

 ( 172 ) the total money spenton the j - ucas / ucav program , which prior to fy2006 reached more than $1.45 billion in rdt&efunding , made it one of the most expensive uav ventures undertaken by dod .

for recent fundingdevelopments , see table 11 .

table 9 .

j - ucas funding ( $ in millions ) .

currently in the engineering and manufacturing development phase of production , the firescout was initially designed as the navy's choice for an unmanned helicopter capable ofreconnaissance , situational awareness and precise targeting .

 ( 173 ) while the navycanceled production of the fire scout in 2001 , northrop grumman's vertical take - off uav wasrejuvenated by the army in 2003 , when the army designated the fire scout as the interim class ivuav for the future combat system .

the army's interest spurred renewed navy funding for therq - 8 , making the fire scout dod's first joint uav helicopter .

recent experimentation andevaluation efforts have explored the possibility of arming the fire scout and adding multiple andnon - traditional mission capabilities to the platform .

system characteristics and mission .

northropgrumman based the design of the fire scout on a commercial schweitzer co. helicopter .

as anupgrade from the original rq - 8a , the rq - 8b fire scout features an advanced four - blade rotordesign to reduce the aircraft's acoustic signature .

 ( 174 ) with a basic 127 lbs payload , the fire scout can stay aloftfor up to 9.5 hours .

with the full capacity sensor payload the helicopter uav endurance diminishesto roughly six hours .

the vehicle also possesses autonomous flight capabilities .

the surveillancepayload consists of a laser designator and range finder , an ir camera and a multi - color eo camera,which when adjusted with specific filters could provide mine - detection capabilities .

 ( 175 ) the fire scoutcurrently possesses line - of - sight communication data links .

northrop grumman officials hope toexpand the communications capabilities to include a wideband data relay from another airborneplatform and possible satellite communications .

 ( 176 ) accompanying the renewed interest in the fire scout is anexpanded vision of mission capabilities , which most notably includes the armament of the helicopteruav for strike missions .

recent weaponization plans have included the integration of hydrafolding - fin rockets , 2.75 inch mark 66 unguided rockets , or the hellfire ii anti - tank missiles .

discussions of future missions have also covered border patrol , search and rescue operations,medical resupply and submarine spotting operations .

 ( 177 ) program status .

currently , five rq - 8a airvehicles accompanied by four ground stations have reached the developmental testing phase of theacquisition process .

these evaluation fire scouts were produced as low - rate - initial - productionvehicles .

the pentagon's 2005 uas roadmap estimates a future inventory of 192 vehicles betweenboth the army and navy .

 ( 178 ) the army anticipates full - rate - production in 2008 and iocby 2010 .

 ( 179 ) furthermore , the army intends to use the fire scout as the interim brigade - level uav for its futurecombat system program ( 180 ) , while the navy selected the rq - 8b to support the littoralcombat ship class of surface vessels .

 ( 181 ) fire scout funding is spread out through a variety of navy andarmy programs .

in february 2003 , the coast guard selected the bell helicopter textron's tr911d eagle eyetilitrotor uav for its deepwater modernization program .

a partnership of manufacturers , led bybell and including lockheed martin and aai , manages the development of the eagle eye .

 ( 183 ) the $3 million eagleeye takes off vertically like a helicopter , but then tilts down its rotors to fly like a plane .

the coastguard , anticipates the eventual acquisition of 69 vehicles , which will extend the surveillancecapability of their cutters .

 ( 184 ) able to patrol the u.s. coastline for drug smugglers , refugeesand ships in distress , the eagle eye will also be able to transmit video and infrared images to thecutter and command centers ashore .

furthermore , the vehicle can fly up to 220 knots and has anoperational radius of roughly 300 miles , which surpasses the performance capabilities of comparablevuavs .

 ( 185 ) subsequently , marine corps officials have expressed interest in the eagle eye as a short to mediumrange replacement for the rq - 2 pioneer .

 ( 186 ) .

force protection aerial surveillance system ( fpass ) .

serving as part of the air force'sairbase defense system , lockheed martin's fpass currently monitors the perimeter of severalairbases in iraq and afghanistan in an effort to prevent enemy incursions or terrorists attacks .

known to airmen as the desert hawk , this battery operated , propeller driven uav was developedin 1999 at the request of u.s. central command ( centcom ) to improve situational awarenessthrough area surveillance , patrols of base - perimeters and runway / departure paths , and aerial spottingfor ground convoys .

the desert hawk's small size , light weight and styrofoam body have led manyservicemen to draw comparison to remote - controlled model planes .

the simple design , however,appears conducive to on - the - job repairs , which operators perform routinely with tape or glue .

 ( 187 ) launched by ashoulder mounted slingshot device , the aircraft flies preprogrammed paths for up to one hour andlands through a controlled crash .

the desert hawk carries either a small digital or infrared cameraand can operate as far away as six nautical miles .

the total inventory of desert hawks for the airforce stands at 126 vehicles .

 ( 188 ) each system , including ground control stations , six vehiclesand spare parts , costs approximately $300,000 .

 ( 189 ) dragon eye .

aerovironment's dragon eye provides marines at the company level and belowwith reconnaissance , surveillance and target acquisition capabilities .

this backpack carried , batteryoperated uav features a 3.8 ft. rectangular wing , twin propellers and two cameras ports eachcapable of supporting day - light electro - optical cameras , low - light tv cameras , and infrared cameras.using autonomous gps navigation , dragon eye surveys preprogrammed area and relays nearreal - time images to a control station on the ground .

the compact and lightweight design of the uavallows an operational endurance of 45 minutes and can travel as far as two and a half nautical milesfrom the operator .

low - rate - initial - production of 40 aircraft began in 2001 .

however , after a 2003operational assessment , the marine corps awarded aerovironment a contract to deliverapproximately 300 systems of full - rate - production dragon eyes .

 ( 190 ) one dragon eyesystem consists of three air vehicles and one ground station .

the fy2006 marine corpsprocurement budget request anticipated the current unit cost per dragon eye system as$154,000 .

 ( 191 ) fqm - 151 pointer .

currently in service in operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operationiraqi freedom ( oif ) , the pointer is a short range reconnaissance and battlefield surveillance uavdeveloped by aerovironment .

the pointer is capable of greater flight endurance ( two hours ) thanmost similar small uavs , in part due to its relative large wingspan .

the pointer weighs in at nearly8.5 lbs and features a 9 foot wingspan , which decreases portability when part of a system of two airvehicles and a ground control unit .

as a result , transportation of a pointer system requires twopersonnel .

 ( 192 ) thebattery - operated uav carries either an ir or a daytime e - o sensor and has remained a valued shortrange isr asset for the air force and special operations command .

currently , these twoorganizations own 50 pointer systems and , according to osd documentation , plan to purchase anadditional 50 systems in the near future for oif and oef .

 ( 193 ) aerovironment is inthe process of developing the pointer's successor , the puma , which is expected to have an enduranceof four hours and be capable of simultaneously carrying e - o and ir cameras .

 ( 194 ) raven .

aerovironment's development of the raven emerged from the company's attemptto maximize the simplicity , portability and short range utility of mini - uavs for the warfighter .

engineered from the basic design of the pointer , the raven is two - thirds the size and weight of itspredecessor , making it backpackable .

 ( 195 ) the raven provides army and socom personnel with"over - the - hill" reconnaissance , sniper spotting and surveillance scouting of intended convoy routes .

the advanced electric motor initiates flight once hand - launched by a running start from the groundoperator .

the vehicle is powered by an electric battery that needs to be recharged after 90 minutes,but deployed soldiers are equipped with four auxiliary batteries that can be easily charged using the28 volt dc outlet in a humvee .

the vehicle lands via a controlled crash in which the cameraseparates from the body , which is composed of kevlar plating for extra protection .

like the pointer,the raven can carry either an ir or an e - o camera and transmits real - time images to its groundoperators .

the relatively simple system allows soldiers to be trained in - theater in a matter of days .

raven systems can either be deployed in three aircraft or two - aircraft configurations .

the army andsocom have purchased 185 and 70 three - aircraft systems respectively , while the air force iscurrently in the process of buying 41 two - aircraft systems .

 ( 196 ) a three - aircraft systemcosts approximately $250,000 .

 ( 197 ) silver fox .

developed by advanced ceramic research in conjunction with the office ofnaval research ( onr ) , the silver fox is a diesel - powered , front propeller uav designed fortactical isr support of brigade and battalion forces .

with a five foot fuselage and an eight footwingspan , the twenty pound vehicle achieves flight through a compressed air catapult or by hand,depending on wind speed .

the fuselage houses both a daylight e - o and a micro - ir camera forsurveillance purposes .

while onr and advanced ceramic research inc. began development of thesilver fox in early 2003 , the vehicle now supports u.s. forces in iraq through a variety ofundisclosed applications .

currently 20-30 systems of three vehicles each are planned for thenavy .

 ( 198 ) scan eagle .

while still in development , the scan eagle , has gained notice for its longendurance capabilities and relative low cost .

the single propeller gasoline powered uav featuresa wingspan two and a half times the length of its fuselage .

the narrow 10 foot wings allow the 40lb .

vehicle to reach altitudes as high as 19,000 feet , distances of more than 60 nautical miles and aflight endurance of almost 20 hours .

developed by boeing and the insitu group as a"launch - and - forget" uav , the scan eagle autonomously flies to points of interest selected by aground operator .

 ( 199 ) using an inertially stabilized camera turret carrying both e - o and ir sensors , the scan eaglecurrently provides marine corps units in iraq with force - protection isr .

the vehicle achieves flightthrough the use of a pneumatic launcher and lands through the skyhook recovery system .

scan eaglecan be launched from the deck of a ship .

furthermore , the uav's sensor data links possess the"cursor - on - target" feature , making a scan eagle system of eight vehicles interoperable with otherlegacy uav systems .

the marine corps , which is evaluating two systems under lease , expects theprice of a single scan eagle to be approximately $100,000 .

