the u.s. - led effort to end permanently afghanistan's role as a base for anti - western islamicterrorists requires not only the defeat of the taliban - which has been achieved through american,allied , and afghan military action , but also the reconstruction of a stable , effective and ideologicallymoderate afghan state .

otherwise , the country could again become a base for terrorism .

failure toachieve stability in afghanistan is also likely to have wider repercussions for the stability of pakistanand the central asian states .

unlike 1989 , when the u.s. government closed its embassy in kabul only ten days after the withdrawal of the last soviet forces , the bush administration has concluded that the united stateshas a major stake in the creation of a stable afghanistan , and that it cannot be left to the armedafghan contenders for power alone to decide the country's future .

the administration has not yetgiven a detailed indication of what longer - term role it envisions for the united states in the political,economic , and social reconstruction of afghanistan beyond current plans for emergency food andagricultural assistance , assistance in the formation of a new national army , and anti - narcotics aid .

however , both the president and the congress have declared that the united states will play a majorrole , in conjunction with nato allies and japan , the united nations , and international financialinstitutions , to promote economic development and encourage political stability in afghanistan .

 ( 1 ) the stakes for the united states include denying sanctuary and support for al qaeda terrorists , maintaining positive influence with a nuclear - armed and politically unstable pakistan , curtailing themassive flow of opium - based drugs from afghanistan , and , possibly , facilitating the creation of analternative to iran and russia as routes for the export of central asian oil and gas .

for all of thesereasons , the future u.s. role in afghanistan and the adjacent region is likely to be an important focusof interaction between the administration and congress in considering foreign assistance anddefense budget priorities and policy issues during the spring of 2002 .

congress has strongly supported american involvement in supporting the fledgling government headed by karzai , and many of the several dozen members of congress who have visitedafghanistan have advocated more u.s. aid than is currently planned , the more prompt delivery ofaid to the karzai administration , and an expanded u.s. role in peacekeeping .

in terms of action bycongress , h.r .

3994 ( hyde ) , the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 , wasintroduced "to authorize economic and democratic development assistance for afghanistan and toauthorize military assistance for afghanistan and certain other foreign countries. .

the bill wasmarked up by the house international relations committee on march 20 and reported ( amended ) on april 25 ( h.rept .

107-420 ) , addresses the overall direction and focus of u.s. policy towardshumanitarian relief and refugee repatriation , economic reconstruction , the suppression of narcoticsproduction , and support for a democratic and market - oriented afghanistan .

the bill would authorizeabout $1.05 billion in appropriations for assistance to afghanistan , subject to certain conditions,from fy2002 to fy2005 .

a senate version of the bill , s. 2712 , was introduced bysenator chuck hagel on july 9 , 2002 .

this report provides information on and analysis of the current situation in afghanistan , taking into consideration the country's essential characteristics and political developments since about thetime of the overthrow of the last afghan king , zahir shah , in 1973 , and sketches out four possiblescenarios for afghanistan's future .

the scenarios incorporate the profound effects of the communistcoup of 1978 , the 1979-1989 soviet occupation , subsequent civil war , and the rise and fall of thetaliban .

finally , the report identifies and analyzes factors that will influence afghanistan's politicalfuture , and discusses three policy areas in particular in which actions by the united states could becrucial , and three policy issues for congressional consideration .

an appendix contains keydocuments relating to the december 2001 bonn agreement , which is the framework for currentefforts to create a stable and democratic afghanistan .

this report will be updated in response to major political developments , but it is not intended to track issues concerning afghanistan on a regular basis .

broader and more frequently updatedcoverage of issues concerning afghanistan and u.s. policy is contained in crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: current issues and u.s. policy concerns , by [author name scrubbed] .

for information andanalysis concerning u.s. and other international humanitarian and reconstruction assistance toafghanistan , see crs report rl31355 , afghanistan's path to reconstruction: obstacles,challenges , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

achieving the goal of a stable and moderate afghanistan depends on the establishment of apolitical process that has at least the tacit support of the major organized ethnic and tribal groups andcontenders for power , as well as ordinary afghans who are simply seeking some kind of peace andnormalcy in their lives .

after nearly three decades since the overthrow of the afghan monarchy andthe onset of a three - cornered struggle involving the forces of moderate reform and market - orientedeconomic modernization , islamic fundamentalism , and marxism , most of the past elements ofafghan unity and stability have been shattered and are not even remembered by the more than halfof the current population who were born after the overthrow of the last monarch , zahir shah .

 ( 2 ) .

one way to envision the circumstances that might support the creation of a stable and moderateafghan state is to consider the country's past political history and the factors that in the past haveenhanced or undermined stability and modernization .

the establishment of afghanistan as a nationstate dates essentially from 1747 , when ahmad shah durrani , a tribal pashtun ( 4 ) chief of the sadozailine of the abdali tribe , gained election by his tribe as the ruler ( amir ) of territories approximatingthe present boundaries of afghanistan .

under the durrani ascendancy , afghanistan experienced allthe vicissitudes of dynastic chance and survived as a political entity largely as a buffer state whosenorthern and southern boundaries conformed to the high water line of the expanding british andrussian empires , and the periodically resurgent iranian empire .

in the 20th century afghanistan teetered between bursts of western and soviet - aided modernization and recurrent reaction spearheaded by the twin sources of rural power in the pashtunheartland: secular leaders , including tribal chieftains , local notables , or commanders , and muslimclerics of various kinds , including mullahs and influential pirs ( spiritual leaders ) of the mystical sufi islamic sects , which predominate in afghanistan and southern asia .

in many respects the traditionallocal power structure , outside of kabul and a few other population centers , approximated that in therural , pre - industrial west , with men of property or learning exercising governmental power andclergy providing spiritual guidance , moral authority , and often local political influence .

in general , modernization progressed faster among two sections of the population: tajiks and uzbeks in the north , who practiced settled agriculture or carried on commerce , and the morecosmopolitan , "persianized," residents of kabul of various ethnic origins , including "detribalized"pashtuns .

the traditional pashtun tribes of southern afghanistan , many of whom are or werenomadic , have been more resistant to centralization and modernization , but nonetheless have longthought of themselves as the "real" afghans .

pashtun dominance has long been a source of resentment among afghanistan's minority groups: the tajiks , uzbeks , and hazaras .

both the afghan tajiks and those in tajikistan have linguistic andcultural connections with iran , but usually not religious .

in matters of religion , the tajiks , like thepashtuns , follow the sunni school of islam , the larger of the two main islamic divisions .

theuzbeks have ethnic and linguistic connections to uzbekistan and central asia , and are also sunn imuslims .

the hazaras are a shi'a muslim minority with ethnic ties to central asia and religiousties to iran .

the language issue also divides the tribal pashtuns from other afghans .

dari , a form of classical persian , has long been the language of the court and of commerce .

in fact , more afghansspeak dari than pashto .

the former is the lingua franca of the north and west , and is spoken byabout 50% of the population , including most non - pashtun minorities , whereas pashto speakersaccount for something over one - third of the population .

some afghan sources claim that the formerking , zahir shah , and most of his relatives , cannot even speak pashto .

 ( 5 ) .

the modern afghan state reached its apogee , in a manner of speaking , under zahir shah , whoascended the throne in 1933 following the assassination of his father , mohammad nadir shah .

mindful of the fate of his predecessors who were perceived as having sacrificed the country'sinterests to obtain foreign support , or as having too aggressively challenged the power of the tribalchiefs and mullahs , zahir shah attempted a cautious modernization program while keeping ajudicious distance ( or so it seemed at the time ) from both the united states and the soviet union,while accepting aid from both .

daoud's overthrow and the soviet invasion caused a diaspora of afghanistan's small educatedand professional elite and the families associated with the rule of zahir shah , leading to the collapseof most vestiges of the old order .

the afghan communists attempted a number of social changesthat under other circumstances would have been viewed as progressive , including measures topromote secular education and liberate women , but the pdpa leaders , who came mainly from urbanareas , had little understanding of the countryside or respect for rural traditions .

their clumsy effortsto overturn the social and political order in the tribal areas provoked widespread rebellion .

equallyimportant , a long - standing , bitter , and unresolvable split between the kalq faction of the pdpa , ledby president nur mohammad taraki and prime minister hafizullah amin , and parcham faction , ledby babrak karmal , a soviet protã©gã© , brought the government to the point of collapse .

in addition to the basic parcham - khalq conflict , the afghan revolution spawned a number of violent radical groups , both leftist and islamist .

in early 1979 , under circumstances still describedas "murky" by the state department , u.s .

ambassador adolph "spike" dubs was kidnaped by agroup of men whose identities remain a matter of speculation and dispute , but who were alleged tobe maoist opponents of the regime .

dubs was killed in a fusillade of fire when afghan interiorministry forces , reportedly at the urging of soviet advisors , stormed the building in which he wasbeing held .

 ( 16 ) the more nationalistic khalqis gained the upper hand in the summer of 1978 and sent babrak karmal and a number of other prominent parchamites , who tended to have pro - soviet leanings , intoexile as ambassadors to soviet bloc countries .

by early 1979 the renewed split in the pdpa and thereckless policies of prime minister amin , the most energetic of the governing duo , had sparkedwidespread rebellions .

taraki visited moscow in september 1979 , where he was elaborately feted,and returned probably with orders to get rid of amin .

in october 1979 , however , amin moved first,organizing the murder of taraki and seizing power .

amin's ruthless power grab and the emergence of an anti - marxist tribal revolt alarmed the soviet union , which feared that amin was single - handedly destroying the revolution .

in december 1979,leonid brezhnev gave the fateful order for the invasion and occupation of afghanistan to keeppdpa government from collapsing .

the spearhead forces of the soviet invasion stormed thepresidential palace and killed amin , replacing him with babrak karmal , the parcham leader who hadbeen in exile in moscow .

 ( 17 ) .

u.s. policymakers and supporters of the afghan resistance movement expected that theanti - soviet campaign by the afghan mujahidin would contribute to the forging of a new sense ofafghan nationhood , but the war actually had the opposite effect .

instead of coalescing around acommon cause , the particular circumstances of the conflict intensified the existing ethnic , tribal,religious , and ideological divisions of the society , and intensified power rivalries among individualleaders .

several aspects of the anti - soviet war period were particularly divisive , and continue to impede national reconciliation today .

one was the boost given to islamic extremism , which developed ina context of ideological conflict with western - educated secularists and personal power rivalries .

atbottom , the rise of radical versions of islam had roots in a reaction against modernization and risingwestern influences associated with what some islamists viewed as a corrupt and decadent monarchy,and against the marxists .

although the anti - soviet mujahidin often were perceived as backward , albeit admirably dedicated tribesmen , most of the principal islamist political leaders in the anti - soviet war inafghanistan were men of education and social position .

more than half of the seven leaders of theso - called peshawar alliance that was headquartered in peshawar , pakistan , during the anti - sovietconflict , were university educated .

 ( 18 ) by and large,however , real power in the anti - soviet resistancetended to flow to younger leaders with an islamist orientation but a secular background , such asgulbuddin hekyatyar and ahmad shah masud , who had organizational and military skills , and whocould command , or at least support , mujahidin in the field .

last , but not least among the sources of division , and increasingly important after the pdpa coup in 1978 , was the role of a number of foreign powers , most notably pakistan , saudi arabia , andiran , each of which backed ethnic and ideological favorites , and private promoters of radicalideologies .

pakistan favored gulbuddin hekmatyar , saudi arabia backed professor rasul sayyaf,and iran supported several small shi'a hazara groups .

osama bin laden's role dates from late1980s , when he and a number of other private saudis attempted to promote their radical version ofsunni islam among the afghan mujahidin .

a power struggle following the soviet withdrawal set the stage for the rise of the taliban .

theinitial round involved rival mujahidin groups headquartered in peshawar , who were members of theso - called alliance and the remaining supporters of the communist government headed bynajibullah , including a reduced but still intact afghan army .

despite several promising negotiations,neither the seven alliance parties headquartered in peshawar , nor the commanders in thecountryside , who met separately in a meeting organized by the late abdul haq , one of the mostprominent field commanders , were able to agree on a division of power .

the story of the rise of the taliban ( plural of talib , an islamic student ) has been well coveredin the press and other media since the terrorist attacks of september 11 and the onset of theanti - terrorist war in afghanistan .

several aspects of the taliban's rise to power have continuingrelevance as cautionaries to the united states and other international supporters of the interimadministration under mohammad karzai: first , the taliban were widely welcomed , especially in the pashtun areas , for putting an end to endemic petty warfare and disorder , including especially the disruption of trade andcommerce .

this is still a goal of great importance to commercial interests as well as ordinaryafghans .

second , the taliban recruited and coopted numerous tribal leaders who were motivated mainly by self - interest - the maintenance of their personal power - rather than ideology .

many of these same leaders and their followers continue to be a major factor in the pashtunsouth .

third , the taliban represented a pashtun resurgence in the reaction to the rising power of the non - pashtun minorities , and completed the near total polarization of the country onpashtun / non - pashtun lines .

this conflict is by no means resolved , as evident by the bad feelingexpressed by many pashtuns at the june 2002 emergency loya jirga .

finally , the preference of the taliban leader , mullah mohammad omar , to rule from his southern home base of kandahar , symbolized starkly the cultural alienation of pashtunconservatives from the tajik - dominated northern alliance , which had controlled kabul , bagram,and adjacent areas during the period 1992-1996 , and had earned a reputation , especially amongpashtuns , for oppression and misrule .

achieving the goal of the united states , its allies , and the international community of a stableand moderate afghan state will depend on many factors , both internal and external .

most of thesefactors cannot now be predicted with any certainty , but if past is prologue , it may be possible toachieve a rough understanding of the requirements for ending afghanistan's steady disintegrationand reconstructing a stable and moderate state .

the following section evaluates the prospects ofachieving this goal by considering the main contributing factors in past periods of comparativestability , the status of these factors at present , the comparative strength of various claimants topower , and four possible scenarios that might result from the actions of internal forces and externalactors .

because more than two decades of conflict have largely destroyed the old afghan polity andeconomy , the past offers no reliable "roadmap" to constructing a politically stable and economicallyviable afghan state .

this conclusion is strongly suggested by two particular developments of thepast two decades - the collapse of the durrani ascendancy , which started with daoud's coup in 1973,and the rise of tajik power and , to a lesser extent , that of other ethnic minorities .

durrani politicaldominance is not likely to be reestablished because of the scattering of the afghan elite numberingperhaps 100,000 , largely to north america and europe , and the polarization of pashtun society byinternal conflict and the rise of the predominantly pashtun taliban .

the return of king zahir shahto his country after more than 30 years of exile , may lend some support to the political process butcannot restore the previous status quo - nor is it intended to under the bonn accord .

a bid byrelatives of the king and their supporters to give the king - and , hence , themselves - a direct role in thegovernance of the country was checked by the exercise of forceful influence by karzai , the panjsheritajik leaders of the northern alliance , and , reportedly , the united states .

for better or worse , the tajiks , who are less divided than the pashtuns , now appear firmly established in kabul and the northeast , and ismail khan , another tajik , who styles himself " emir " ( an arabic word equivalent to prince or ruler ) and acts independently of the his former northernalliance colleagues , has largely uncontested control of herat .

general dostum's control of mazar - i - sharif is being contested , but seems insured for the time being .

on the other hand,kandahar , jalalabad , and other important population centers in the pashtun south and southeastshow no similar coalescence under one leader or group of leaders .

which , if any , of these scenarios prevails likely will be determined by a number of key factors .

some of these are susceptible to external influence , others can only be decided by the afghansthemselves .

inevitably u.s. policy will have a significant influence on the outcome of the current effort toreconstruct a stable afghan state .

in addition to playing a key role in driving the taliban frompower , in concert with afghan forces on the ground , the united states has been the largest donor byfar to the feeding programs of the united nations world food program ( wfp ) , and it is certain tobe the among the leading contributors to economic reconstruction .

for the future , three roles on the part of the united states would appear extremely critical , over and above humanitarian assistance .

a number of assassinations and other incidents of political violence both before and after theemergency loya jirga underscore that events in afghanistan may be coming to a head sooner ratherthan later .

as of july 2002 , positive developments appear in many cases to be offset by negativeones , and the overall state of progress becomes a matter of individual judgment or perspective .

agreement on provisional arrangements in afghanistan pending the re - establishment of permanent government institutions the participants in the un talks on afghanistan , in the presence of the special representative of the secretary - general for afghanistan , determined to end the tragic conflict in afghanistan and promote national reconciliation , lasting peace , stability and respect for human rights in the country , reaffirming the independence , national sovereignty and territorial integrity of afghanistan , acknowledging the right of the people of afghanistan to freely determine their own political future in accordance with the principles of islam , democracy , pluralism and social justice , expressing their appreciation to the afghan mujahidin who , over the years , have defended the independence , territorial integrity and national unity of the country and have played a major role inthe struggle against terrorism and oppression , and whose sacrifice has now made them both heroesof jihad and champions of peace , stability and reconstruction of their beloved homeland,afghanistan , aware that the unstable situation in afghanistan requires the implementation of emergency interim arrangements and expressing their deep appreciation to his excellency professorburhanuddin rabbani for his readiness to transfer power to an interim authority which is to beestablished pursuant to this agreement , recognizing the need to ensure broad representation in these interim arrangements of all segments of the afghan population , including groups that have not been adequately represented atthe un talks on afghanistan , noting that these interim arrangements are intended as a first step toward the establishment of a broad - based , gender - sensitive , multi - ethnic and fully representative government , and are notintended to remain in place beyond the specified period of time , recognizing that some time may be required for a new afghan security force to be fully constituted and functional and that therefore other security provisions detailed in annex i to thisagreement must meanwhile be put in place , considering that the united nations , as the internationally recognized impartial institution , has a particularly important role to play , detailed in annex ii to this agreement , in the period prior to theestablishment of permanent institutions in afghanistan , have agreed as follows: the interim authority i .

general provisions 1 ) an interim authority shall be established upon the official transfer of power on 22 december 2001 .

2 ) the interim authority shall consist of an interim administration presided over by a chairman , a special independent commission for the convening of the emergency loya jirga , anda supreme court of afghanistan , as well as such other courts as may be established by the interimadministration .

the composition , functions and governing procedures for the interimadministration and the special independent commission are set forth in this agreement .

3 ) upon the official transfer of power , the interim authority shall be the repository of afghan sovereignty , with immediate effect .

as such , it shall , throughout the interim period , representafghanistan in its external relations and shall occupy the seat of afghanistan at the united nationsand in its specialized agencies , as well as in other international institutions and conferences .

4 ) an emergency loya jirga shall be convened within six months of the establishment of the interim authority .

the emergency loya jirga will be opened by his majesty mohammed zaher[sic] , the former king of afghanistan .

the emergency loya jirga shall decide on a transitionalauthority , including a broad - based transitional administration , to lead afghanistan until such timeas a fully representative government can be elected through free and fair elections to be held no laterthan two years from the date of the convening of the emergency loya jirga .

5 ) the interim authority shall cease to exist once the transitional authority has been established by the emergency loya jirga .

6 ) a constitutional loya jirga shall be convened within eighteen months of the establishment of the transitional authority , in order to adopt a new constitution for afghanistan .

in order to assistthe constitutional loya jirga prepare the proposed constitution , the transitional administrationshall , within two months of its commencement and with the assistance of the united nations,establish a constitutional commission .

ii .

legal framework and judicial system 1 ) the following legal framework shall be applicable on an interim basis until the adoption of the new constitution referred to above: i ) the constitution of 1964 , a / to the extent that its provisions are not inconsistent with those contained in this agreement , and b / with the exception of those provisions relatingto the monarchy and to the executive and legislative bodies provided in the constitution ; and ii ) existing laws and regulations , to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this agreement or with international legal obligations to which afghanistan is a party , or withthose applicable provisions contained in the constitution of 1964 , provided that theinterim authority shall have the power to repeal or amend those laws and regulations .

2 ) the judicial power of afghanistan shall be independent and shall be vested in a supreme court of afghanistan , and such other courts as may be established by the interim administration.the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the united nations , a judicialcommission to rebuild the domestic justice system in accordance with islamic principles,international standards , the rule of law and afghan legal traditions .

iii .

interim administration a .

composition 1 ) the interim administration shall be composed of a chairman , five vice chairmen and 24 other members .

each member , except the chairman , may head a department of the interimadministration .

2 ) the participants in the un talks on afghanistan have invited his majesty mohammed zaher [sic] , the former king of afghanistan , to chair the interim administration .

his majesty has indicatedthat he would prefer that a suitable candidate acceptable to the participants be selected as the chairof the interim administration .

3 ) the chairman , the vice chairmen and other members of the interim administration have been selected by the participants in the un talks on afghanistan , as listed in annex iv to thisagreement .

the selection has been made on the basis of professional competence and personalintegrity from lists submitted by the participants in the un talks , with due regard to the ethnic,geographic and religious composition of afghanistan and to the importance of the participation ofwomen .

4 ) no person serving as a member of the interim administration may simultaneously hold membership of the special independent commission for the convening of the emergency loyajirga .

b .

procedures 1 ) the chairman of the interim administration , or in his / her absence one of the vice chairmen , shall call and chair meetings and propose the agenda for these meetings .

2 ) the interim administration shall endeavour to reach its decisions by consensus .

in order for any decision to be taken , at least 22 members must be in attendance .

if a vote becomes necessary,decisions shall be taken by a majority of the members present and voting , unless otherwise stipulatedin this agreement .

the chairman shall cast the deciding vote in the event that the members aredivided equally .

c. functions 1 ) the interim administration shall be entrusted with the day - to - day conduct of the affairs of state , and shall have the right to issue decrees for the peace , order and good government ofafghanistan .

2 ) the chairman of the interim administration or , in his / her absence , one of the vice chairmen , shall represent the interim administration as appropriate .

3 ) those members responsible for the administration of individual departments shall also be responsible for implementing the policies of the interim administration within their areas ofresponsibility .

4 ) upon the official transfer of power , the interim administration shall have full jurisdiction over the printing and delivery of the national currency and special drawing rights from internationalfinancial institutions .

the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the unitednations , a central bank of afghanistan that will regulate the money supply of the country throughtransparent and accountable procedures .

5 ) the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the united nations , an independent civil service commission to provide the interim authority and the future transitionalauthority with shortlists of candidates for key posts in the administrative departments , as well asthose of governors and uluswals , in order to ensure their competence and integrity .

6 ) the interim administration shall , with the assistance of the united nations , establish an independent human rights commission , whose responsibilities will include human rightsmonitoring , investigation of violations of human rights , and development of domestic human rightsinstitutions .

the interim administration may , with the assistance of the united nations , alsoestablish any other commissions to review matters not covered in this agreement .

7 ) the members of the interim administration shall abide by a code of conduct elaborated in accordance with international standards .

8 ) failure by a member of the interim administration to abide by the provisions of the code of conduct shall lead to his / her suspension from that body .

the decision to suspend a member shallbe taken by a two - thirds majority of the membership of the interim administration on the proposalof its chairman or any of its vice chairmen .

9 ) the functions and powers of members of the interim administration will be further elaborated , as appropriate , with th assistance of the united nations .

iv .

the special independent commission for the convening of the emergency loya jirga 1 ) the special independent commission for the convening of the emergency loya jirga shall be established within one month of the establishment of the interim authority .

the specialindependent commission will consist of twenty - one members , a number of whom should haveexpertise in constitutional or customary law .

the members will be selected from lists of candidatessubmitted by participants in the un talks on afghanistan as well as afghan professional and civilsociety groups .

the united nations will assist with the establishment and functioning of thecommission and of a substantial secretariat .

2 ) the special independent commission will have the final authority for determining the procedures for and the number of people who will participate in the emergency loya jirga .

thespecial independent commission will draft rules and procedures specifying ( i ) criteria for allocationof seats to the settled and nomadic population residing in the country ; ( ii ) criteria for allocation ofseats to the afghan refugees living in iran , pakistan , and elsewhere , and afghans from the diaspora ; ( iii ) criteria for inclusion of civil society organizations and prominent individuals , including islamicscholars , intellectuals , and traders , both within the country and in the diaspora .

the specialindependent commission will ensure that due attention is paid to the representation in theemergency loya jirga of a significant number of women as well as all other segments of the afghanpopulation .

3 ) the special independent commission will publish and disseminate the rules and procedures for the convening of the emergency loya jirga at least ten weeks before the emergency loyajirga convenes , together with the date for its commencement and its suggested location and duration .

4 ) the special independent commission will adopt and implement procedures for monitoring the process of nomination of individuals to the emergency loya jirga to ensure that the process ofindirect election or selection is transparent and fair .

to pre - empt conflict over nominations , thespecial independent commission will specify mechanisms for filing of grievances and rules forarbitration of disputes .

5 ) the emergency loya jirga will elect a head of the state for the transitional administration and will approve proposals for the structure and key personnel of the transitional administration .

v. final provisions 1 ) upon the official transfer of power , all mujahidin , afghan armed forces and armed groups in the country shall come under the command and control of the interim authority , and bereorganized according to the requirements of the new afghan security and armed forces .

2 ) the interim authority and the emergency loya jirga shall act in accordance with basic principles and provisions contained in international instruments on human rights and internationalhumanitarian law to which afghanistan is a party .

3 ) the interim authority shall cooperate with the international community in the fight against terrorism , drugs and organized crime .

it shall commit itself to respect international law and maintainpeaceful and friendly relations with neighbouring countries and the rest of the internationalcommunity .

4 ) the interim authority and the special independent commission for the convening of the emergency loya jirga will ensure the participation of women as well as the equitable representationof all ethnic and religious communities in the interim administration and the emergency loya jirga .

5 ) all actions taken by the interim authority shall be consistent with security council resolution 1378 ( 14 november 2001 ) and other relevant security council resolutions relating toafghanistan .

6 ) rules of procedure for the organs established under the interim authority will be elaborated as appropriate with the assistance of the united nations .

this agreement , of which the annexes constitute an integral part , done in bonn on this 5th day of december 2001 in the english language , shall be the authentic text , in a single copy which shallremain deposited in the archives of the united nations .

official texts shall be provided in dari andpashto , and such other languages as the special representative of the secretary - general maydesignate .

the special representative of the secretary - general shall send certified copies in english,dari and pashto to each of the participants .

for the participants in the un talks on afghanistan: ms. amena afzali mr. s. hussain anwari mr. hedayat amin arsala mr. sayed hamed gailani mr. rahmatullah musa ghazi eng .

abdul hakim mr. houmayoun jareer mr. abbas karimi mr. mustafa kazimi dr. azizullah ludin mr. ahmad wali massoud mr. hafizullah asif mohseni prof. mohammad ishaq nadiri mr. mohammad natiqi mr. yunus qanooni dr. zalmai rassoul mr. h. mirwais sadeq dr. mohammad jalil shams prof. abdul sattar sirat mr. humayun tandar mrs. sima wali general abdul rahim wardak mr. pacha khan zadran witnessed for the united nations by: mr. lakhdar brahimi special representative of the secretary - general for afghanistan annex i international security force 1 .

the participants in the un talks on afghanistan recognize that the responsibility for providing security and law and order throughout the country resides with the afghans themselves.to this end , they pledge their commitment to do all within their means and influence to ensure suchsecurity , including for all united nations and other personnel of international governmental andnon - governmental organizations deployed in afghanistan .

2 .

with this objective in mind , the participants request the assistance of the international community in helping the new afghan authorities in the establishment and training of new afghansecurity and armed forces .

3 .

conscious that some time may be required for the new afghan security and armed forces to be fully constituted and functioning , the participants in the un talks on afghanistan request theunited nations security council to consider authorizing the early deployment to afghanistan of aunited nations mandated force .

this force will assist in the maintenance of security for kabul andits surrounding areas .

such a force could , as appropriate , be progressively expanded to other urbancentres and other areas .

4 .

the participants in the un talks on afghanistan pledge to withdraw all military units from kabul and other urban centers or other areas in which the un mandated force is deployed .

it wouldalso be desirable if such a force were to assist in the rehabilitation of afghanistan's infrastructure .

annex ii role of the united nations during the interim period 1 .

the special representative of the secretary - general will be responsible for all aspects of the united nations' work in afghanistan .

2 .

the special representative shall monitor and assist in the implementation of all aspects of this agreement .

3 .

the united nations shall advise the interim authority in establishing a politically neutral environment conducive to the holding of the emergency loya jirga in free and fair conditions .

theunited nations shall pay special attention to the conduct of those bodies and administrativedepartments which could directly influence the convening and outcome of the emergency loyajirga .

4 .

the special representative of the secretary - general or his / her delegate may be invited to attend the meetings of the interim administration and the special independent commission on theconvening of the emergency loya jirga .

5 .

if for whatever reason the interim administration or the special independent commission were actively prevented from meeting or unable to reach a decision on a matter related to theconvening of the emergency loya jirga , the special representative of the secretary - general shall,taking into account the views expressed in the interim administration or in the special independentcommission , use his / her good offices with a view to facilitating a resolution to the impasse or adecision .

6 .

the united nations shall have the right to investigate human rights violations and , where necessary , recommend corrective action .

it will also be responsible for the development andimplementation of a programme of human rights education to promote respect for and understandingof human rights .

annex iii request to the united nations by the participants at the un talks on afghanistan the participants in the un talks on afghanistan hereby 1 .

request that the united nations and the international community take the necessary measures to guarantee the national sovereignty , territorial integrity and unity of afghanistan as well as thenon - interference by foreign countries in afghanistan's internal affairs ; 2 .

urge the united nations , the international community , particularly donor countries and multilateral institutions , to reaffirm , strengthen and implement their commitment to assist with therehabilitation , recovery and reconstruction of afghanistan , in coordination with the interimauthority ; 3 .

request the united nations to conduct as soon as possible ( i ) a registration of voters in advance of the general elections that will be held upon the adoption of the new constitution by theconstitutional loya jirga and ( ii ) a census of the population of afghanistan .

4 .

urge the united nations and the international community , in recognition of the heroic role played by the mujahidin in protecting the independence of afghanistan and the dignity of its people,to take the necessary measures , in coordination with the interim authority , to assist in thereintegration of the mujahidin into the new afghan security and armed forces ; 5 .

invite the united nations and the international community to create a fund to assist the families and other dependents of martyrs and victims of the war , as well as the war disabled ; 6 .

strongly urge that the united nations , the international community and regional organizations cooperate with the interim authority to combat international terrorism , cultivation andtrafficking of illicit drugs and provide afghan farmers with financial , material and technicalresources for alternative crop production .

