wireless communications devices — including mobile telephones , personal digital assistants ( pdas ) , pagers , and automobile - based services such as onstar — are ubiquitous .

many of the services provided by these devices require data on the user's location , whether it is to connect a phone call or dispatch emergency services when an airbag deploys .

consumers and privacy rights advocates are increasingly concerned about the privacy implications of these wireless location - based services .

if a company providing a wireless service knows the user's location , with whom can that data be shared ? .

how long can the data be retained ? .

will the data be used to create individual profiles that will be sold to marketing companies or used for other purposes unknown to the user or contrary to his or her preference ? .

will consumers be deluged with messages on their communications devices advertising sales at nearby stores or restaurants not unlike the "spam" in their e - mail inboxes ? .

the precision with which wireless service providers can determine a subscriber's exact location is improving with the implementation of enhanced 911 ( e911 ) capabilities for mobile telephones and other wireless devices , wherein wireless carriers are required to provide public safety answering points ( psaps ) with the location of wireless callers who dial 911 within 50-300 meters ( 150-900 feet ) .

while this serves the laudable goal of ensuring mobile telephone users immediate access to emergency services , many worry about what other uses will be made of such location information .

once the technical ability exists to provide a user's precise coordinates , some privacy advocates worry that more and more devices will incorporate it , making location information widely available without proper privacy safeguards .

the debate over wireless privacy in many ways parallels the debate over internet privacy and internet spam .

indeed , since wireless internet access devices are on the market , the issues intersect .

one particular similarity is that the policy debate focuses on whether legislation is needed , or if industry can be relied upon to self - regulate .

four laws , each discussed later in this report , address some of the issues — the telephone consumer protection act ( p.l .

102-243 ) , the wireless communications and public safety act ( p.l .

106-81 ) , the controlling the assault of non - solicited pornography and marketing act ( can - spam , p.l .

108-187 ) , and the undertaking spam , spyware , and fraud enforcement with enforcers beyond borders act ( us safe web , p.l .

109-455 ) — however , other concerns remain .

much of the wireless privacy controversy parallels the debate over internet privacy ( see crs report rl31408 , internet privacy: overview and legislation in the 109 th congress , 1 st session , by [author name scrubbed] ) and spam ( see crs report rl31953 , " spam " : an overview of issues concerning commercial electronic mail , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

in that context , questions have arisen over whether wireless carriers should be required to follow "fair information practices" with regard to collection , use , or dissemination of call location information .

the ftc has identified four "fair information practices" for operators of commercial websites: providing notice to users of their information practices before collecting personal information , allowing users choice as to whether and how personal information is used , allowing users access to data collected and the ability to contest its accuracy , and ensuring security of the information from unauthorized use .

enforcement is sometimes included as a fifth practice .

"choice" is often described as "opt - in" or "opt - out. .

to opt - in , consumers must give their affirmative consent to a website's information practices .

to opt - out , consumers are assumed to have given consent unless they indicate otherwise .

some argue that similar practices should be observed by wireless carriers or providers of location - based information and services .

a major issue is whether congress should pass a law requiring them to do so , or if industry self - regulation is sufficient .

several industry segments are involved in the wireless privacy debate: the wireless telecommunications carriers ; companies offering location - based information and services ; and websites that can be accessed over wireless devices .

the optimism surrounding the business potential of wireless devices is exemplified by the emergence of the terms m - commerce ( mobile commerce ) and l - commerce ( location commerce ) and the creation of industry associations to promote them .

the mobile marketing association developed a code of conduct that was adopted by mma's board of directors in november 2003 .

it combines opt - in and opt - out approaches .

in september 2004 , mma established a wireless anti - spam committee in what it called the second phase of its efforts to ensure wireless applications are spam - free ( the release of the code of conduct was the first phase ) .

truste , a company that offers privacy "seals" to websites that follow certain privacy guidelines , released what it called the "first wireless privacy standards" on february 18 , 2004 .

the "wireless privacy and principles and implementation guidelines" call for — wireless service providers to give notice to their customers prior to or during the collection of personally identifiable information ( pii ) , or upon first use of a service ; wireless service providers to disclose customers' pii to third parties only if the customer has opted - in , and the customer should be able to change that preference at any time ; and wireless service providers may only use location information for services other than those related to placing or receiving calls if the customer has opted - in , and wireless service providers should disclose the fact that they retain location information beyond the time reasonably needed to provide the requested service .

the mma's code of conduct includes a requirement to "align" with the truste principles .

the ftc held a workshop on wireless web privacy issues in december 2000 .

according to a media account , participants conceded that many companies developing wireless applications are too busy implementing their services to focus on privacy issues , and that since these companies are not certain of what future applications may emerge , "they tend to collect far more data than they need right now ... and even more collection is likely once there's ready buyer [sic] for information. .

some participants noted the importance of determining privacy requirements early in the development of wireless and location - based services so systems and equipment need not be retrofitted in the future .

in november 2000 , ctia asked the fcc to initiate a rulemaking , separate from its rulemaking on customer proprietary network information ( cpni , see discussion of the 911 act , below ) , on implementation of the wireless location information amendments made by p.l .

106-81 .

ctia argued that location privacy information is uniquely a wireless concern , and such an fcc rulemaking would attract commenters who would not be interested in the general cpni rulemaking .

ctia asked that the fcc adopt privacy principles to assure that mobile services users would be informed of the location information collection and use practices of their service providers before the information is disclosed or used .

specifically , ctia wanted the fcc to adopt technology neutral ( i.e. , for either handset - or network - based systems ) rules requiring notice , choice , and "security and integrity. .

the latter phrase was described as meaning that location information should be protected from unauthorized use and disclosure to third parties , and third parties must adhere to the provider's location information practices .

the fcc issued a public notice on march 16 , 2001 requesting comments on ctia's request .

after receiving comments and deliberating on the request , the fcc announced in july 2002 that it would not commence such a proceeding .

the fcc concluded that the "statute imposes clear legal obligations and protections for consumers" and "we do not wish to artificially constrain the still - developing market for location - based services..." the fcc added that it would closely monitor the issues and initiate a rulemaking proceeding "only when the need to do so has been clearly demonstrated. .

wireless privacy issues have expanded beyond the initial concerns about privacy principles and fair information practices .

as discussed earlier , a major issue today is the sale of cell phone records , and four of the major wireless service providers have brought legal actions against companies that allegedly fraudulently obtain or sell their customers' cell phone records .

ctia applauded the introduction of legislation in the senate in january 2006 , but also said that prosecutors could act under existing law .

at the house energy and commerce committee hearing on february 1 , 2006 , ctia president steve largent again said his organization supports the need for legislation , but cautioned that it might not entirely solve the problem ( discussed earlier ) .

verizon wireless and t - mobile are supporting senator schumer's bill .

three existing laws directly address some aspects of the wireless privacy and spam debate: tcpa , the "911 act," and the can - spam act .

they are summarized in this section .

the privacy of cell phone records , an issue which has arisen quite recently , is not addressed by any of these three laws .

instead , the federal trade commission act ( ftc act ) and the 1996 telecommunications act contain provisions relevant to that debate .

they are discussed earlier in this report ( see " selling cell phone records " ) , so that information is not repeated here .

the 110 th congress will likely continue to consider whether additional legislation is needed to protect wireless subscribers .

h.r .

83 ( frelinghuysen ) , the wireless privacy protection act , is identical to h.r .

71 from the 108 th congress .

the bill would amend the communications act of 1934 to require informed customer prior written consent to the provision of wireless call location and crash information to a third party .

the bill was referred to the house energy and commerce committee .

s. 2130 ( schumer ) , would amend 18 u.s.c .

§ 2510 ( 8 ) to include ( 1 ) within the definition of "contents" of any interception of wire , electronic , and oral communications to include contemporaneous , real - time , or prospective information regarding the physical location of a cellular telephone ; and ( 2 ) within the definition of "tracking device," a cellular telephone for which the government seeks contemporaneous , real - time , or prospective information regarding its location .

the bill was referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

1139 ( pitts ) , the wireless 411 privacy act , is identical to h.r .

3558 from the 108 th congress .

this bill would enable wireless subscribers to keep their wireless telephone numbers unlisted , for free , if a directory assistance database for wireless subscribers were to be created .

the legislation requires commercial mobile service providers to obtain express prior authorization ( "opt - in" ) from each current subscriber , separate from any authorization obtained to provide the subscriber with mobile service or any associated calling plan or other service , to include the subscriber's wireless phone number in the database .

for new subscribers , mobile service providers may include a subscriber's number in a 411 directory only if they provide a separate notice at the time a new subscriber signs up for service , and at least once a year thereafter , informing the subscriber of the right not to be listed , and providing a convenient mechanism for the subscriber to decline or refuse to be listed ( "opt - out" ) .

call forwarding from a directory assistance operator to a subscriber would be permitted only if the operator first informs the subscriber of who is calling and the subscriber may accept or reject the incoming call on a per - call basis , and the subscriber's phone number may not be disclosed to the calling party .

call forwarding would not be permitted to subscribers whose numbers are unlisted .

the bill also prohibits commercial mobile service providers from publishing , in print , electronic , or other form , the contents of any wireless directory assistance database .

no fees may be charged to subscribers for keeping their phone numbers private .

the bill was referred to the subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet of the committee on energy and commerce .

s. 1350 ( specter ) has the same title as h.r .

1139 , but the provisions are somewhat different .

it does not differentiate between current and new subscribers , for example .

in h.r .

1139 , the opt - in requirement is only for current subscribers ; new subscribers would be given the opportunity to opt - out .

in s. 1350 , opt - in consent is required from all subscribers .

also , in s. 1350 , if a subscriber's number is listed in a 411 directory , and the subscriber wants it removed , the mobile service provider must do so without any cost to the subscriber .

s. 1350 contains language similar to the call forwarding provisions of h.r .

1139 under the heading "wireless accessibility. .

whereas h.r .

1139 prohibits commercial mobile service providers from publishing the contents of a wireless 411 directory , s. 1350 allows such publication if opt - in consent is obtained .

like h.r .

1139 , s. 1350 specifies that no fees may be charged to subscribers for keeping their phone numbers private .

s. 1350 also would preempt state and local laws that are inconsistent with the requirements in the bill ; h.r .

1139 does not address that issue .

s. 1350 was referred to the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee .

s. 2389 ( allen ) , the protecting consumer phone records act ( also discussed below ) ( s.rept .

109-253 ) , would prohibit a provider of commercial mobile services from including the wireless telephone number of any subscriber in any wireless directory assistance database , or publishing such a directory , without first ( 1 ) providing a clear notice to the subscriber of the right not to be listed ; and ( 2 ) obtaining express prior authorization from such subscriber for such listing .

the bill would also require cost - free delisting for subscribers and prohibit provider from charging a fee to the subscriber for the exercise of such privacy rights .

the bill was placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders ( calendar no .

425 ) .

s. 2177 ( durbin ) , the phone records protection act , prohibits the sale , fraudulent transfer or use of telephone records .

the bill covers telecommunications carriers as defined in section 3 of the communications act of 1934 , including any form of wireless telephone services such as cell phones , broadband personal communications service ( pcs ) , specialized mobile radio ( smr ) service , and successors to those services .

the bill creates criminal penalties , including fines and up to 10 years in prison .

exceptions are provided for law enforcement agencies .

the bill was referred to the senate judiciary committee .

s. 2178 ( schumer ) , the consumer telephone records protection act , would make it a criminal violation to obtain , or attempt to obtain , confidential phone records without authorization from the customer to whom those records relate by knowingly and intentionally making false or fraudulent statements or representations to an employee or customer of covered entities , providing false documentation to a covered entity knowing it was false , or accessing customer accounts via the internet .

the bill covers telecommunications carriers as defined in section 3 of the communications act of 1934 , and any provider of ip - enabled voice service .

 ( ip means internet protocol. ) .

the bill also prohibits any person , including employees of telephone companies or data brokers , from knowingly and intentionally selling such records without authorization from the customer .

violators would be fined , imprisoned for no more than five years , or both .

exceptions are provided for law enforcement agencies .

the bill creates enhanced penalties if the violation is committed while violating another law or as part of a pattern of illegal activity involving more than $100,000 or more than 50 customers in a 12-month period .

the enhanced penalty would double the fine and allow imprisonment for up to 10 years .

the bill was placed on senate legislative calendar under general orders ( calendar no .

368 ) .

s. 2264 ( pryor ) , the consumer phone record security act , would make it unlawful for a person to: ( 1 ) obtain , or attempt to obtain , through fraud an individual's cpni , or cause , or attempt to cause , an individual's cpni to be disclosed to another person without authorization ; ( 2 ) sell , or offer for sale , a person's cpni without their authorization ; or ( 3 ) request another person to obtain a person's cpni from a telecommunications carrier without proper authorization ( with an exception authorizing a law enforcement official to obtain a person's cpni provided certain conditions are met ) .

the bill would assign enforcement of the requirements of the bill to the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and the states , and authorize a person whose cpni has been obtained , used , or sold to file an action for civil relief against the violator .

finally , the bill would amend the communications act of 1934 to require telecommunications carriers to implement certain measures to protect a person's cpni .

the bill was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

s. 2389 ( allen ) , the protecting consumer phone records act , would make it unlawful for a person to: ( 1 ) acquire or use a an individual's cpni without written consent ; ( 2 ) misrepresent that another person has consented to the acquisition of cpni in order to obtain such information ; ( 3 ) obtain unauthorized access to data processing systems or records in order to obtain such information ; ( 4 ) sell , or offer to sell , cpni ; or ( 5 ) request that another person obtain cpni from a telecommunications carrier or internet protocol - enabled voice service provider , knowing that the other person will obtain such information in an unlawful manner .

the bill does provide for some exceptions while also providing for both civil and criminal penalties for violations .

the bill would require enforcement by the ftc , the fcc , and the states , and preempt contrary state law .

it would also require the ftc and fcc to conduct a public awareness campaign about protecting cpni .

this bill was placed on senate legislative calendar under general orders ( calendar no .

425 ) .

h.r .

4657 ( lipinski ) , the secure telephone operations act , would make it a crime to knowingly sell cpni .

violators would be subject to fines or imprisonment for up to 10 years , or both .

it was referred to the house judiciary committee subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security .

h.r .

4662 ( blackburn ) , the consumer telephone records protection act , has the same title as s. 2178 , but is different .

section 3 would make it unlawful for any person to obtain or cause to be disclosed ( or attempt to do so ) cpni by making false , fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations to an officer , employee , or agent of a telecommunications carrier ; or by providing by any means , including the internet , any document or information to an officer , employee , or agent of a telecommunications carrier knowing it was forged , counterfeit , lost , stolen , obtained fraudulently or without the customer's consent , or contained a false , fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation .

it also would be unlawful to request someone to obtain cpni knowing it would be obtained in that manner , or to sell cpni knowing that it was obtained by such means .

exceptions are provided for law enforcement agencies .

section 4 would require telecommunications carriers to notify customers if their cpni was disclosed in violation of the act ( that topic is not addressed in s. 2178 . ) .

the ftc would enforce section 3 .

the bill sets the same criminal penalties and enhanced penalties as s. 2178 .

it was referred to the house energy and commerce committee subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet .

h.r .

4678 ( schakowsky ) , the stop attempted fraud against everyone ' s cell and land line ( safe call ) act , is similar to h.r .

4662 , except that it does not set criminal penalties ( it would be enforced by the ftc ) , and does not require customers to be notified if their cpni is disclosed .

it was referred to the house energy and commerce committee subcommittee on commerce , trade and consumer protection .

h.r .

4709 ( l. smith ) , the law enforcement and phone privacy protection act ( h.rept .

109-395 ) , would make it a crime knowingly and intentionally obtain , or attempt to obtain , confidential phone records information of a covered entity by making false or fraudulent statements or providing such documents , or accessing customer accounts via the internet without prior authorization from the customer to whom the records relate .

the term "confidential phone records information" is defined as information that relates to the quantity , technical configuration , type , destination , location , or amount of use of a service offered by a covered entity subscribed to by a customer of the covered entity , and is made available to a covered entity by a customer only because of the relationship between the covered entity and the customer .

the term "covered entity" is defined as a telecommunications carrier ( as defined in 47 u.s.c .

153 ) and includes any provider of ip - enabled voice service .

 ( ip is internet protocol ) .

this bill was presented to the president on december 22 , 2006 .

h.r .

4714 ( boswell ) , the phone records protection act , is identical to s. 2177 .

it was referred to the house judiciary committee .

