on may 24 , 2002 , president bush and russia's president putin signed the strategic offensive reductions treaty , known as the moscow treaty , that would limit strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

in it , the two nations stated that they would reduce strategic nuclear weapons to between 1,700 and 2,200 warheads by december 31 , 2012 .

the treaty lapsed , however , on february 5 , 2011 , when the new start treaty entered into force and superseded the moscow treaty .

press reports and public statements in 2002 hailed the moscow treaty because it seemed to impose sharp reduction from the 6,000 warhead level mandated by the 1991 strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) .

however , this treaty differed from past arms control treaties in that it did not include any of the detailed definitions , counting rules , elimination procedures , or monitoring and verification provisions that have become common in treaties signed since the late 1980s .

consequently , a simple comparison of warhead levels counted under start and warhead levels permitted by the moscow treaty does not provide a complete view of the likely effects of the moscow treaty .

this report provides a brief overview of the two nations' objectives when they began discussions on this treaty and a summary of how they resolved these differences when concluding the negotiations .

it then describes the key provisions in the treaty and presents illustrative forces that each side might deploy in the next 10 years .

it offers a brief assessment of how each nation fared in achieving its objectives when negotiating this agreement and a summary of reaction from u.s. and russian commentators .

it concludes with a brief review of the issues raised during the treaty's ratification debates .

the first signs of a new arms control dialogue between the united states and russia appeared after president bush and president putin met in genoa , italy , during the g - 8 summit in july 2001 .

at that time , the presidents issued a statement saying that the two nations would "shortly begin intensive consultations on the interrelated subjects of offensive and defensive systems. .

each nation had sharply divergent views on the substance and goals for these talks .

when discussing offensive force reductions , russia argued that the two sides should seek agreement on a formal treaty that would limit each side to 1,500 nuclear weapons .

the bush administration wanted to pursue unilateral reductions , with each side setting its own nuclear force size and structure , but it would not offer any details on u.s. plans in this regard until the department of defense completed its review of u.s. nuclear posture .

this internal review concluded in november , 2001 .

during a summit meeting with president putin in washington , on november 13 , 2001 , president bush announced that the united states would reduce its "operationally deployed" strategic nuclear warheads to a level between 1,700 and 2,200 over the next decade. .

the president stated that the united states would reduce its forces unilaterally , without signing a formal agreement with russia .

he stated that the two nations did not need "endless hours of arms control discussions" and arms control agreements "to reduce our weaponry in a significant way. .

he offered to "write it down on a piece of paper," but he indicated that he believed a handshake would be good enough .

president putin responded by stating that he appreciated the president's decision to reduce u.s. nuclear forces and stated that russia "will try to respond in kind. .

he did not offer a target number for the reductions at that time , but he had stated several times in previous months , and repeated in december 2001 , that russia planned to reduce its forces to 1,500 warheads .

he did , however , indicate that he would like to use the formal arms control process to reduce u.s. and russian forces .

he emphasized that the two sides should focus on "reaching a reliable and verifiable agreement on further reductions of the u.s. and russian weapons. .

the two sides began discussions on the form and content of a new agreement in january 2002 .

official comments and press reports from january and february 2002 demonstrate that the two sides' opening positions contained significant differences .

by the time they concluded the treaty in may , they had resolved most of their differences over form and content .

in content , the treaty encodes u.s. proposals .

in form , it reflects russia's desire for a formal , "legally binding" document .

the text of the strategic offensive reductions treaty , or moscow treaty , appears in appendix a at the end of this report .

it contains a preamble that primarily reviews the relationship between the two nations and their existing arms control obligations , four articles that outline the obligations they have assumed under the new treaty and a fifth article that notes that the parties will register the treaty at the united nations .

the discussion that follows addresses the contents of the four substantive articles in the treaty .

the tables in this section display u.s. and russian force structures in place in july 2009 ; as reported in the data base exchanged under the start treaty .

they also show forces that would have been consistent with the limits in the start ii treaty and forces that will be consistent with the limits in the treaty of moscow .

although the parties will not implement start ii , the report includes these potential forces for comparison with the reductions that might have occurred under the new treaty .

as is stated in article iv , the treaty must be ratified "in accordance with the constitutional procedures" of each nation before it can enter into force .

in russia , a majority of both houses of parliament , the duma and the federation council , must vote to approve a federal law on ratification .

in the united states , two - thirds of the members in the senate must vote to approve a resolution of ratification .

this has been a relatively simple matter , because legislators in both nations praised the treaty and no one voiced opposition to its approval .

however , both nations' legislatures have shown a reluctance in recent years to approve arms control agreements without significant debate and , on occasion , significant reservations .

in addition , the russian duma has often linked its consideration of arms control treaties to its objections on other aspects of u.s. policy .

for example , in 1999 , the u.s. senate failed to offer its advice and consent to ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty .

it approved the chemical weapons convention in 1997 , but included 28 conditions in its resolution of ratification .

the clinton administration never submitted several 1997 agreements related to the 1972 abm treaty , in part because it feared the senate would reject these agreements and attack the continued viability of the abm treaty .

the moscow treaty did not , however , encounter significant opposition in the senate .

republican members praised the treaty because it did not restrict u.s. flexibility in structuring its forces .

democrats have also praised the treaty because it demonstrates a continuing u.s. commitment to the arms control process ; many also hoped it would represent a first step on a path to deeper nuclear weapons reductions .

the senate could , nonetheless , have amended the treaty or added conditions to its resolution of ratification to address perceived weaknesses .

the senate foreign relations committee did not recommend any amendments to the treaty .

the senate foreign relations committee did , however , include reservations and conditions in the resolution of ratification that it approved , by a vote of 19-0 , on february 5 , 2003 .

in response to members' concerns about the absence of timelines and interim limits in the treaty , the resolution requires that the president report to congress each year on the progress that the united states and russia have made in reducing their forces to the treaty's limits .

the resolution also contains non - binding declarations that require , among other things , that the united states reduce its forces as quickly as possible and that it provide russia with assistance in securing its non - strategic nuclear weapons would only affect u.s. policy .

the full senate approved the resolution of ratification , by a vote of 95-0 on march 6 , 2003 , with these reservations and declarations included .

some senators proposed amendments to the resolution of ratification , but these were all defeated after the chairman and ranking member , senators lugar and biden , made it clear that they would not support any amendments to the treaty or the resolution of ratification during the debate on the floor of the senate .

the text of the resolution of ratification appears in appendix b , at the end of this report .

the russian duma has also demonstrated its independence on arms control treaties .

it delayed its vote on the start ii treaty for seven years , questioning both the foreign policies of president yeltsin and several key elements of the treaty .

when it did approve the treaty , it included a condition in its federal law on ratification that stated russia would not exchange the instruments of ratification , and allow the treaty to enter into force , until the united states approved several 1997 agreements related to the abm treaty .

since the senate never addressed or approved these agreements , start ii could not enter into force .

the duma could have included conditions in its approval of the new treaty , as well .

it did raise questions about russia's financing and support for its strategic nuclear forces .

the duma also delayed its debate and vote on the treaty in march 2003 , after the united states began its military operation in iraq .

however , most analysts agreed that neither the duma nor the federation council was likely to challenge president putin by threatening to reject the treaty .

president putin had much broader and stronger support in the duma than president yeltsin had .

although the leader of the communist party denounced the treaty as a betrayal of russian interests , most members who commented praised the president for convincing the united states to sign a "legally binding" treaty .

in addition , russian officials established a working group , which includes members of both the duma and the federation council , to review the treaty and meet with government experts .

this working group prepared the draft federal law on ratification for the treaty .

the duma approved the federal law on ratification on may 14 , 2003 .

the treaty entered into force on june 1 , 2003 .

although it was due to remain in force until december 31 , 2012 , it may lapse in early 2011 .

in 2010 , the united states and russia signed a new start treaty .

the moscow treaty will lapse when this new treaty enters into force .

the u.s. senate gave its consent to the ratification of the new start treaty on december 22 , 2010 .

if the russian parliament does the same , the new start could enter into force in early 2011 .

many analysts and observers in the united states and russia praised the moscow treaty as a "useful first step" in the process of reducing u.s. and russian nuclear weapons .

they were particularly appreciative of the fact that the agreement was a formal treaty — it carried the weight of law since it was reviewed and approved by the nations' legislative bodies and it will remain in force beyond the terms of president bush and president putin .

some russian commentators have also noted that , as a treaty , the document would carry more weight in the international political community , demonstrating that the united states and russia remain committed to nuclear disarmament , as they promised in the nuclear nonproliferation treaty .

some , in both the united states and russia , criticized the absence of provisions that would require the elimination of delivery vehicles or warheads .

some in russia argued that this would place russia at a disadvantage , because russia would have to eliminate its weapons systems due to a lack of funding , but the united states will retain a "redeployment potential" with both extra delivery capacity and extra warheads .

others , in both the united states and russia , argued that the retention of excess warheads in storage might create potential new risks because the warheads could be sold to or stolen by terrorist organizations .

in russia , some praised the treaty because it signaled the end of the start ii treaty and its ban on mirved icbms .

they noted that , under the new agreement , russia will be able to structure its forces as it sees fit .

in particular , it could retain aging mirved icbms , such as the ss - 18 or ss - 19 , or it could deploy the new ss - 27 and rs - 24 with multiple warheads .

in the united states , however , critics have argued that the demise of the ban on mirved icbms could undermine confidence and stability .

they noted that multiple warhead missiles would still be an attractive target and , fearing that it might lose these weapons in an attack , russia could still keep them at a high state of alert .

this could increase the chance of an inadvertent launch of nuclear weapons in response to false or ambiguous information .

furthermore , some have argued that the arms control opponents in the united states could use deployment of new mirved icbms in russia as a reason to add warheads to the u.s. force , which could undermine the agreement and lead to its collapse .

finally , many analysts in the united states and russia noted that the new treaty did nothing to count , contain , or reduce non - strategic nuclear weapons — the shorter range missiles and artillery .

reports indicate that russia may have 3,800 of these weapons and some analysts argue they are housed in storage areas that might be at risk for loss through theft or attack .

analysts also note that these weapons have played a greater role in russia's national security policy in recent years , and that russia might use these weapons in a conflict if it lacked the necessary conventional forces .

in response to concerns about russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons , the bush administration noted that the subject would be on the agenda for discussion between the two countries .

the summit did not address this issue in its public documents .

but secretaries powell and rumsfeld both noted , during their testimony before the senate foreign relations committee , that the issue of nonstrategic nuclear weapons was likely to be high on the agenda of the new consultative group for strategic stability , which was established in the summit's joint declaration .

discussions on this issue , did not , however , occur .

the state department has provided congress with several reports on the implementation of the strategic offensive reductions treaty , as mandated by the treaty's resolution of ratification .

these reports indicate that both the united states and russia were on a pace to complete their implementation well before the deadline of 2012 .

in a report issued in mid - 2009 , the state department reported that the united states had already reduced its operationally deployed strategic nuclear warheads to a total of 2,126 warheads .

during the ratification process for the moscow treaty , the bush administration assured congress that the united states and russia would confer frequently about the status of their nuclear forces and about their broader strategic relationship .

few of these talks occurred , however .

the treaty's bilateral implementation commission rarely met , in part because the treaty contains so few rules and definitions , that compliance questions are unlikely and the parties have little to discuss as they reduce their forces .

in addition , the two nations reportedly disbanded a strategic offensive transparency working group , which was slated to address monitoring and verification issues under the treaty , and instead , replaced it with a new channel of talks between undersecretary of state robert joseph and john rood and russian deputy foreign minister sergei kislyak .

these talks also served as the forum for discussions on the future of arms control after the start treaty expires in 2009 .

the 1994 start treaty contained a wide variety of monitoring and verification provisions that were supposed to help the nations monitor compliance with the moscow treaty .

in the 2005 implementation report , the state department noted that the start verification regime provided "important data" for the united states in its monitoring of the moscow treaty .

the 2006 report , however , downplayed the value of the start data , indicating that the start provisions provide "additional data" that can be of use when monitoring the moscow treaty .

this distinction is important , as some analysts have argued that the united states and russia should at least extend the monitoring provisions in start through the 2012 end of the moscow treaty .

russia has gone further , calling for a new treaty that would replace start and contain many of the same types of details and definitions that were present in start but absent from the moscow treaty .

the bush administration rejected russia's position , and instead proposed that the two sides continue implementing some of the monitoring activities to assist with the verification of compliance with the moscow treaty .

the obama administration , in contrast , pursued formal negotiations with russia , with the goal of replacing the start treaty with a new treaty that would contain both further reductions in strategic nuclear weapons and a wide range of monitoring and verification provisions .

the united states and russia signed the new start treaty on april 8 , 2010 .

appendix a .

text of strategic offensive reductions treaty the united states of america and the russian federation , hereinafter referred to as the parties , embarking upon the path of new relations for a new century and committed to the goal of strengthening their relationship through cooperation and friendship , believing that new global challenges and threats require the building of a qualitatively new foundation for strategic relations between the parties , desiring to establish a genuine partnership based on the principles of mutual security , cooperation , trust , openness , and predictability , committed to implementing significant reductions in strategic offensive arms , proceeding from the joint statements by the president of the united states of america and the president of the russian federation on strategic issues of july 22 , 2001 in genoa and on a new relationship between the united states and russia of november 13 , 2001 in washington , mindful of their obligations under the treaty between the united states of america and the union of soviet socialist republics on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms of july 31 , 1991 , hereinafter referred to as the start treaty , mindful of their obligations under article vi of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons of july 1 , 1968 , and convinced that this treaty will help to establish more favorable conditions for actively promoting security and cooperation , and enhancing international stability , have agreed as follows: article i each party shall reduce and limit strategic nuclear warheads , as stated by the president of the united states of america on november 13 , 2001 and as stated by the president of the russian federation on november 13 , 2001 and december 13 , 2001 respectively , so that by december 31 , 2012 the aggregate number of such warheads does not exceed 1700-2200 for each party .

each party shall determine for itself the composition and structure of its strategic offensive arms , based on the established aggregate limit for the number of such warheads .

article ii the parties agree that the start treaty remains in force in accordance with its terms .

article iii for purposes of implementing this treaty , the parties shall hold meetings at least twice a year of a bilateral implementation commission .

article iv 1 .

this treaty shall be subject to ratification in accordance with the constitutional procedures of each party .

this treaty shall enter into force on the date of the exchange of instruments of ratification .

2 .

this treaty shall remain in force until december 31 , 2012 and may be extended by agreement of the parties or superseded earlier by a subsequent agreement .

3 .

each party , in exercising its national sovereignty , may withdraw from this treaty upon three months written notice to the other party .

article v this treaty shall be registered pursuant to article 102 of the charter of the united nations .

done at moscow on may 24 , 2002 , in two copies , each in the english and russian languages , both texts being equally authentic .

appendix b .

resolution of ratification for the treaty of moscow resolved , ( two thirds of the senators present concurring therein ) , section 1 .

senate advice and consent subject to conditions and declarations .

the senate advises and consents to the ratification of the treaty between the united states of america and the russian federation on strategic offensive reductions ( t. doc .

107-8 , in this resolution referred to as the "moscow treaty" or "treaty" ) , subject to the conditions in section 2 and declarations in section 3 .

sec .

2 .

conditions .

the advice and consent of the senate to the ratification of the moscow treaty is subject to the following conditions , which shall be binding on the president: ( 1 ) report on the role of cooperative threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance .

recognizing that implementation of the moscow treaty is the sole responsibility of each party , not later than 60 days after the exchange of instruments of ratification of the treaty , and annually thereafter on february 15 , the president shall submit to the committee on foreign relations and the committee on armed services of the senate a report and recommendations on how united states cooperative threat reduction assistance to the russian federation can best contribute to enabling the russian federation to implement the treaty efficiently and maintain the security and accurate accounting of its nuclear weapons and weapons - usable components and material in the current year .

the report shall be submitted in both unclassified and , as necessary , classified form .

 ( 2 ) annual implementation report .

not later than 60 days after exchange of instruments of ratification of the treaty , and annually thereafter on april 15 , the president shall submit to the committee on foreign relations and the committee on armed services of the senate a report on implementation of the treaty by the united states and the russian federation .

this report shall be submitted in both unclassified and , as necessary , classified form and shall include ( a ) a listing of strategic nuclear weapons force levels of the united states , and a best estimate of the strategic nuclear weapons force levels of the russian federation , as of december 31 of the preceding calendar year ; ( b ) a detailed description , to the extent possible , of strategic offensive reductions planned by each party for the current calendar year ; ( c ) to the extent possible , the plans of each party for achieving by december 31 , 2012 , the strategic offensive reductions required by article i of the treaty ; ( d ) measures , including any verification or transparency measures , that have been taken or have been proposed by a party to assure each party of the other party's continued intent and ability to achieve by december 31 , 2012 , the strategic offensive reductions required by article i of the treaty ; ( e ) information relevant to implementation of this treaty that has been learned as a result of strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) verification measures , and the status of consideration of extending the start verification regime beyond december 2009 ; ( f ) any information , insufficiency of information , or other situation that may call into question the intent or the ability of either party to achieve by december 31 , 2012 , the strategic offensive reductions required by article i of the treaty ; and ( g ) any actions that have been taken or have been proposed by a party to address concerns listed pursuant to subparagraph ( f ) or to improve the implementation and effectiveness of the treaty .

sec .

3 .

declarations .

the advice and consent of the senate to the ratification of the moscow treaty is subject to the following declarations , which express the intent of the senate: ( 1 ) treaty interpretation .

the senate reaffirms condition ( 8 ) of the resolution of ratification of the document agreed among the states parties to the treaty on conventional armed forces in europe ( cfe ) of november 19 , 1990 ( adopted at vienna on may 31 , 1996 ) , approved by the senate on may 14 , 1997 , relating to condition ( 1 ) of the resolution of ratification of the intermediate - range nuclear forces ( inf ) treaty , approved by the senate on may 27 , 1988 .

 ( 2 ) further strategic arms reductions .

the senate encourages the president to continue strategic offensive reductions to the lowest possible levels consistent with national security requirements and alliance obligations of the united states .

 ( 3 ) bilateral implementation issues .

the senate expects the executive branch of the government to offer regular briefings , including consultations before meetings of the bilateral implementation commission , to the committee on foreign relations and the committee on armed services of the senate on any implementation issues related to the moscow treaty .

such briefings shall include a description of all efforts by the united states in bilateral forums and through diplomatic channels with the russian federation to resolve any such issues and shall include a description of ( a ) the issues raised at the bilateral implementation commission , within 30 days after such meetings ; ( b ) any issues related to implementation of this treaty that the united states is pursuing in other channels , including the consultative group for strategic security established pursuant to the joint declaration of may 24 , 2002 , by the presidents of the united states and the russian federation ; and ( c ) any presidential determination with respect to issues described in subparagraphs ( a ) and ( b ) .

 ( 4 ) nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

recognizing the difficulty the united states has faced in ascertaining with confidence the number of nonstrategic nuclear weapons maintained by the russian federation and the security of those weapons , the senate urges the president to engage the russian federation with the objectives of ( a ) establishing cooperative measures to give each party to the treaty improved confidence regarding the accurate accounting and security of nonstrategic nuclear weapons maintained by the other party ; and ( b ) providing united states or other international assistance to help the russian federation ensure the accurate accounting and security of its nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

 ( 5 ) achieving reductions .

recognizing the transformed relationship between the united states and the russian federation and the significantly decreased threat posed to the united states by the russian federation's strategic nuclear arsenal , the senate encourages the president to accelerate united states strategic force reductions , to the extent feasible and consistent with united states national security requirements and alliance obligations , in order that the reductions required by article i of the treaty may be achieved prior to december 31 , 2012 .

 ( 6 ) consultations .

given the senate's continuing interest in this treaty and in continuing strategic offensive reductions to the lowest possible levels consistent with national security requirements and alliance obligations of the united states , the senate urges the president to consult with the senate prior to taking actions relevant to paragraphs 2 or 3 of article iv of the treaty .

