established in january 2002 under retired admiral john poindexter , usn , the mission of theinformation awareness office ( iao ) in the defense advanced research project agency ( darpa ) is to develop new tools to detect , anticipate , train for , and provide warnings about potential terroristattacks .

 ( 1 ) within three to five years , darpaenvisions that these tools would be integrated into aprototype total information awareness ( tia ) system to provide better intelligence support to seniorgovernment officials .

if proven effective , under secretary of defense for acquisition , technologyand logistics edward c. "pete" aldridge has suggested that the tia technology prototypes will beturned over to "intelligence , counterintelligence and law enforcement communities as a tool to helpthem in their battle against domestic terrorism. .

 ( 2 ) in a press conference on november 20 , 2002 , under secretary aldridge stated that funding for the total information awareness system ( tia ) is $10 million in fy2003 .

 ( 3 ) on february 7 , 2003,he reiterated that funding for the tia project is $10 million in fy2003 and $20 million in fy2004.the electronic privacy information center ( epic ) , a non - profit organization specializing in privacyissues , calculated that tia - related programs totaled $112 million in fy2003 and $240 million forthe three - year period , fy2001-fy2003 .

 ( 4 ) pressreports also cited funding of over $200 million overthree years .

 ( 5 ) these alternative funding levels reflect the difference between the $10 million in funding for the r&d specifically labeled the "total information awareness system" that would integratevarious r&d technology efforts , and the $137.5 million in funding for various r&d efforts managedby the information awareness office that could become part of that system .

funding for tiaprograms that are managed by the information awareness office includes r&d efforts to developtechnologies to improve data mining so as to allow dod to sift through and analyze patterns in vastamounts of information , to translate large volumes of foreign language materials electronically , tostrengthen dod's information infrastructure , and to devise new tools for high - level decision makerstrying to anticipate , train , and respond to terrorist attacks .

 ( see appendix below for descriptionsofindividual projects ) .

 ( 6 ) to proponents , tia r&d holds out the promise of developing a sophisticated system that would develop new technologies to find patterns from multiple sources of information in order togive decision makers new tools to use to detect , pre - empt and react to potential terrorist attacks .

toopponents , tia has the potential to violate the privacy of individuals by giving the governmentaccess to vast amounts of information about individuals as well as possibly mis - identifyingindividuals as potential terrorists .

reflecting both these viewpoints , p.l .

108-7 ( h.j.res .

2 ) the fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution requires that the secretary of defense , the director of central intelligence ( dci ) , and the attorney general submit to congress a detailed report on tia by may 20 , 2003 orface a cutoff in funding ( see restrictions on tia in fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution later in this report for more details ) .

in the meantime , tia programs are continuing .

 ( 7 ) darpa has,for example , obligated $7.4 million of the $10 million available in fy2003 for tia systemintegration .

 ( 8 ) on march 13 , 2003 , paul mchale , the new assistant secretary of defense for homeland security , testified that although he considered it appropriate for darpa to develop tiatechnologies , once completed , dod did not anticipate using the technology because of the desirethat " this kind of intrusive but perhaps essential capability" be operated by civilian rather thanmilitary personnel .

 ( 9 ) instead , he anticipated that thetia system would be transferred to civilian lawenforcement agencies and be subject to the judicial and congressional oversight .

 ( 10 ) .

in addition to concerns raised by members of congress and public interestgroups about protecting the privacy of u.s. citizens , congress may continue toaddress oversight issues , including: developing monitoring mechanisms for tia programs ; and assessing the technical feasibility of the program .

data mining technologies .

human identification at a distance ( humanid ) .

* this project aims to use information from sensors about human characteristics such as gaitor face , to identify individuals at any time of the day or night and in all weatherconditions , for instance , within a large crowd .

evidence extraction and link discovery ( eeld ) .

* this project is an effort to identify terrorist groups by developing a suite of technologiesto detect patterns between people , organizations , places and things from intelligencemessages and law enforcement records , and then use those patterns or links to gatheradditional information from vast amounts of textual or transactional data including web sites , sensor data , and news reports .

genisys .

* this project is a new effort in 2003 to put together old and new databases so that they can be readily queried .

this "ultra - large all - sourceinformation repository" could include information about potential terrorists andpossible supporters , purchase of terrorist types of material , training and rehearsalactivities , potential targets , and status of defenses , as well as research into methodsof protecting privacy .

 ( 48 ) bio - surveillance ( re - named bio - alirt in fy2004 ) :* this project is an effort to collect and analyze information from non - traditional human,agricultural and animal health data bases in order to develop indicators and models,and set up a prototype bio - surveillance system for a citywide area like norfolk,virginia to increase dod's ability to detect a clandestine biological warfare attack .

machine translation projects .

translingual information detection , extraction and summarization ( tides ) .

* tides is designed to get critical information quickly forintelligence analysts and operators by developing tools that can rapidly find,summarize , and translate key information in foreignlanguages .

effective affordable reusable speech - to - text ( ears ) : anticipated to increase the speed of translation from oral sources by ten to 100-fold ( including broadcasts and telephone ) , as well as extract clues about the identity ofspeakers , ears is intended to serve the military , intelligence and law enforcementcommunities .

multispeaker environments ( muse ) and global autonomous language exploitation ( gale ) : muse and gale are successorprograms to ears .

muse is to produce transcripts from command centers andmeeting rooms and gale is to develop techniques for detecting key intelligence inmassive amounts of foreign language transmissions .

communicator: designed to enable military personnel to get logistical support and tactical information when in the field , prototypes of this"smart phone" have already been deployed on navy ships .

babylon: another battlefield system likely to be deployed in afghanistan in the next few months , babylon is intended to aid those in the field bytranslating foreign phrases for the service member .

 ( 49 ) protection of critical information infrastructure .

defensenet ( dnet ) : this effort is intended to increase the security and performance of dod's information infrastructure in handling largevolumes of information .

mis - information detection and generation ( midget ) : a new project in 2003 , this effort is designed to detect and reduce dod's vulnerabilityto mis - information about adversaries that appears in open - sourcedata .

tools for high - level decision makers .

rapid analytic wargaming ( raw ) : this project is intended to develop gaming technologies that simulate asymmetric threats to be used by themajor commands in training and operational settings .

war gaming the asymmetric environment ( wae ) .

* this effort is an initiative to develop tools and models to help analysts and decisionmakers predict the behavior and the reactions of terrorists to u.s.actions .

genoa / genoa ii: * project genoa attempts to improve collaborative reasoning , estimate plausible futures , and create actionable optionsamong intelligence analysts in various organizations .

genoa ii seeks to enhancecollaboration between people and machines in order to improve support provided byintelligence analysts to policy makers at the military command level , to high leveldod civilian officials , nsa and the joint chiefs of staff for dealing with terroristthreats .

total information awareness .

* tia is to integrate some or all of the efforts above into a prototype system or systems that would create andexploit large - scale , counter - terrorist data bases , develop new analytical techniquesand models for mining those data bases so as to improve our ability to detect,anticipate , pre - empt , and respond to terrorist attacks .

r&d efforts specifically linkedto the tia system in fy2003 are human id at a distance , eeld , genisys,bio - surveillance , tides , wae , project genoa and genoa ii , and the tia integrativeeffort .

