the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) has been identified by both congress and the bush administration as an organization that may help promote the u.s. goal of liberalizing international trade and investment in asia , and possibly the rest of the world .

in addition , because of the unique nature of apec's membership and organization , the association provides a forum at which the united states can hold bilateral discussions on non - economic matters such as international security and human rights .

as one indicator of congressional interest in apec , in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109 - 163 ) , congress called for the president to develop a comprehensive strategy to address the "emergence of china economically , diplomatically , and militarily ; promote mutually beneficial trade relations with china ; and encourage china's adherence to international norms in the areas of trade , international security , and human rights. .

it continues by specifying that this comprehensive strategy should "identify and pursue initiatives to revitalize united states engagement in east asia. .

the act then states , "the initiatives should have a regional focus and complement bilateral efforts .

the asia pacific economic cooperation forum ( apec ) offers a ready mechanism for pursuit of such initiatives . .

[emphasis added] the notion that apec may be an effective forum for advancing u.s. interests in asia is apparently shared by the bush administration .

during a white house pre - trip press briefing on august 30 , 2007 , national security council senior director dennis wilder stated , "the importance that the president attaches to apec is demonstrated by the fact that he has not missed an apec leaders meeting since taking office. .

in addition , senior administration officials indicate that the white house sees apec as a model for regional economic integration in the asia pacific which allows the united states to play a significant role in the region's political and economic development .

some members of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) have been actively pursuing alternative "asian only" models for regional economic development , including "asean + 1" ( asean and china ) , "asean + 3" ( asean , china , japan , and south korea ) , and the east asia summit ( eas ) , also known as "asean + 6" ( asean , australia , china , india , japan , new zealand , and south korea ) .

the bush administration's interest in apec may bring up the regional forum before the 110 th congress in several ways .

first , congress may choose to consider the level of direct and indirect financial support provided to apec .

second , congress may take into account u.s. commitments to apec when considering legislation on various trade and non - trade issues .

third , congress may increase oversight of apec - related activities and programs of the u.s. trade representative , the department of state and other federal departments and agencies .

although both congress and the bush administration view apec as important to u.s. trade and economic and human security interests in the asia , it is uncertain that apec is a reliable mechanism for advancing those interests and if congress and the bush administration share a common view of what the u.s. interests in asia are .

in particular , the organizational and operational structure of apec is unusual among multilateral associations , reflecting an atypical approach to trade liberalization .

as a result , apec's approach , organization , and operations may make it difficult for the united states to promote its positions on various issues through its activities in apec .

apec is an association of 21 "member economies" bordering the pacific ocean that are working cooperatively to promote economic growth and prosperity in the asia - pacific region .

during the 1994 meetings in bogor , indonesia , apec established the "bogor goals" of "free and open trade and investment in the asia - pacific by 2010 for industrialized economies and 2020 for developing economies. .

these goals have been reaffirmed at the leaders' meeting each subsequent year .

apec began in 1989 as an australian initiative — backed by japan and new zealand — in recognition of the growing interdependence among asia - pacific economies and in response to the free - trade areas that had developed in europe and north america .

it is the only international trade organization in which hong kong , mainland china , and taiwan are all members .

in contrast to most other multilateral organizations , apec is a cooperative forum in which members arrive at decisions via consensus .

all commitments made by members are voluntary ; apec has no formal enforcement mechanisms to compel members to comply with any trade liberalization policies previously declared at apec meetings — an approach often referred to as "open regionalism. .

point 9 of the 1994 "apec economic leaders' declaration of common resolve" states , "apec economies that are ready to initiate and implement a cooperative arrangement may proceed to do so while those that are not yet ready to participate may join at a later date. .

the underlying notion of the apec approach to trade liberalization is that voluntary commitments are easier to achieve and more likely to be implemented than obligatory commitments derived from agreements negotiated by more traditional — and potentially , confrontational — methods .

by establishing a common vision or goal for the organization , the belief is that future apec discussions can make more rapid progress towards the organization's goals by seeking consensus views with which members are willing to comply .

by contrast , trade agreements negotiated according to more traditional approaches tend to foster confrontation and expectations of reciprocal concessions .

lacking a shared goal or objectives , it may be difficult to resolve differences among the parties and complete an agreement .

later on , if any party to the agreement feels that it was inequitable , they may fail to comply with the terms of the agreement , or withdraw from the agreement in its entirety , even if there are formal sanction or grievance provisions within the agreement .

apec strives to meet the bogor goals in three "broad areas" of cooperation .

first , members consult with each other to formulate individual and collective actions to liberalize merchandise and service trade , as well as international investment .

second , members discuss their domestic regulations and procedures to find ways of facilitating international business .

third , the members engage in "economic and technical cooperation," or ecotech , to provide training and foster greater cooperation among apec members .

in 1995 , apec created a template to achieve the bogor goals in its "osaka action agenda. .

the osaka action agenda emphasizes apec's "resolute opposition to an inward - looking trading bloc that would divert from the pursuit of global free trade" by accepting a set of fundamental principles for apec's trade and investment liberalization and facilitation .

these principles include comprehensiveness ; wto consistency ; comparability ; non - discrimination ; transparency ; flexibility ; and cooperation .

apec's unusual approach to trade liberalization is reflected in its organization and operation .

apec's organization consists of a small secretariat in singapore , which reports to the constituents of five separate groups: the preeminent leaders' meeting , the apec business advisory council , the ministerial meeting , the sectoral minister meetings , and the senior officials meetings .

the secretariat , in turn , supervisors the work of six different groups: the committee on trade and investment , the economic committee , the steering committee on ecotech , the budget and management committee , special task groups , and working groups .

each member of apec seconds representatives to work on the secretariat's staff to serve as program directors .

source: apec website , http: / / www.apec.org / apec / about_apec / structure.html .

the focal point of apec activities is the annual leaders' meeting in which the apec leaders set goals , publicize them , and provide momentum for the process .

this is usually held in october or november of each year , and is attended by heads of state except for those from taiwan and hong kong who , because of china's objections , send other representatives .

the first leaders' meeting was held in 1993 on blake island , near seattle , washington .

major decisions are generally affirmed and / or announced at the leaders' meeting .

the meeting also provides a platform for and gives momentum to major apec initiatives .

although apec confines its agenda primarily to economic issues , the leaders often hold bilateral meetings during the leaders' meeting to discuss international security , human rights , and other issues .

most of the decisions announced at the leaders' meeting are first considered in a series of ministerial meetings held throughout the year .

these include the respective ministers dealing with trade , finance , transportation , telecommunications , human resources development ( education ) , energy , environment , science and technology , and small and medium - sized enterprises .

the largest ministerial is the annual joint ministerial meeting which precedes the leaders' meeting .

it usually is attended by foreign trade or commerce ministers from member states .

the various ministerial meetings make recommendations to the leaders' meeting ; they do not have the authority to act independently on behalf of apec .

working under the direction of the various apec ministers , the senior officials coordinate the activities of the various committees , working groups and task forces within apec .

senior officials meetings are held three or four times a year .

the current u.s. senior official for apec is ambassador patricia m. haslach .

the apec business advisory council ( abac ) consists of up to three individuals appointed by each apec member .

it provides advice on implementing the apec agenda and other specific business - related issues .

abac also can make comments on the recommendations of the various ministerial meetings .

most of the specific tasks before apec are addressed in committees , working groups , or expert groups that deal with economic issues of importance to the region .

for implementing the bogor goals , the committee on trade and investment plays the key role .

apec has ten working groups that work on specific areas of cooperation and facilitation: ( 1 ) trade and investment data , ( 2 ) trade promotion , ( 3 ) industrial science and technology , ( 4 ) human resources development , ( 5 ) energy cooperation , ( 6 ) marine resource conservation , ( 7 ) telecommunications , ( 8 ) transportation , ( 9 ) tourism , and ( 10 ) fisheries .

each working group has one or more shepherds ( members ) who take responsibility for coordinating the work of the group .

the apec chair rotates annually and since 1989 has been held by ( in order ) : australia , singapore , south korea , thailand , the united states , indonesia , japan , the philippines , canada , malaysia , new zealand , brunei , people's republic of china , mexico , thailand , chile , south korea , and vietnam .

in 2007 , australia was once again the apec chair , with the leaders' meeting held on september 8-9 in sydney .

decisions within apec's various organizational bodies are based on the consensus approach of apec .

most committees , working groups , and special task groups have representatives from all 21 members , and select their leadership from amongst themselves .

members may delay or refrain from any action recommended or approved by a meeting , committee , working group or special task force without facing sanctions or recriminations from other members .

however , all decisions and agreements of the various meetings , committees , and working groups must be implemented in accordance with the osaka action agenda .

apec actions take place at three levels: actions by individual members ; actions with the confines of apec ; and collective apec actions with respect to other multinational organizations .

the primary form of individual member actions are the "individual action plans," or iaps .

each year , apec members submit at the ministerial meeting an iap that spells out what steps the member has taken and / or will take to advance their trade regime towards the achievement of the bogor goals .

iaps typically are organized along both sectoral ( eg , architectural services ) and topical ( eg , customs procedures ) lines .

although members cannot impose changes on each other's iaps , the osaka action agenda calls on each member to consult , submit , and review the iaps to foster comparability , transparency , and cooperation amongst the iaps .

the internal actions of apec generally involve research on topics related to trade liberalization , the exchange of best practices , and the standardization of policies and procedures related to international trade and investment .

in some cases , apec will create a working group on a particular topic , with the goals of generating a "collective action plan," or cap .

in some cases , the caps are little more than a topical summary of the member iaps ; in other cases , the working group plays a more active role in promoting trade liberalization and facilitation via the caps .

another example of an apec's internal action is the "apec business travel card," an idea advanced by the abac .

business travelers possessing an apec business travel card are allowed fast - track entry and exit through special apec lanes at major airports , and multiple , visa - free entry amongst members that recognize the card .

collective actions of apec usually involve joint or coordinated efforts to advance trade and investment liberalization in other multilateral organizations .

most recently , apec's collective actions have focused on helping complete the doha round of the wto .

for example , following the 2006 leaders' meeting in hanoi , apec released a statement on the "doha development agenda of the wto" that affirmed the members' "collective and individual commitments to concluding an ambitious and balanced wto doha agreement" by each member "moving beyond our current positions in key areas of the round. .

the key areas mentioned were "trade - distorting farm support," "market access in agriculture," "real cuts in industrial tariffs," and "new openings in services trade. .

in january 2007 , australia assumed the chair of apec , and was the host for the various apec meetings held throughout the year .

following the meetings in 2006 , various goals were suggested for 2007 , including "further studies on ways and means to promote regional economic integration. .

the official theme for the apec 2007 meetings was "strengthening our community , building a sustainable future. .

in the runup to the events in sydney , the host country indicated that the main foci for the meetings would be climate change and regional economic integration .

these themes were echoed in pre - event statements by several other apec members , including china .

successful conclusion of the doha round negotiations , energy security , and counter - terrorism efforts were other major topics raised by members prior to the meetings in early september .

the primary goal of apec is to foster international trade by means of trade and investment liberalization and facilitation .

since its inception in 1993 and the adoption of the bogor goals in 1994 , apec members have lowered their trade restrictions to varying degrees .

with over a decade of history , one question is whether or not there has been a corresponding rise in apec members' foreign trade accompanying their liberalization and facilitation efforts .

initially , apec was viewed as a purely economic forum .

apec carefully kept its distance from political matters for fear that such issues would cause divisions within the group — particularly among china , japan , russia , taiwan , and the united states .

such divisions could thwart cooperation in achieving economic goals .

consideration of non - economic issues was confined to bilateral meetings held before and after the leaders' meeting .

in 1995 , the issue was raised of whether apec should be expanded to include consideration of regional security issues .

the consensus in 1995 among apec members seemed to be that regional security issues should be discussed in the asean regional forum and other fora rather than in apec .

starting in 2001 , however , security was added to the official agenda of the leaders' meeting .

at the october 2001 meetings in shanghai , the attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon overshadowed the economic agenda .

the leaders issued a joint statement condemning the attacks — apec's first joint statement on non - economic issues .

since 2001 , the agenda for the leaders' meeting has included issues related to "human security," with a focus on three topics: terrorism , disease , and disasters .

congress — and the bush administration — have identified apec as the primary regional institution in the asia - pacific for promoting open trade and practical economic cooperation .

apec is also seen as a useful forum for advancing u.s. concerns on issues related to human security .

since apec's inception in 1989 , congressional interest and involvement with apec has focused on two areas: ( 1 ) direct and indirect financial support for apec ; and ( 2 ) oversight of u.s. participation in apec .

section 424 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 , authorized the president to maintain united states membership in the asia - pacific economic cooperation and provided for u.s. contributions of apec out of appropriations for "contributions to international organizations. .

the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies appropriations act of 2006 appropriated a total of $1.17 billion "to meet annual obligations of membership in international multilateral organizations," including apec .

the current level of direct u.s. financial support for apec is $601,000 per year .

section 2540 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 made "a non - communist country that was a member nation of the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) as of october 31 , 1993" eligible to participate in a loan guarantee program "arising out of the financing of the sale or long - term lease of defense articles , defense services , or design and construction services. .

the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 ( p.l .

104 - 127 ) included a finding by congress that: ... during the period 1996 through 2002 , there will be several opportunities for the united states to negotiate fairer trade in agricultural products , including further negotiations under the world trade organization , and steps toward possible free trade agreements of the americas and asian - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ; and the united states should aggressively use these opportunities to achieve more open and fair opportunities for trade in agricultural products .

in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108 - 458 ) , congress finds: ... other economic and regional fora , such as the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum , and the western hemisphere financial ministers , have been used to marshal political will and actions in support of combating the financing of terrorism ( cft ) standards .

finally , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109 - 163 ) included as the sense of congress: that the president should present to congress quickly a comprehensive strategy to — ( 1 ) address the emergence of china economically , diplomatically , and militarily ; ( 2 ) promote mutually beneficial trade relations with china ; and ( 3 ) encourage china's adherence to international norms in the areas of trade , international security , and human rights .

to be included in that strategy are "[a]ctions to encourage united states diplomatic efforts to identify and pursue initiatives to revitalize united states engagement in east asia .

the initiatives should have a regional focus and complement bilateral efforts .

the asia - pacific economic cooperation forum ( apec ) offers a ready mechanism for pursuit of such initiatives. .

for the 110 th congress , issues related to apec could arise in a variety of direct and indirect ways .

in addition to the issue of u.s. financial support for apec , congress may choose to express its sense on different policy issues .

also , there are oversight issues raised by u.s. participation in various apec activities .

in the 110 th congress , one proposed bill specifically mentions apec — the united states - china diplomatic expansion act of 2007 ( h.r .

3272 ) .

introduced by representative mark kirk , and cosponsored by representatives rick larsen , steve israel , susan davis , and charles boustany , h.r .

3272 would authorize the appropriation in fy2008 of $65 million for the construction of a new consulate in china , $10 million for additional personnel for the u.s. diplomatic mission in china , $6 million for other state department personnel , $10 million for various chinese language programs , and $2 million for rule of law initiatives in china .

the bill also would authorize the appropriation of $3 million for a u.s. contribution to apec .

as previously mentioned , the u.s. - australia defense trade cooperation treaty signed during the apec meetings would be subject to the approval of the senate , once submitted to the senate by the president .

in addition , if and when the president nominates someone to be "ambassador to asean," the appointment would be subject to senate advice and consent .

the most direct issue would be the level of u.s. financial support for apec .

although the president does have the authority under current federal law to determine the level of apec's funding without action by congress , congress may choose to take up this issue ( see above ) .

for example , congress could consider setting funding levels , directly or indirectly , for apec's trade facilitation programs independently from the amounts announced in august 2007 .

congress has recognized the potential of apec as a vehicle for promoting free trade .

in addition , to the issue of a possible free trade area of the asia - pacific , negotiations over regional trade integration under apec would likely raise issues related to labor rights and environment protection , and whether the united states would be able to respond to foreign country violations of labor or environmental standards with economic sanctions or monetary fines ( as stipulated in the u.s. - singapore / chile ftas ) .

successful completion of the doha round is a major trade priority for the bush administration .

however , negotiations are complicated , in part by the u.s. merchandise trade deficit , especially bilateral trade deficits with some apec member economies .

while many economists attribute the u.s. trade deficit to u.s. macroeconomic conditions , when combined with specific trade disputes with some apec members , prospects for adjustments in the u.s. offer on doha are uncertain .

the 2006 leaders' joint declaration called on all apec members — including the united states — "to spare no efforts to break through the current deadlocks. .

this year's "statement on the wto negotiations" takes a slightly softer tone , stating that "consensus will only be possible on the basis of an ambitious , balanced result that delivers real and substantial market access improvements for agricultural and industrial goods and services , and real and substantial reductions in trade - distorting agricultural subsidies. .

this would likely require congressional action on specific legislation .

in particular , the farm income and price support programs , which are dictated primarily by title i of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107 - 171 ) and expire in 2007 , might be affected by efforts to complete the doha round .

this touches on the broader domestic debate over whether the united states should continue to pursue the liberalization of international trade and investment with other nations , the effect of trade and globalization on import - sensitive industries , and whether increased trade threatens or enhances u.s. prosperity , employment opportunities , and economic security .

in addition to the various economic and trade issues , congress may also consider issues pertaining to human security as a result of the u.s. involvement with apec .

for example , u.s. recognition of the apec business travel card could raise domestic security concerns to the expedited visa and entry privileges extended to card bearers .

similarly , concerns about a potential influenza pandemic may engender interest in providing more support to apec's health task force .

from a geopolitical perspective , apec is a leading forum through which the united states can broadly engage the asia - pacific region .

the united states is not included in the other regional multilateral associations , such as asean and the newly - created east asian summit ( eas ) , and no other forum includes such a wide range of asian economies .

from a strategic perspective , many experts believe apec could plan a useful role in advancing u.s. interests in asia .

over the last few years , the united states' position as the leader in the region has been challenged by china .

china's accession to the wto , its recent efforts to negotiate btas across asia ( including the comprehensive economic partnership agreements with hong kong and macau ) , and its unilateral liberalization of its trade regime , has arguably placed china as a competitor to the united states .

many argue that the united states should re - energize its involvement in asian trade discussion and elevate the importance of apec to reassert u.s. leadership .

they advocate both increased financial assistance to apec , though the annual contribution and specific assistance programs , and alteration in u.s. laws and policies on key issues .

others say that apec should reformulate its mission by focusing more narrowly on trade facilitation and economic integration , abandoning many of the working groups that are not central to the core goals , and strengthening the secretariat .

the annual leaders' meeting continues to provide prestige and offer an opportunity for heads of state , particularly those of smaller countries , to interact with top u.s. officials .

apec offers the additional benefit of including taiwan and hong kong as member economies , unlike the eas .

the following table provides a brief summary of the past apec meetings .

for more details about each meeting , see the official apec web page , http: / / www.apec.org / .

