federal agencies provide a range of assistance to individual survivors ; state , territorial , and local governments ; and nongovernmental entities after major disasters , including natural disasters and terrorist attacks .

types of aid can include , but are not limited to , operational , logistical , and technical support ; financial assistance through grants , loans , and loan guarantees ; and the provision of federally owned equipment and facilities .

many , but not all , programs are available after the president issues a major disaster declaration pursuant to the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) authority .

more limited aid is available under a stafford act emergency declaration , a declaration issued by a department or agency head , or on an as needed basis .

this report only identifies programs frequently used to provide financial assistance in the disaster response and recovery process .

it provides brief descriptive information to help congressional offices determine which programs merit further consideration in the planning , organization , or execution of the disaster response and recovery process .

most of the programs listed here are authorized as assistance programs and are listed at the general services administration ( gsa ) website beta.sam.gov .

the list does not include operational or technical assistance that some agencies provide in emergency or disaster situations .

it is also not inclusive of all forms of financial disaster assistance that may be available to every jurisdiction in every circumstance , as unique factors often trigger unique forms of assistance .

congress may , and frequently has , authorized specific forms of financial assistance on a limited basis following particular disasters .

crs report r41981 , congressional primer on responding to major disasters and emergencies , by bruce r. lindsay and elizabeth m. webster crs report r41101 , fema disaster cost - shares: evolution and analysis , by natalie keegan and elizabeth m. webster crs report rl33330 , community development block grant funds in disaster relief and recovery , by eugene boyd crs report rl33579 , the public health and medical response to disasters: federal authority and funding , by sarah a. lister crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by diane p. horn and baird webel crs insight in10450 , private flood insurance and the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by baird webel and diane p. horn crs report r45099 , national flood insurance program: selected issues and legislation in the 115th congress , by diane p. horn crs in focus if10730 , tax policy and disaster recovery , by molly f. sherlock crs report r41884 , considerations for a catastrophic declaration: issues and analysis , by bruce r. lindsay crs report r43784 , fema's disaster declaration process: a primer , by bruce r. lindsay crs report r43738 , fire management assistance grants: frequently asked questions , by bruce r. lindsay and katie hoover crs report r45085 , fema individual assistance programs: in brief , by shawn reese crs report r45238 , fema and sba disaster assistance for individuals and households: application process , determinations , and appeals , by bruce r. lindsay and shawn rees .

crs report rs22022 , disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , by julie m. whittaker crs report r41309 , the sba disaster loan program: overview and possible issues for congress , by bruce r. lindsay crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by megan stubbs crs report r42854 , emergency assistance for agricultural land rehabilitation , by megan stubbs crs in focus if10565 , federal disaster assistance for agriculture , by megan stubbs crs in focus if10730 , tax policy and disaster recovery , by molly f. sherlock crs report r44808 , federal disaster assistance: the national flood insurance program and other federal disaster assistance programs available to individuals and households after a flood , by diane p. horn crs insight in11094 , the evolving use of disaster housing assistance and the roles of the disaster housing assistance program ( dhap ) and the individuals and households program ( ihp ) , by elizabeth m. webster crs insight in11054 , disaster housing assistance: homeland security issues in the 116th congress , by elizabeth m. webster crs insight in11106 , community disaster loans: homeland security issues in the 116th congress , by michael h. cecir .

note: because not all agencies have complete , up - to - date information available on the internet , in particular during and immediately after a disaster , congressional users are encouraged to contact the appropriate crs program analysts or department or agency program officers for more complete , timely information .

usa.gov http: / / www.usa.gov / many federal agencies have established websites specifically for responding to disasters .

some agencies maintain websites with comprehensive information about their disaster assistance programs , whereas others supply only limited information ; most list contact phone numbers .

an a - z index of u.s. government departments and agencies is available at the website above .

fema website http: / / www.fema.gov from its website , fema offers regular updates on recovery efforts in areas under a major disaster declaration .

information on a specific disaster may include a listing of declared counties and contact information for local residents .

disaster assistance.gov http: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / disasterassitance.gov provides information on how help might be obtained from the u.s. government before , during , and after a disaster .

the website includes tools to find , apply for , and check the status of assistance by category or agency .

the website also includes disaster - related news feeds and information on community resources .

assistance listings at beta.sam.gov https: / / beta.sam.gov / official descriptions of more than 2,200 federal assistance programs , including disaster and recovery grants and loans , can be found on beta.sam.gov .

the website is currently in beta , and it houses federal assistance listings previously found on the now - retired catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) .

for programs summarized in this report , cfda program numbers are given ( which are searchable at the "assistance listings" domain at beta.sam.gov ) .

full assistance listing descriptions , updated by departments and agencies , cover authorizing legislation , objectives , and eligibility and compliance requirements .

for current appropriations and additional information , users can contact crs analysts , or departments and agencies .

