[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international relations ( [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , specialist in national defense ( [phone number scrubbed] ) in 2003 , the 108th congress is expected to face early challenges in foreign , defense and trade policy .

as the global campaign against terrorism continues and a possible war with iraq looms,congress must complete action on the fy2003 appropriations bills and begin consideration of thebudget for fy2004 .

congressional actions are likely to reflect the reality that the september 11,2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states ( hereafter referred to as 9 / 11 ) have , in some fundamentalways , changed america and the way it looks at the world .

for many , 9 / 11 destroyed the illusion thatthe united states is invulnerable to attack from a determined enemy .

the administration andcongress are shifting u.s. policy and resources accordingly .

the new priorities appear to include the following: first , in order to diminish u.s. vulnerabilities to attack that were exposed by 9 / 11 , a whole new structure for "homeland security"is being built .

second , the united states and a coalition of countries are continuing a worldwidecampaign to destroy al qaeda and other terrorist organizations that target u.s. citizens and facilities.while the initial phase of removing the taliban government and destroying al qaeda bases inafghanistan was successful , the effort to defeat the terrorists is by no means finished .

theintelligence community believes that al qaeda is regrouping in pakistan and elsewhere .

many keyleaders have not been captured or killed and the organization is believed to be capable of mountingnew threats .

third , the united states is intensifying its efforts to remove what the administrationand many in congress consider the related threat of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) in thehands of "rogue" governments .

the concern is that they might be tempted to use such weaponsagainst the united states and its allies or to supply them to terrorist organizations .

the u.s.showdown with iraq is the main focus at present , but president bush has identified north korea andiran , as well as iraq , as forming an "axis of evil. .

in october , 2002 , north korean leaders admittedthat they have an ongoing nuclear weapons program in violation of international agreements .

sincethen , they appear to be reactivating nuclear installations shut down under a 1994 agreement and haveexpelled international atomic energy agency inspectors , threatening a full - scale international crisis .

while the world rallied in support of u.s. actions after 9 / 11 , the administration and congress must also contend with the fact that many countries are becoming increasingly wary and evenalarmed about how unconstrained u.s. military power might be used and the direction of u.s.policy .

some concern has been present ever since the united states became the sole superpower ina less predictable world , in contrast to the u.s. - soviet balance of power which existed for half acentury .

however , worries seem to have been heightened by the perceived u.s. shift of focus fromthe war against al qaeda to iraq and the "axis of evil"and by the u.s. assertion of a doctrine ofpreemption .

other countries still seek and welcome u.s. leadership on global issues , but they increasingly complain that the united states is deciding and acting on its own and pursuing narrow self - interests .

they see the administration as consulting partners only after decisions are made , when theirassistance is needed , and without taking their views into account .

such complaints are even voicedby close u.s. allies in europe and asia who wonder whether the u.s. is downgrading long - standingalliances as it pursues short - term "coalitions of the willing. .

international grievances about u.s.unilateralism include a litany of complaints about specific u.s. policies , such as its opposition to theinternational criminal court , rejection of environmental agreements like the kyoto protocol , andits withdrawal from the anti - ballistic missile treaty .

some urge the administration to seriouslyaddress allied differences on these issues ; others see u.s. positions as correct and view some of theprotestations as hypocritical and self - centered .

congress faces other new issues and challenges that are in some ways related .

as it deliberates and votes on accepting seven new members into nato , the 108th congress may reexamine the rolethat u.s. alliances play in the new circumstances .

there is concern among some observers that ifu.s. - allied differences continue to mount , they could begin to erode the foundations of relations .

since the end of the cold war , there are fewer clear and present dangers that absolutely necessitateformal alliances .

increasingly , voices can be heard in the united states , europe , japan , south korea,and elsewhere that question the need for them .

some in other countries are beginning to see closeassociation with u.s. policy as making them more vulnerable to terrorist or wmd threats .

on theu.s .

side , some go - it - alone advocates see allies primarily as an impediment to u.s. freedom ofaction , while not contributing much to u.s. strength , especially given that the gap in their militarycapabilities and spending has continued to widen .

at present these seem to be minority views .

others would probably still argue that u.s. policy should continue to define u.s. interests in termsof broader shared allied interests .

there is concern that the current u.s. preponderance , if not usedin a multilateral way , might be difficult to sustain and could even hasten the emergence of competingpower centers or coalitions .

many would argue that strong alliances are still among the greatest u.s.assets and sources of long - term u.s. political , economic , and military strength .

congress faces issues concerning continuing u.s. assistance and engagement in afghanistan , bosnia , kosovo , and other recent conflict areas and may also need to prepare for a possiblelong - term and costly military presence in iraq .

this again raises for congress the controversialquestion of "nation - building" and the appropriate u.s. role in post - conflict peacekeeping andreconstruction efforts .

many argue for leaving such efforts principally to other countries .

at present,the united states is drawing down its forces in the balkans .

however , some experts argue that itwould not serve u.s. interests or the prospects for stability in these countries , if the u.s. were towithdraw completely .

congress will likely review u.s. foreign aid priorities after 9 / 11 and take up the president's large new foreign aid initiative , the millennium challenge account , which would substantiallyincrease foreign assistance to developing countries with a record of good performance in key areas .

the initiative may derive at least in part out of recognition that poverty makes countries breedinggrounds for terrorism and other ills , such as the spread of hiv / aids and other infectious diseases .

it is believed to be a root cause of strife and instability in many parts of the world .

at the same time , other challenges remain on the congressional agenda .

these include oversight of u.s. foreign policy toward regions and countries of the world , including rising powerssuch as china and major countries undergoing significant transition such as russia .

congress islikely to continue to focus considerable attention and resources to fighting hiv / aids and othercommunicable diseases , especially in africa and asia .

transnational problems such as internationalcrime , drugs , environmental problems , and human rights concerns remain important congressionalconcerns .

the global economy has profoundly changed international relations and the ability of governments to control developments even within national borders .

international developmentsimpact on the domestic policy as never before .

the benefits of globalization are considered farreaching , spurring world productivity , economic growth , and access to information .

along with thebenefits come significant new challenges that may require further congressional attention.globalization brings economic dislocations in some areas .

financial uncertainties threaten differentregions .

in the trade area , the 108th congress will likely face decisions on approving one or morefree trade agreements and monitoring the negotiations on others which the bush administration hasinitiated or proposed .

the negotiations include bilateral , regional , and multilateral trade liberalizingagreements .

many believe that strong u.s. leadership in a multilateral framework will be necessary to find cooperative solutions to world problems .

others remain suspicious of international organizations andreluctant to enter into agreements that they believe would cede a degree of u.s. sovereignty to them .

the 108th congress will confront underlying ambiguity , controversy , and uncertainty regarding the proper directions and priorities for u.s. defense policy when it opens in early 2003-a hugechange from the degree of underlying consensus which marked the opening of the 107th congressin early 2001 .

before the attacks of 9 / 11 , u.s. strategic priorities and military contingency planningwere centered almost exclusively around preparation for possible hostilities with threateningnation - states .

since 9 / 11 , the department of defense ( dod ) has been waging a war of episodicintensity against active terrorist and terrorist - related forces throughout the world ; since early 2002,it has been preparing for a war against iraq , if diplomatic efforts fail to eliminate any weapons ofmass destruction it may possess .

at the same time , secretary of defense rumsfeld has been vigorously propounding the underlying assumptions of the technology - driven "revolution in military affairs ( rma ) ," and,accordingly , emphasizing lightness , mobility , technological sophistication , and hardware overfirepower , sustainability , size of the force , and quantity of weapons and units .

he has done this overvarying degrees of doubt and opposition from within and without the military services and theirsenior uniformed leadership , the congress , and nongovernmental commentators and analysts ondefense issues .

the administration appears to have decided to fight a major war with iraq if necessary ; continue the rma - driven modernization of the armed forces ; and maintain the existing level ofeffort in the war against terrorism centered in and around afghanistan - without greatly enlarging thesize of the active duty armed forces .

the administration appears to have tacitly decided , so far , toprosecute the current anti - terrorism operations , and possibly the imminent ones against iraq , withinthe constraints of existing active and reserve military force structure , weapons and equipmentinventory , and personnel strengths .

it is not clear how long this level of military effort can besustained without requiring a substantially larger active duty force , and much greater levels ofprocurement spending , so as to avoid gross unreadiness in those forces not actually deployed to partsof the world where hostilities are taking place .

in the background are issues of defense strategy and resource allocation which the terrorism war and related matters have temporarily crowded off of literal and virtual front pages .

it was going tobe difficult enough to finance what the administration regarded as minimally necessary increasesin peacetime defense spending out of then predicted budget surpluses .

when hostilities cease , orgreatly diminish in intensity , how will crucial modernization and readiness programs be funded nowthat deficits are back ? .

are national missile defense ( nmd ) systems technically feasible , and , if so,are they important enough to command a major part of a constrained defense budget at the expenseof conventional weapons research and development and procurement ? .

how should the united statessize its conventional forces in an era where the previous benchmarks of "2 � wars," "1 � wars,""two nearly - simultaneous major theater wars [mtws]," and / or "winning one mtw and holding inanother" all appear to be sterile remnants of the pre - 9 / 11 era ? .

finally , the administration's stated willingness to "exercise our right of self - defense by acting preemptively" against terrorism , and against either transnational terrorists or nation - states that appearto be preparing to attack the united states with wmd , may have military as well as politicalimplications .

are u.s. military forces , which are almost 40% smaller than they were at the heightof the cold war in the late 1980s , capable of executing a strategy which could demand morelong - range power projection capability , intelligence collection and evaluation assets , and specialoperations forces than the present force structure ? .

in short , the 108th congress will be confrontingdefense issues in an atmosphere of uncertainty that has not existed since the collapse of the sovietunion and the warsaw pact a dozen years ago .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in asian affairs ( [phone number scrubbed] ) north korea's decision in late december , 2002 to restart nuclear installations at yongbyon that were shut down under the u.s. - north korean nuclear agreed framework of 1994 creates a majorarms control and foreign policy problem for the united states .

north korea's major motive appearsto be to escalate pressure on the bush administration to negotiate over pyongyang's proposednon - aggression pact and / or a new nuclear agreement that would provide new u.s. benefits to northkorea .

however , re - opening the yongbyon facilities opens up a possible north korean intent oroption to stage a "break out" of its nuclear program in 2003 and openly produce nuclear weapons .

the 1994 agreed framework obligated north korea to suspend the operations of its nuclear facilities and allow the secure storage of 8,000 nuclear fuel rods removed from a nuclear reactor inmay , 1994 .

the united states , in turn , organized an international consortium , the korean peninsulaenergy development organization ( kedo ) , which was to construct two light water nuclear reactors ( lwrs ) inside north korea and provide north korea with 500,000 tons of heavy oil annually untilthe construction of the first lwr was completed .

before north korea received nuclear componentsfor the lwrs , it was to come into full compliance with its 1992 safeguards agreement with theinternational atomic energy agency ( iaea ) .

except for the special status given to the yongbyonfacilities by the agreed framework , the agreed framework specified that north korea would abideby the iaea safeguards agreement with regard to any other nuclear activities and abide by the 1991north korea - south korea denuclearization agreement , which specifically prohibited any northkorean nuclear program based on uranium enrichment .

there reportedly is a "secret minute" to theagreed framework .

press reports have said that this secret minute prohibits north korea fromconstructing any new nuclear facilities .

the bush administration speeded up the construction of the lwrs , which had fallen well behind the completion target date of 2003 , but it also pressed north korea to begin a three to fouryear process of complying with its obligations to the iaea or face a suspension of the lwr project .

after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attack , the administration issued demands that north koreadismantle its weapons of mass destruction , stop proliferating weapons to the middle east and southasia , and withdraw its heavy troop concentrations from the korean demilitarized zone .

thesedemands stressed unilateral north korean actions to meet u.s. concerns and contained no specificoffers of reciprocal u.s. actions .

president bush's declaration of north korea as a member of an"axis of evil" began a series of demands to north korea suggesting penalties if it did not meet u.s.concerns .

the administration sent assistant secretary of state james kelly to north korea in early october , 2002 , for the first substantive u.s. - north korea negotiation since december , 2000 .

kellypresented the north koreans with u.s. evidence that north korea was conducting a secret nuclearweapons program based on uranium enrichment .

u.s. intelligence evidence of the secret programhad built up since 1998 .

the north koreans surprised the administration by admitting to theprogram and asserting that they had the right to possess nuclear weapons .

the kelly visit promptedthe administration to formulate a policy of "containment and isolation" if north korea did not endthe secret program .

the policy consisted of ( 1 ) a refusal to negotiate any new nuclear agreementwith north korea until north korea ended the secret nuclear program and came into compliancewith the past agreements which it was violating ; ( 2 ) an unwillingness to engage in any other type ofsustained dialogue with north korea ; ( 3 ) assembling an international coalition to pressure northkorea , the most important members being south korea , china , japan , and russia ; ( 4 ) imposing aninitial penalty on north korea by suspending the shipments of heavy fuel oil to north korea andwarning of a total termination of the agreed framework ; and ( 5 ) warnings of future internationaleconomic sanctions .

the intensity of north korea's counter - move in re - opening the yongbyon facilities again took administration officials by surprise , by their own admission .

north korea announced through itsofficial media and a letter of december 27 , 2002 , to the iaea that it would restart its nuclear reactorand plutonium reprocessing plant that were in operation until 1994 and resume construction of twolarger reactors .

the most dangerous follow - up north korean move would be to move the 8,000stored fuel rods into the plutonium reprocessing plant for the production of nuclear weapons - gradeplutonium .

according to estimates by nuclear experts and reportedly by u.s. intelligence agencies,if north korea began to reprocess the fuel rods , it would take about four months to produce weaponsgrade plutonium and another one or two months to produce four to six atomic bombs .

such actionby north korea - a nuclear breakout - would put considerable pressure on the bushadministration's initial policy responses to the re - opening of the yongbyon facilities .

the administration's reaction to the re - opening of yongbyon has been to repeatedly disavow any "military option" such as bombing yongbyon and state that it is open to diplomatic contact withnorth korea - but not negotiation of a new agreement .

the administration reportedly is consideringseeking cooperation from an international coalition in instituting economic sanctions against northkorea , possibly through the u.n. security council and interdicting north korean shipments ofweapons to middle east and south asian countries .

such a strategy would aim at north korea'sgreatest vulnerability - its already deteriorating economy .

the option of economic sanctions,however , is encountering growing resistance from china , russia , and south korea .

they supportthe general u.s. position on north korea's nuclear policies , but they have criticized the idea ofeconomic sanctions and have called on the united states to engage in dialogue with north korea .

the south korean position has come about as a result of growing south korean public criticism ofthe 37,000 u.s. troops stationed in south korea and the election in december , 2002 , of apresidential candidate , roh moo - hyun , who ran on a platform critical of u.s. policies .

congress approved the administration's requests for money for kedo operations from fy 1996 through fy 2002 .

congress will take up the relevant foreign operations appropriations billfor fy 2003 in early 2003 .

in view of the new situation since the kelly mission to pyongyang,congress will have an important decision - whether to continue to provide funds for heavy fuel oiland the operation of kedo or to discontinue funding and thus add another step toward thetermination of the agreed framework .

[author name scrubbed],specialist in national defense ( [phone number scrubbed] ) congress continues to confront several challenges related to weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) : how to defend against possible wmd attacks in light of the terrorist threat and how toprevent further proliferation of wmd capabilities globally and in the case of specific countries - most notably russia , china , iraq , iran , north korea , india and pakistan .

in addition tononproliferation regimes and treaties , bilateral agreements and export controls , the possibility ofpreemptively eliminating wmd capabilities has gained currency in the bush administration andelsewhere in the context of iraq and the broader war on terrorism .

since september 11 , 2001 , increased concerns about a nexus between wmd and terrorism has helped drive strategy and tactics for the war on terrorism .

key issues for the 108th congress willinclude: a ) does the threat of wmd use push us toward preemption ? .

b ) if so , does a policy ofpreemption increase the wmd threat to u.s. and allied forces ? .

c ) does the threat of preemptionundermine the existing regime of treaties and agreements or does it strengthen those regimes ? .

closer to home , preparations to defend against a possible wmd attack - for example , an initiativeto vaccinate critical workers against smallpox - will continue to present budgetary , health,infrastructure and homeland security concerns .

congress will continue to be involved in assessingand / or funding programs to enhance detection of wmd - related materials at home , and , possibly,abroad .

a key activity of congress is expected to be the oversight of funding and programs designed to cut off terrorist access to wmd and wmd - related materials "at the source" - securing materialsat sites around the globe , particularly where terrorism and wmd capabilities intersect .

first on thelist of potential suppliers are russia and former soviet republics .

since 1991 , the united states hasprovided assistance to these states in securing and eliminating nuclear and other weapons of massdestruction through the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program .

among theissues that congress may address when it reviews this program in the coming year are the total levelof funding for non - proliferation assistance to russia , priority for specific projects , russia's financialcommitment and cooperation in implementing these programs , and possible ctr - type assistanceto nations outside the former soviet bloc .

the russian debt swap for nonproliferation act , whichcreated a new funding stream for nonproliferation programs in russia , will be an area of oversightinterest .

the 108th congress will likely face issues related to proliferation of wmd capabilities from russia , china , and north korea .

in particular , sales of missiles and missile technologies from thesestates , particularly to such clients as iran and pakistan , will likely be closely watched , as well asdestabilizing missile deployments like short - range chinese missiles facing taiwan .

if the agreedframework with north korea fails , north korea may resume missile testing .

other developmentsof potential interest include the recently signed international code of conduct against ballisticmissile proliferation , which seeks to complement the existing missile technology control regimethrough wider membership and incentives for nonproliferation ; and potential sales of arrow or othermissile defense systems to volatile regions like south asia .

concern about "secondary proliferation" - that is , states of proliferation concern that produce wmd for sale to other countries - could spark interest in new measures to capture the activities ofthose states outside nonproliferation regimes .

recent reports of pakistan's provision ofenrichment - related technology to north korea will raise questions .

on the one hand , pakistan'sassistance in the war on terrorism is considered by some to be important enough to offsetnonproliferation concerns about its own nuclear weapons , but assistance to a nation which theadministration has characterized as part of an "axis of evil" may be viewed in a different light .

thebush administration , if it waives the requirement to place sanctions on pakistan under thesymington amendment to the foreign assistance act ( now section 101 of the arms export controlact ) , will need to inform congress of that waiver .

north korea presents proliferation challenges across the board .

in particular , north korea's admission in october , 2002 , of a clandestine uranium enrichment program caused the bushadministration to suspend heavy oil shipments to north korea ( a key u.s. obligation under theagreed framework ) beginning in december , 2002 .

administration officials indicated that theunited states intended to terminate the agreed framework at that time .

north korea's actions toreactivate its nuclear facilities in late december , 2002 , has further exacerbated the situation .

the107th congress continued to provide funding for implementation of the agreement , but the newcongress may review this funding , especially when it takes up the foreign operations appropriationslegislation for fy2003 .

the administration continues to press north korea to take steps towardending missile deployments and sales and its chemical and biological weapons programs .

finally , the 107th congress authorized president bush to use military force against iraq , in part to enforce iraq's compliance with u.n. resolutions to eliminate its wmd programs .

given the sevenprevious years of inspections with ambiguous results ( 1991-1998 ) , the 108th congress may find itselfin an early debate over the conclusiveness of the inspection results .

further , if war appears to beinevitable , congress will be keenly interested in how to protect our forces against the use of wmdand how to prevent the further dissemination of iraq's wmd to terrorists or state sponsors ofterrorism .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) with narrow passage last summer of the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) , congress ended eight years of debate over whether to re - authorize trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , formerly calledfast - track authority .

this authority allows the president to submit to congress legislationimplementing new trade agreements under special legislative procedures that do not allow foramendment .

while there is unlikely to be trade legislation over the next two years that will be ofthe magnitude or divisiveness of the trade act of 2002 , particularly given the outcome of themid - term election , the 108th congress will have a busy trade agenda .

the bush administration isexpected to ask congress to approve free trade agreements ( ftas ) with chile and singapore andperhaps other countries .

in considering whether to approve ftas submitted by the administration,congress will evaluate how these agreements affect the often divergent interests of exporters,import - competing industries , consumers , and workers , as well as the progress of two broader tradenegotiations that are scheduled to be concluded by 2005 - the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) and the doha development agenda .

as u.s. dependence on trade has grown , controversyconcerning the costs and benefits of agreements that accelerate the economic integration of theunited states with the rest of the world has continued .

the 108th congress will also take up a number of other trade issues .

efforts again will be made to re - authorize the export administration act where the main controversy concerns the efficacy ofloosening export controls on sensitive goods given today's terrorist threats .

in addition , congressfaces the challenge of bringing varied u.s. laws into conformity with world trade organization ( wto ) rules .

absent compliance , the european union and other trading partners could imposesanctions on u.s. exports .

introduction .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialistin international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the bush administration is negotiating or isproposing to negotiate an unprecedented number of trade agreements .

the negotiations includebilateral , regional , and multilateral trade liberalizing agreements .

bilaterally , the united states hascompleted negotiations on an agreement to establish a free trade area ( fta ) with chile , and hasreached an agreement in principle with singapore for a free trade agreement .

the administrationalso notified congress of its intention to begin fta negotiations with morocco , central america ( costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua ) , the south african customs union ( south africa , botswana , lesotho , namibia , and swaziland ) , and australia .

in addition , the unitedstates announced in october 2002 the enterprise for asean initiative , a new trade effort with theassociation of southeast asian nations .

this initiative would offer the prospect of bilateral freetrade agreements with asean countries that are committed to economic openness and reforms .

negotiations for two broader agreements - the western hemisphere's ftaa and the wto dohadevelopment agenda - are ongoing and scheduled to be concluded by january 2005 .

the 108th congress will likely face the question of whether to approve one or more free trade agreements .

it is also expected to monitor negotiations on other free trade agreements and on thewto doha development agenda .

the agreements and negotiations raise several important policyquestions: do the agreements and the ongoing negotiations serve u.s. interests ? .

is the administration fulfilling its obligations under the new trade promotionauthority ? .

are bilateral and regional free trade agreements and negotiations , on the onehand , and the u.s. multilateral agenda in the doha development agenda , on the other hand,mutually supportive or in conflict ? .

how are fta partners chosen and what economic or foreign policy criteriamust be met ? .

in deciding whether to approve bilateral free trade agreements , members of congress may weigh potential costs and benefits to their constituents and to the u.s. economy as a whole .

pointedconcerns may focus on how specific agreements differentially affect the interests of exporters,import - competing industries , consumers , and workers .

for example , the chile and singaporeagreements are characterized as primarily opening up new markets for u.s. exporters withoutmaking any significant reduction in u.s. import protection .

agreements with morocco and centralamerica , however , could produce strong competition for the u.s. textile and apparel sector , raisingindustry resistance .

committees with jurisdiction over trade agreements , particularly the houseways and means and senate finance committees , may raise questions regarding theadministration's fta strategy as well: how are fta partners chosen ? .

what economic or strategiccriteria must be met ? .

does the strategy complicate or support efforts to negotiate larger regional andglobal agreements ? .

some critics maintain that bilateral ftas offer limited economic benefits to the united states .

others worry that they could undermine efforts to conclude broader regional and global tradeagreements .

while the larger agreements offer greater market opening opportunities for u.s.exporters and service providers , they also would require the united states to cut farm subsidies , andopen up still - protected sectors , such as textiles , faster .

the american public's reaction to some freetrade agreements , such as nafta , has been chilly .

the bush administration maintains that ftas support larger foreign policy goals , such as bolstering democratic regimes .

the administration also views bilateral fta's as springboards forconcluding more ambitious regional and global pacts .

agreements with chile and central americaare seen putting pressure on south american countries , particularly brazil , to negotiate on the freetrade area of the americas .

progress in the ftaa , in turn , is seen pressuring the european unionand others to make progress in the wto trade negotiations .

congressional role in trade agreements .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] through its constitutionalresponsibility for the conduct of foreign commerce , congress has an important role in whether andhow the united states participates in these and other trade negotiations .

it decides whether or notchanges under trade agreements , which are negotiated by the executive branch , will be implementedin domestic law .

in 2002 , the 107th congress passed and the president signed the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) , which , among other things , granted the president so - called trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , previously known as fast - track authority .

tpa allows the president to submit certain tradeagreements for a limited time period to congress for approval under special legislative procedures .

these provide that the congress must accept or reject the total results of a trade agreement understrict timetables and without amendment provided that the administration follows rules set out bycongress regarding negotiating objectives , consultations , and other matters .

by increasing thelikelihood that congress will approve trade agreements as negotiated , tpa bolsters the negotiatingleverage and credibility of u.s. trade negotiators .

if congress determines that the executive branch is not observing the provisions of the trade legislation that it approved last year , it could consider several responses .

it could withdraw expeditedprocedures for implementing legislation for trade agreements reached in the wto negotiations , thusallowing amendment of the legislation .

members also might insist on more active participationthrough access to negotiating documents and as observers at negotiating sessions .

the executivebranch probably would oppose both of these responses .

implementing legislation for the chile and singapore fta agreements is likely to be submitted to congress this year .

implementing legislation for other bilateral agreements could be submitted in 2004 .

regarding the ftaa and doha agenda , implementing legislation is not expected to besubmitted , assuming agreements are reached , until the 109th congress .

but the 108thcongress,having an expanded oversight authority as defined in the trade act of 2002 , will play an crucial roleduring the last phase of the negotiations both through consultations and oversight .

some membersmight participate as observers at negotiating meetings as well .

u.s. - singapore fta .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialistin industry and trade ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the united states and singapore launched negotiations on abilateral fta in december 2000 and a final agreement is expected to be completed in late 2002 .

theagreement would ( with a phase - in period ) eliminate tariffs on all goods traded between them , covertrade in services , and protect intellectual property rights .

following the anticipated signing of theagreement in early 2003 , the white house is expected to send it to congress for its concurrence andimplementation .

the fta was originally to be patterned after the u.s. - jordan fta and containsimilar environmental and labor clauses .

the bush administration reportedly has negotiatedlanguage more acceptable to it for environmental and labor provisions .

two contentious issues inthe negotiations dealt with textiles ( the length of the phase - in period and rules of origin ) and capitalflows ( the ability of singapore to curb outflows of capital in a financial crisis ) .

the u.s. traderepresentative claims that the fta has broken new ground in electronic commerce , competitionpolicy , and government procurement and has achieved major advances in intellectual propertyprotection , environment , labor , transparency , customs cooperation , and transshipments .

singaporeis a major trading country ; annual exports and imports exceed its gdp .

it has a population of 4.4million .

u.s. - chile fta .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialistin international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] on november 29 , 2000 , the united states andchile announced they would negotiate a bilateral free trade agreement ( fta ) that would be acomprehensive commitment to freer trade and investment in the region and directly supportnegotiations of the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) .

after passage of trade promotionauthority ( tpa ) legislation in august 2002 , the bilateral negotiations proceeded quickly and ondecember 11 , 2002 , an agreement was reached .

once implemented , the fta calls for 87% of allconsumer and industrial goods to be traded duty free immediately between the two countries,including textile and apparel products manufactured from u.s. or chilean inputs .

also , 75% oftariffs on farm goods and chile's luxury tax on automobiles will be eliminated within the first fouryears , with tariffs on sensitive goods to be phased out over a period of up to 12 years .

rulesgoverning investment , services trade , dispute resolution and other critical issues to the united stateswere also liberalized and made more transparent .

under the trade act of 2002 , president bush isrequired to give congress a 90-day notice of his intention to sign the agreement .

his signaturemakes way for consideration of trade implementing legislation in the 108th congress .

chile is arelatively small economy and has a population of 15.5 million .

u.s. - moroccan fta .

[[author name scrubbed],specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the bush administration formallynotified congress of its intent to negotiate an fta with morocco on october 1 , 2002 .

thenotification letter states that the proposed agreement would "support this administration'scommitment to promote more tolerant , open , and prosperous muslim societies. .

while the proposalhas a strong national security and foreign policy rationale , the fta would also seek to support u.s.economic objectives .

these include allowing u.s. agricultural products to compete more effectivelyagainst european agricultural products , which currently benefit from preferential access .

frommorocco's perspective , the fta could lead to an increase in u.s. foreign direct investment andprovide preferences for textile and apparel exports to the united states .

formal negotiations arescheduled to commence in late january and to conclude in 2003 .

morocco is a small economy andhas a population of just over 31 million .

u.s. - australian fta .

[[author name scrubbed],specialist international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] on november 13 , 2002 , the bushadministration notified the congress that it would begin negotiations with australia on an fta 90days from that date .

australian officials lobbied u.s. policymakers for several years forconsideration as an fta partner , and prime minister john howard raised the issue in meetings withpresident bush .

the bush administration expressed interest but , until recently , had not committedto begin negotiations .

underlying the hesitation were u.s. concerns about australian sanitary andphytosanitary controls that u.s. farmers claim act as barriers to u.s. agricultural exports to australia.while the u.s. business community strongly supports the negotiations , the american agriculturalcommunity remains skeptical .

a group that includes the national cattlemen's association expressed"strong reservations" about the negotiations and a second group led by the american farm bureaufederation said , "we accept the initiation of fta negotiations with australia , but that does notnecessarily imply willingness to accept the final agreement. .

 ( congressional daily .

november 13,2002 ) .

australia is a medium size economy which exports wheat , wool , and meat among otheritems .

its population is 19.5 million .

u.s. - central american fta .

[[author name scrubbed],specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] on january 16 , 2002 , president bushannounced that the united states would explore a free trade agreement with the five nationscomposing the central american common market ( cacm ) - costa rica , el salvador , guatemala,honduras , and nicaragua .

the first round of negotiations is scheduled to begin january 21 , 2003in san jose , costa rica and both sides have expressed optimism that an agreement can be concludedby year end .

the central america free trade agreement , referred to as cafta , presents a newchallenge in bilateral negotiations because the five republics must first negotiate among themselvesin order to bring a single position on any given issue to the negotiating table with the united states .

although the central american countries currently qualify as beneficiary countries under thecaribbean basin initiative , an fta with the united states would potentially allow for furtherreduction in trade barriers , make permanent benefits provisionally guaranteed in legislation requiringperiodic re - authorization , and provide an environment even more conducive for u.s. foreigninvestment .

for the united states , proponents of the agreement see it supporting u.s. exports andproviding less expensive imports , advancing the movement toward a free trade area of theamericas ( ftaa ) , and solidifying deeper regional political and economic reforms that strengthendemocracy and promote stability .

critics have noted that central america represents only 1% ofu.s .

trade and so an fta will have only a small , if noticeable , affect on the u.s. economy overall,with the possible exception of a few import competing industries that may feel the effects slightlymore .

u.s. - south african union fta .

[ian f.fergusson , analyst in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] on november 4 , 2002 , theunited states trade representative ( ustr ) notified congress that talks to negotiate a free - tradeagreement ( fta ) with the southern african customs union ( sacu ) would begin in february 2003.sacu is a customs union composed of south africa , botswana , lesotho , namibia , and swaziland.the original sacu agreement dates from 1910 and was revised in 1969 .

a new agreement to morefully integrate the smaller states into decisionmaking for the area , which was previously dominatedby south africa , was signed on october 21 , 2002 .

the agreement is characterized by free movementof goods within sacu ; a common external tariff ; and the common revenue pool which isapportioned among the member states .

a large degree of economic integration exists among thesacu states because of the agreement , perhaps accounting for the u.s. decision to negotiate an ftawith sacu , rather than just south africa .

however , south africa is the dominant economy of theregion , accounting for 87% of the population , and 92 % of the gdp of the customs area .

u.s. exportsto sacu totaled $3.1 billion in 2001 , led by aircraft , vehicles , construction and agriculturalequipment , and computers .

u.s. imports from sacu totaled $4.8 billion , composed of minerals suchas platinum , diamonds , and titanium , textiles and apparel , vehicles , and automotive parts .

potentialobstacles to an fta with sacu include competition issues related to the south africantelecommunications industry and government procurement , u.s. textile tariffs and quotas , andintellectual property rights especially with regards to access to hiv / aids medicines .

south africacurrently has a free trade agreement with the european union that , while not including the othermembers of sacu , has been characterized as putting u.s. firms at a competitive disadvantagecompared to their european counterparts .

free trade area of the americas .

[j.f .

hornbeck , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the proposed free tradearea of the americas ( ftaa ) is a regional trade concept that would include 34 nations of thewestern hemisphere intent on promoting economic integration by creating a comprehensive ( presumably wto - plus ) framework for reducing tariff and nontariff barriers to trade and investment .

formal negotiations commenced in 1998 and the first draft of the agreement was adopted at thethird summit of the americas in quebec , canada in april 2001 .

the second draft text was acceptedon november 1 , 2002 at the seventh trade ministerial in quito , ecuador .

the negotiating schedulecalls for a final agreement to be adopted by january 2005 , with its entry into force to occur no laterthan the end of the same year .

five major achievements stand out from the quito trade ministerial: 1 ) brazil and the united states became co - chairs of the trade negotiations committee ( tnc ) , which will guide the finalphase of the overall negotiation process ; 2 ) a new hemisphere cooperation program ( hcp ) wasestablished to develop resources to help small countries "strengthen their capacity to implement andparticipate fully in the ftaa ; " 3 ) the second draft of the ftaa agreement was released ; 4 ) a timeline was established for the critical market access negotiations ; and 5 ) the final rotation of chairs forthe various negotiating groups was completed .

the tnc will meet in april 2003 in trinidad andtobago and the eighth ( next ) ftaa ministerial meeting will convene in miami , florida in the fourthquarter of 2003 ; the ninth is scheduled for the following year in brazil .

negotiations on agriculture are a critical and sensitive topic for most negotiating members .

as was recognized at quito , the negotiations will have to be done with an eye on parallel discussionsbeing undertaken by the wto .

the wto deadline for agriculture negotiations is also set forjanuary 2005 .

much attention is also focused on how brazil and the united states will undertaketheir duties as co - chairs of the tnc , both as leaders of the negotiating process , and as the twolargest economies with significant differences of opinion on many issues , including difficult topicssuch as treatment of steel and agricultural products .

additional complications include challenges to economic and social progress in latin america , such as the financial crisis in argentina , the recent large imf package for brazil , and uncertainpolitical conditions in venezuela and colombia .

setbacks in these areas raise the potential foreroding stability and the spirit of cooperation that launched the ftaa negotiations .

multilateral negotiations: the wto doha development agenda .

[[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] from november 9-14 , 2001 , trade ministers from 142 member countries of the world tradeorganization ( wto ) met in doha , qatar to decide whether or not to launch a new round ofmultilateral trade negotiations .

at the end of that meeting , they agreed on a work program for a newround , called the doha development agenda .

under the work program , negotiators will continueongoing agriculture and services trade talks , as well as address industrial tariffs , intellectual propertyissues , topics of interest to developing countries , and other areas .

at doha , trade ministers agreed that the negotiations would be carried out under the trade negotiations committee ( tnc ) , which would consist of all wto members and countriesnegotiating membership .

the tnc has met four times: january , april , july , and october 2002 .

countries have agreed on a negotiating structure and chairpersons .

they face a deadline of may 31,2003 for agreement on formulas and other modalities in the agriculture negotiations and for initialoffers of market access for the services negotiations .

they also face a may 2003 deadline for areview of the dispute settlement understanding .

the trade ministers agreed at doha that they wouldtake stock and make several interim decisions at the next ministerial meeting , which is scheduledfor september 10-14 , 2003 in cancun , mexico .

they set a deadline of january 1 , 2005 , for a finalcomprehensive trade agreement .

the potential benefit of successful multilateral negotiations is projected to be great .

a university of michigan study found that a one - third reduction of current barriers to trade wouldresult in over $600 billion in worldwide economic benefits .

while the possible gains in multilateralnegotiations are such a great magnitude , however , reaching agreement among so many countries ishighly difficult .

therefore , policymakers are also seeking more limited economic gains throughbilateral or regional agreements , which are often easier to negotiate .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) in the 108th congress , there will be continued efforts to rewrite and reauthorize the export administration act of 1979 ( eaa ) .

the eaa provides the statutory authority for export controlson sensitive dual - use goods and technologies , items that have both civilian and military applications including those items that can contribute to the proliferation of nuclear , biological and chemicalweaponry .

efforts to renew the act have been complicated by continued tension between national security and commercial concerns .

some observers contend that current export controls hurt u.s. businessby subjecting technology exports to what they consider a cumbersome and ineffective licensingprocess that costs sales and loses markets to overseas competitors .

others maintain that currentcontrols are not strong enough to prevent the spread of dual - use technologies to adversaries orpotential proliferators , and that eaa legislation , as introduced in the 107th congress , would furtherweaken this system .

congressional interest in eaa reform has been heightened by questions aboutthe efficacy of export controls in the fight against terrorism and by revelations about theunauthorized transfer of sensitive items to nations restricted by current regulations , including china .

the eaa , which originally expired in 1989 , periodically has been reauthorized for short periods of time , with the last incremental extension expiring in august 2001 .

at other times , the exportlicensing system created under the authority of eaa has been continued by the invocation ofauthorities under the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

in the 107thcongress , two competing versions of eaa emerged .

the senate version ( s. 149 ) waspassed by the senate on september 6 , 2001 .

both the house international relations committee andthe house armed services committee substantially amended the house version ( h.r .

2581 ) which , as introduced , was substantially similar to s. 149 .

to different degrees,the house versions conferred additional authority on the department of defense to block licenseapplications and decontrol decisions , tightened the criteria for decontrol of certain items , andmandated the denial of licenses for certain exports .

the administration supported s. 149 and opposed the competing house versions .

negotiations between the administration , senate,and house participants to reconcile differences between the versions of the legislation continued forthe remainder of the session without success .

because the substance of this debate has not beenpredominantly partisan in nature , the change in party composition of the 108th congress is notexpected to alter the dynamics of the debate .

the sponsor of the senate version of eaa in the 107thcongress , senator michael enzi , has indicated that he will reintroduce a version of eaa in the 108thcongress , and other members may also offer export control legislation .

in addition to thereauthorization legislation , the 108th congress may tackle such issues as the nature and scope ofexport controls on high performance computers , whether commercial communications satellites willremain under the licensing authority of the department of state or be transferred to the departmentof commerce , and the regulation of "deemed exports" - the release of sensitive technology toforeign nationals within the united states .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , legislative attorney , american law division ( [phone number scrubbed] ) the 108th congress inherits several disputes where the wto has ruled that u.s. laws violate world trade obligations .

barring abolition or significant modification of the statutes in question , theeuropean union and other trading partners could decide to retaliate on u.s. exports this year or next .

the largest threat involves a wto ruling that a u.s. export tax benefit , the extraterritorial income exclusion ( eti ) , and its predecessor - the foreign sales corporation ( fsc ) - is an illegalsubsidy .

pursuant to the case and the inability of the united states to repeal the subsidy or find awto compatible substitute , the wto in august 2002 granted the eu the right to impose 100%tariffs on $4 billion of u.s. exports to europe .

some fear that a decision by the eu to retaliate onsuch a large volume of trade - the largest sanction in the history of the wto - could ignite atransatlantic trade war and deal a devastating blow to the ongoing round of global trade negotiations .

the threat of foreign retaliation against u.s. exports is also a possibility in several other cases in which the united states has been on the losing side of wto dispute panel rulings .

these includecases involving the antidumping act of 1916 , which provides a private right of action and criminalpenalties against dumping , a copyright dispute where the u.s. was found to violate royalty rights ofeu musicians , and a trademark dispute involving a cuban rum .

critics , including a number of members of congress , have charged that some of these wto dispute settlement rulings unfairly infringe on u.s. sovereignty by undermining domestic traderemedy laws .

bush administration trade officials have expressed concerns that some panel rulings"legislate new obligations and go too far in determining how [wto] members should comply withadverse panel rulings. .

in response , some members reportedly are considering introducinglegislation to establish a commission of former judges to review wto decisions with a view todetermining whether the wto is exceeding its authority .

others may support changes in the disputesettlement process that could be proposed and negotiated in the doha development agenda .

supporters of the wto dispute resolution process argue that the united states was the chief proponent of creating a stronger and more binding dispute settlement process .

they also claim thatthe system works in keeping markets open to u.s. exports , and that u.s. complaints only arise whenthe system chips away at some of the vestiges of u.s. protection .

were the united states or otherleading wto members to ignore wto findings , they argue that the dispute resolution process couldbe severely weakened .

legislation was introduced in the 107th congress to settle a number of these disputes , but none of the bills was brought to the floor .

on the eti dispute , house ways and means committeechairman bill thomas introduced legislation ( h.r .

5095 ) that would repeal the etiand replace it with a series of tax benefits that would primarily help companies with overseasoperations .

many companies that produce and export primarily from the united states are not infavor of this approach .

by contrast , senate finance committee leaders are promoting a "negotiatedsolution" to the dispute , perhaps within the context of the doha round of negotiations .

eu tradeofficials have repeatedly stated that they only want the united states to amend or repeal the eti ina wto - consistent manner .

three different bills were introduced to repeal the 1916 antidumping statute , but were not acted on .

while two of the bills would have terminated pending litigation , the third would havegrandfathered existing court cases , all of which involve eu or japanese companies .

the unitedstates was to have originally complied by mid - 2001 , but received extensions from the eu and japan,the most recent lasting until the adjournment of the past session of congress .

the eu recentlywarned that it would resume retaliation procedures in the wto if the u.s. failed to repeal the lawin a way that would end all existing court cases .

in the eu's successful challenge of u.s. music licensing legislation , the united states agreed to pay arbitrated compensation of $3.3 million to the eu , though the eu still seeks a change in u.s.law .

congress authorized $50 million in the trade act of 2002 for a fund for the payment ofsettlements in wto disputes , but has not appropriated the funds .

another wto panel found earlier this year that the united states violated its wto obligations in enacting the continued dumping and subsidy offset act of 2000 ( also known as the byrdamendment ) , which requires the distribution of antidumping and countervailing duties to petitionersand interested parties in underlying cases , and recommended that the united states repeal the statute .

while the united states has appealed the panel's findings , a wto appellate decision upholding thepanel may raise legislative issues for the united states .

were the eu to prevail in the dispute , theunited states would likely need to indicate its compliance plans to the wto in the first half of 2003 .

the 108th congress may reconsider legislation to bring the united states into compliance with recommendations and rulings formulated by the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) of the wto .

consideration is likely to be given to the eti export subsidy case , which is the longest standingexample of non - compliance .

return to contents section of this long report .

