the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-191 , hipaa ) provided for changes in the health insurance market and imposed certain federal requirements on health insurance plans offered by public and private employers .

it guaranteed the availability and renewability of health insurance coverage for certain employees and individuals , and limited the use of preexisting condition restrictions .

the act established federal standards for insurers , health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) , and employer plans , including those who self - insure .

however , it allowed states and sometimes insurers substantial state flexibility for compliance with the federal requirements .

hipaa also included tax provisions relating to health insurance .

it permitted a limited number of small businesses and self - employed individuals to contribute to tax - advantaged medical savings accounts ( msas ) established in conjunction with high - deductible health insurance plans .

it increased the deduction for health insurance that self - employed taxpayers may claim .

in addition , it allowed long - term care expenses to be treated like deductible medical expenses and clarified the tax treatment of long - term care insurance .

hipaa amended the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) , the public health service ( phs ) act , and the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

in general , requirements on employer plans are found in the erisa and irc amendments ; requirements on health insurance issuers , such as insurance carriers and health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) are found in the phs act and erisa amendments .

the increased deduction for the self - employed , tax - favored msas , and long - term care provisions are amendments to the irc .

the basic intent of hipaa's health insurance provisions is to lower the possibility that people and small employers will lose existing health plan coverage , and to make it easier for individuals to switch plans or to purchase coverage on their own if they lose employer - offered coverage .

the health insurance reforms ensure that people who are moving from one job to another or from employment to unemployment are not denied health insurance because they have a preexisting medical condition ( portability ) and limit the waiting time before a plan covers any preexisting medical condition for participants and beneficiaries in group health plans .

the reforms were also intended to guarantee that individuals and employers who choose to purchase coverage are able to find a plan ( guaranteed issue ) and that individuals already covered , as well as employers that offer coverage to their employees , are able to renew their coverage ( guaranteed renewal ) .

finally , the health insurance provisions prohibit discrimination on the basis of health status ( non - discrimination ) and require plans to offer special enrollment periods .

other hipaa provisions seek to make health insurance more affordable .

the act raised the tax deduction for health insurance premiums paid by the self - employed .

msas coupled with qualified high deductible health insurance plans were made available on a trial basis to a limited number of individuals .

new tax incentives were made available to encourage individuals and employers to purchase long - term care insurance .

finally , the act included administrative simplification and privacy provisions instructing the secretary of hhs to issue standards addressing the electronic transmission of health information and the privacy of personally identifiable medical information .

additional federal protections have been added since the passage of hipaa .

the protections required plans that cover newborn delivery to allow for a minimum two - day hospital stay under certain conditions , required plans that offer mental health services to offer them subject to similar limitations as other health benefits , and required plans that cover mastectomy to also cover reconstructive surgery .

in addition , the deduction allowed for premium costs for the self - employed was changed .

in addition to the insurance provisions discussed above , hipaa includes other provisions affecting health care .

this section briefly summarizes these provisions and refers readers to other crs reports where available .

in addition to provisions relating to private health insurance , hipaa directed the secretary of hhs to issue standards to support and promote the electronic transmission of health care information between payers and providers .

the standards specify the content and format of electronic health care claims and other common administrative and financial health care transactions ( eg , health plan enrollment , referrals ) .

they are intended to streamline administrative operations within the health care system , which currently stores and transmits health information in numerous paper and electronic formats .

in 2001 congress enacted the administrative simplification compliance act ( p.l .

107-105 ) , which enabled payers and providers to seek a one - year extension on the october 16 , 2002 deadline for compliance with the electronic transactions and codes standards .

hipaa's administrative simplification provisions also instructed the secretary of hhs to develop security standards and safeguards , which health plans and providers must incorporate into their operations to protect health information from unauthorized access , use , and disclosure .

health care providers and most health plans must be in compliance with the security standards by april 21 , 2005 .

in addition , hipaa directed the secretary to develop standards for unique health identifiers ( i.e. , id numbers ) for patients , employers , health plans , and providers .

cms has issued standards for both the employer and provider identifiers , but the health plan identifier remains under development .

in each fiscal year since fy1999 , congress has prevented cms from developing a standard for the unique patient identifier by inserting language in the agency's annual appropriations bill .

the language prohibits the use of funds for developing a unique patient identifier standard unless legislation is enacted specifically approving such a standard .

the growing use of information technology in the management , administration , and delivery of health care has led to increasing public concern over the privacy of medical information .

patients are worried about who has access to their medical records without their express authorization .

they fear that their personal health information will be used against them to deny insurance , employment , and housing , or to expose them to unwanted judgment and scrutiny .

lawmakers addressed these concerns by including in hipaa's administrative simplification provisions a timetable for developing standards to protect the privacy of health information .

hipaa gave congress until august 21 , 1999 , to enact comprehensive health privacy legislation , otherwise the secretary was instructed to develop privacy standards .

congress was unable to meet its own deadline and so the secretary proceeded to develop a health information privacy rule .

the final rule was issued on december 28 , 2000 , and modifications to the rule were published on august 14 , 2002 .

for more information on the privacy rule , see crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule , by [author name scrubbed] .

information on the status and implementation of all the hipaa administrative simplification standards is at http: / / aspe.os.dhhs.gov / admnsimp .

hipaa authorized tax - advantaged medical savings accounts ( msas ) under a demonstration that began in 1997 .

msas ( now formally called archer msas ) are personal savings accounts for unreimbursed medical expenses .

they can be used to pay for health care not covered by insurance , including deductibles and copayments .

the legislation provided that msas may be established by taxpayers who have qualifying high deductible insurance ( and none other , with some exceptions ) and who either are self - employed or are employees covered by the high deductible plan established by their small employer .

employer contributions to msas are not subject to either income or employment taxes , while contributions made by individuals — allowed only if the employer does not contribute — are allowed as an above - the - line deduction ( not limited to itemizers ) .

msas are held in trust by insurance companies , banks , and other financial institutions , and whatever earnings they have are exempt from taxes .

withdrawals are not taxed if they are for medical expenses unreimbursed by insurance or otherwise , while other distributions , being non - qualified , are included in gross income and subject with some exceptions to an additional 15% penalty .

hipaa set a deadline ( originally december 31 , 2000 ) for establishing new accounts and limited the total to various ceilings , eventually 750,000 accounts .

in october , 2002 , the irs estimated that there would be 78,913 msa returns filed for tax year 2001 ; it also determined that 20,592 taxpayers who did not make contributions in 2001 established accounts in the first six months of 2002 .

these numbers were far less than the 750,000 statutory ceiling .

later amendments extended the deadline for new accounts to december 31 , 2003 .

although no new msas may be created , with some exceptions , current owners can maintain their accounts and , provided they have a qualifying high - deductible insurance , can continue to make contributions .

however , most msa owners can now have hsas , and their msa balances can be rolled over into the new accounts .

for more information about msas and hsas , see crs report rs21573 , tax - advantaged accounts for health care expenses: side - by - side comparison , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl32467 , health savings accounts , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and neela k. ranade .

for current legislative activity on tax - advantaged accounts , see crs issue brief ib98037 , tax benefits for health insurance and expenses: current legislation , also by [author name scrubbed] .

hipaa increased the portion of premiums that self - employed taxpayers may deduct from income for the purposes of determining federal taxes owed .

under prior law , the deduction was 30% of health insurance costs ; hipaa increased it to 40% in 1997 ; 45% in 1998 through 2002 ; 50% in 2003 ; 60% in 2004 ; 70% in 2005 ; and 80% in 2006 and thereafter .

subsequent legislation ( p.l .

105-34 and p.l .

105-277 ) accelerated and increased the percentages set by hipaa .

beginning in 2003 , 100% of health insurance costs can be deducted .

as discussed below , hipaa also allowed self - employed taxpayers to take account of long - term care insurance premiums in making this deduction .

hipaa provided that payments for personal injury or sickness through an arrangement having the effect of accident or health insurance are excluded from gross income ( that is , they are exempt from taxation ) , provided the arrangement has adequate risk shifting and is not merely a reimbursement arrangement .

thus with respect to taxes , payments from self - insured plans covering self - employed individuals are treated like payments from commercial insurance .

hipaa established new rules regarding the tax treatment of long - term care insurance and expenses , effective january 1 , 1997 .

qualified long - term care insurance is treated as accident and health insurance , and benefits are treated as amounts received for personal injuries and sickness and reimbursement for medical expenses actually incurred .

as a consequence , benefits are excluded from gross income ( that is , exempt from taxation ) .

the exclusion for benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic basis is limited to the greater of ( 1 ) $240 a day ( in 2005 ) or ( 2 ) the cost of long - term care services .

employer contributions to the cost of qualified long - term care insurance premiums are excluded from the gross income of the employee .

the exclusion does not apply to insurance provided through employer - sponsored cafeteria plans or flexible spending accounts .

unreimbursed long - term care expenses are allowed as itemized deductions to the extent they and other unreimbursed medical expenses exceed 7.5% of adjusted gross income .

long - term care insurance premiums can be counted as these expenses subject to age - adjusted limits .

in 2005 , these limits range from $270 for persons age 40 or less to $3,400 for persons over age 70 .

self - employed individuals are allowed to include long - term care insurance premiums in determining their above - the - line deduction ( not limited to itemizers ) for health insurance expenses .

only amounts not exceeding the age - adjusted limits can be included .

so limited , 100% of the cost of the insurance may be claimed as a deduction in 2005 , as described above .

qualified long - term care insurance is defined as a contract that covers only long - term care services ; does not pay or reimburse expenses covered under medicare ; is guaranteed renewable ; does not provide for a cash surrender value or other money that can be paid , assigned , or pledged as collateral for a loan , or borrowed ; applies all refunds of premiums and all policy holder dividends or similar amounts as a reduction in future premiums or to increase future benefits ; and meets certain consumer protection standards .

policies issued before january 1 , 1997 , and meeting a state's long - term care insurance requirements at the time the policy was issued are considered qualified insurance for purposes of favorable tax treatment .

qualified long - term care services are defined as necessary diagnostic , preventive , therapeutic , curing , treating , mitigating , and rehabilitative services , and maintenance or personal care services , which are required by a chronically ill individual , and are provided according to a plan of care prescribed by a licensed health care practitioner .

however , amounts paid for services provided by the spouse of a chronically ill person or by a relative directly or through a partnership , corporation , or other entity will not be considered a medical expense eligible for favorable tax treatment , unless the service is provided by a licensed professional .

chronically ill persons are defined as those individuals: unable to perform without substantial assistance from another individual at least two of the following activities of daily living ( adls ) for a period of at least 90 days due to a loss of functional capacity: bathing , dressing , transferring , toileting , eating , and continence ; having a level of disability similar to the level of disability specified for functional impairments ( as determined by the secretary of the treasury in consultation with the secretary of health and human services ) ; or requiring substantial supervision to protect them from threats to health and safety due to severe cognitive impairment .

hipaa required that a licensed health practitioner ( physician , registered professional nurse , licensed social worker , or other individual prescribed by the secretary of the treasury ) certify that a person meets these criteria within the preceding 12-month period .

hipaa clarified that accelerated death benefits ( that is , benefits paid before death ) received under a life insurance contract on the life of an insured terminally or chronically ill individual are excluded from gross income .

also excluded are amounts received from a viatical settlement provider for the sale or assignment of a life insurance contract .

these exclusions do not apply to amounts paid to persons other than the insured if they have an insurable interest in the insured for business reasons .

a terminally ill individual is one who has been certified by a physician as having an illness or physical condition which can reasonably be expected to result in death within 24 months of the date of certification .

a chronically ill individual is defined the same way as for long - term care ( see the previous section ) .

in this case , the exclusion of accelerated death benefits is limited to the actual costs of long - term care incurred by the individual that are not compensated by insurance or otherwise .

the exclusion for benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic basis is limited to the greater of ( 1 ) $240 a day ( in 2005 ) or ( 2 ) the costs of long - term care services .

contracts must not pay or reimburse expenses which are reimbursable under medicare or would be but for the application of a deductible or coinsurance amount .

in addition , contracts are subject to the consumer protection provisions specified in the tax code for long - term care insurance , except for analogous standards specifically applying to chronically ill individuals that are adopted by the national association of insurance commissioners or the state in which the policyholder resides .

hipaa added two types of organizations to the list of those expressly exempt from the federal income tax: ( 1 ) state - sponsored membership organizations that provide insurance coverage or medical care to high - risk individuals , and ( 2 ) state - sponsored workmen's compensation reinsurance organizations .

organizations in either classification must meet a number of requirements .

hipaa allowed health insurance providers ( other than health maintenance organizations ) that are organized and governed under state laws specifically and exclusively applying to not - for - profit health insurance or service organizations to deduct 25% of claims and expenses incurred during the year , less adjusted surplus .

previously this tax treatment applied only to blue cross and blue shield organizations .

hipaa provided that the 10% early withdrawal penalty would no longer apply to individual retirement account ( ira ) distributions used to pay medical expenses in excess of 7.5% of adjusted gross income .

in addition , it provided that the penalty would not apply to ira distributions used to pay health insurance premiums after separation from employment in the case of an individual who receives 12 consecutive weeks of unemployment compensation .

hipaa required the secretary of the treasury to include organ and tissue donor information , to the extent practicable , in the mailing of individual income tax refunds from february 1 , 1997 through june 30 , 1997. authorized tax - advantaged medical savings accounts ( msas ) under a demonstration that began in 1997 .

