kosovo's declaration of independence on february 17 , 2008 , and the entry into force of a new kosovo constitution on june 15 , have ushered in a "new reality" in the balkans , but one still with many uncertainties .

the ethnic albanian majority in kosovo and the kosovo government view independence as the fulfillment of a long - held goal .

the united states , france , and the united kingdom were among the first countries to recognize kosovo , and have since been joined by a total of over forty countries worldwide .

these and other countries have pledged to support kosovo through new international missions and financial assistance ; an international donors' conference is scheduled for july 11 .

on the other hand , serbia and russia vehemently oppose kosovo's secession , and have warned of dangerous and far - reaching consequences .

the kosovo serb minority as well as leaders in serbia insist that "kosovo is serbia" and have pledged never to recognize kosovo's independence .

on the ground , post - independence tensions have been greatest in the northern part of kosovo , where many ethnic serbs are concentrated .

kosovo's serbs have largely boycotted participation in kosovo's institutions .

serbian protesters have frequently confronted u.n. and nato forces on the kosovo - serb border and in the northern half of the town of mitrovica .

the worst clash to date took place on march 17 in the aftermath of a serb attempt to occupy a government building in northern mitrovica ; unmik and nato arrests of the occupiers prompted clashes with rioters which resulted in the death of a u.n. police officer and several dozen wounded .

while no major recurrence of violence has taken place , the situation in the north remains tense .

on may 11 , serbia organized and held national and municipal elections in serb - majority municipalities throughout kosovo .

u.n. officials called the municipal vote illegal and an unacceptable extension of serbian - controlled parallel institutions in kosovo .

kosovo's moved to declare independence after a lengthy process to achieve a negotiated settlement on kosovo's status failed to reach agreement amongst the parties or international consensus within the u.n. security council .

the united nations remains neutral with respect to kosovo's status .

nevertheless , kosovo's leaders have pledged to implement the provisions of the ahtisaari plan , presented by the u.n. envoy in march 2007 , which outline terms for kosovo's supervised independence with extensive rights for the kosovo serb minority and other minority communities .

the european union agreed to take on new civilian missions on the ground in kosovo , while nato pledged to maintain security through its kosovo force ( kfor ) .

not all of the eu's 27 member states support kosovo's independence , although a majority are expected eventually to recognize the new state and all agreed to launch the new eu - led missions .

as a consequence , unsc resolution 1244 remains in force , with the various international missions in co - existence for the time being .

u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon has called for a "reconfigured" u.n. presence , with the eu taking on enhanced responsibilities .

u.s. and european officials have emphasized their wish for friendly relations with serbia , while appealing for restraint in belgrade's actions in response to kosovo , particularly with respect to apparent serbian efforts to harden a partition in kosovo or engage its security personnel directly in kosovo affairs .

most observers recognize that , for the time being , the new situation presents a serious strain in relations with serbia , especially in the aftermath of february riots in belgrade , in which violent demonstrators set fire to the u.s. embassy and other european embassies nearby .

at the same time , the european union has moved to advance serbia's track toward eu accession , in an effort to bolster support for pro - european political forces in serbia .

in 1998 and 1999 , the united states and its nato allies attempted to put an end to escalating violence between ethnic albanian guerrillas and yugoslav forces in the federal republic of yugoslavia's kosovo region .

they were outraged by serb security forces' atrocities against ethnic albanian civilians , and feared that the conflict could drag in other countries and destabilize the region .

these efforts culminated in a 78-day nato bombing campaign against serbia from march to june 1999 .

yugoslav leader slobodan milosevic agreed to withdraw his forces from the province in june 1999 , clearing the way for the deployment of u.s. and other nato peacekeepers .

while nato's action ended milosevic's depredations in kosovo , it left u.s. and other western policymakers with many difficult issues , including creating the conditions for the resumption of a normal life in kosovo , setting up autonomous governing structures , and beginning reconstruction of the war - torn province .

the thorny issue of kosovo's final status also loomed as critical unfinished business , with important ramifications for stability in the entire western balkan region .

after several years , u.s. policymakers began to emphasize the need to resolve unfinished business in the balkans , especially with respect to a viable political settlement for kosovo .

in 2006 and 2007 , u.s. officials made repeated statements against maintaining an unstable status quo and in favor of resolving kosovo's status in order to achieve long - standing u.s. goals for a europe whole , free , and at peace .

since 2007 , president bush and other top u.s. officials have publicly expressed u.s. support for kosovo's independence ( see " u.s. policy " section , below ) .

over the years , u.s. engagement in kosovo has at times been controversial .

proponents of u.s. engagement say that instability in kosovo could have a negative impact on the stability of the balkans and therefore of europe as a whole , which they view as a vital interest of the united states .

they believe instability in the region could produce an environment favorable to organized crime and terrorism and undermine u.s. goals of euro - atlantic integration and cooperation .

they say the ongoing involvement of the united states is critical to ensuring this stability , because of its resources and unrivaled political credibility in the region .

increasingly , many observers on both sides of the atlantic emphasize that europe has a larger stake than the united states in stability in southeastern europe , and that european nations should lead international efforts in kosovo .

some critics of u.s. engagement in the balkans say that the situation in kosovo does not have as large an impact on vital u.s. interests as other issues , particularly the war on terrorism in the wake of the september 11 terrorist attacks on the united states and the war in iraq , as well as a host of other foreign policy and national security challenges .

reflecting international focus on the global anti - terrorism campaign and other priorities , there has appeared a strong interest in "finishing the job," including an eventual "exit strategy" for the international civil and military administration of kosovo .

however , a residual international civilian and military role , with an ongoing nato and u.s. presence — including an ongoing commitment of u.s. resources — is likely to stay on for some time after independence to assist with and supervise kosovo's transition .

although the war in kosovo had deep historical roots , its immediate causes can be found in the decision of milosevic regime in serbia to eliminate the autonomy of its kosovo province in 1989 .

the regime committed widespread human rights abuses in the following decade , at first meeting only non - violent resistance from the province's ethnic albanian majority .

however , in 1998 ethnic albanian guerrillas calling themselves the kosovo liberation army ( kla ) began attacks on serbian police and yugoslav army troops .

the milosevic regime responded with increasingly violent and indiscriminate repression .

from february 1998 until march 1999 , conflict between the kla and serb forces ( as well as armed serb attacks on ethnic albanian civilians ) drove more than 400,000 people from their homes and killed more than 2,500 people .

the united states and other western countries used sanctions and other forms of pressure to try to persuade milosevic to cease repression and restore autonomy to kosovo , without success .

the increasing deterioration of the situation on the ground led the international contact group ( united states , britain , france , germany , italy and russia ) to agree on january 29 , 1999 on a draft peace plan for kosovo .

they invited the two sides to rambouillet , near paris , to start peace talks based on the plan on february 6 .

as an inducement to the parties to comply , on january 30 the north atlantic council agreed to authorize nato secretary - general javier solana to launch nato air strikes against targets in serbia , after consulting with nato members , if the serb side rejected the peace plan .

nato said it was also studying efforts to curb the flow of arms to the rebels .

the draft peace plan called for three - year interim settlement that would provide greater autonomy for kosovo within yugoslavia , and the deployment of a nato - led international military force to help implement the agreement .

on march 18 , 1999 , the ethnic albanian delegation to the peace talks signed the plan , but the yugoslav delegation rejected it .

nato began air strikes on the federal republic of yugoslavia on march 24 , 1999 .

yugoslav forces moved rapidly to expel most of kosovo's ethnic albanians from their homes , many of which were looted and burned .

a december 1999 state department report estimated the total number of refugees and displaced persons at over 1.5 million , over 90% of kosovo's ethnic albanian population .

the report said that yugoslav forces killed about 10,000 ethnic albanians , and abused , tortured and raped others .

after 78 days of increasingly intense air strikes that inflicted damage on yugoslavia's infrastructure and its armed forces , president milosevic agreed on june 3 to a peace plan based on nato demands and a proposal from the group of eight countries ( the united states , britain , france , germany , italy , canada , russia , and japan ) .

it called for the withdrawal of all yugoslav forces from kosovo ; the deployment of an international peacekeeping force with nato at its core ; and international administration of kosovo until elected interim institutions are set up , under which kosovo will enjoy wide - ranging autonomy within yugoslavia .

negotiations would be eventually opened on kosovo's final status .

on june 9 , 1999 , nato and yugoslav military officers concluded a military technical agreement governing the withdrawal of all yugoslav forces from kosovo .

on june 10 , the u.n. security council approved unsc resolution 1244 , based on the international peace plan agreed to by milosevic .

kfor began to enter kosovo on june 11 .

the yugoslav pullout was completed on schedule on june 20 .

on june 20 , the kla and nato signed a document on the demilitarization of the kla .

within weeks of the pullout of yugoslav forces from kosovo and the deployment of nato - led peacekeeping force kfor , the overwhelming majority of ethnic albanian refugees returned to their homes .

at the same time , more than 200,000 ethnic serbs and other minorities living in kosovo left the province , according to the u.n. high commissioner for refugees .

international officials estimate the number of serbs living in kosovo at about 100,000 .

serbs in the northern part of the province are concentrated in or near the divided town of mitrovica .

the rest are scattered in isolated enclaves in other parts of the province , protected by kfor troops .

a key reason for the departures is violence and intimidation by ethnic albanians , although some departures have been voluntary .

meanwhile , some 15,000 so - called "minority returns" — or returns of displaced persons to their homes in which they constitute an ethnic minority — have been reported over the last several years , although even this amount has been offset by other minorities who have since left the province .

kosovo serbs say that since the pullout of yugoslav forces , more than 1,100 were killed and over 1,000 are missing .

hundreds of houses of serb refugees have been looted and burned .

without further action in the u.n. security council , kosovo's authorities prepared to make a declaration of independence in early 2008 as part of a process closely coordinated with the international community .

at the urging of the international community , pristina waited until serbia completed both rounds of its direct presidential election ( january 20 and february 3 ) .

kosovo's leaders had long expressed concerns about repeated delays in the status process , and some in kosovo objected to the ahtisaari plan's perceived limits on kosovar sovereignty ; for example , a pro - independence rally in february 2007 turned into a violent clash with u.n. police , leaving two dead .

on february 17 , 2008 , the kosovo assembly adopted a declaration of independence "in full accordance with the recommendations of u.n. special envoy martti ahtisaari. .

it declared kosovo to be a democratic , secular , and multi - ethnic republic , fully accepted the obligations for kosovo under the ahtisaari plan .

on the following day , the united states , france , and the united kingdom formally recognized kosovo's independence .

they have been joined by several other european countries and a total of over forty countries worldwide .

among u.n. security council members , russia , china , along with serbia and some other countries denounced the declaration as a violation of international law .

a majority but not all of the eu's 27 member states support kosovo's independence — spain , cyprus , romania , slovakia , bulgaria , and greece have expressed strong reservations .

at the same time , the lack of eu unity on kosovo's status has not prevented or held up eu joint actions on deploying new missions to kosovo ( see below ) .

the united nations , meanwhile , has maintained a strict "status neutral" position on kosovo's status .

kosovo's leaders have welcomed international support for kosovo's democratic development through international presences .

the kosovo assembly has taken swift action to enact new laws consistent with the ahtisaari plan , including ratifying a new constitution which came into effect on june 15 , 2008 .

the thaci government presented its agenda to parliament in mid - april .

kosovo's leaders have called euro - atlantic integration a key priority for the new country .

post - independence tensions have been greatest in the northern part of kosovo , where many ethnic serbs are concentrated .

the worst clash to date took place on march 17 in the aftermath of a serb attempt to occupy a government building in northern mitrovica ; unmik and nato arrests of the occupiers prompted clashes with rioters which resulted in the death of a u.n. police officer and several dozen wounded .

according to unmik and nato officials , some serbian government security personnel were involved in instigating this and other incidents .

it is unclear how the kosovo government intends in the future to assert its authority in kosovo's northern regions .

the serbian government and kosovo's serbian community have consistently insisted that serbia retain sovereignty over kosovo ; this view is backed by nearly all political parties in serbia .

throughout the u.n. negotiation process , serbia's governing parties remained engaged and pressed , with strong support from russia , for talks to continue .

serbian leaders encapsulated their broad position on status with the phrase "more than autonomy , but less than independence" and floated varying interpretations on "maximum" autonomy for kosovo short of full independence .

kosovo serbs participated in the status talks as part of the serbian delegation .

in advance of kosovo's independence declaration , belgrade determined that it would consider it invalid .

subsequently , serbian officials and demonstrators have emphasized that "kosovo is serbia. .

serbian president tadic has called for a new round of internationally mediated talks on kosovo's status .

following kosovo's declared independence , serbia sponsored a large protest rally in belgrade on february 21 , which brought hundreds of thousands of peaceful demonstrators to the streets .

in the evening , a few hundred persons breached the u.s. embassy compound and set fire to the chancery building , and also attacked the missions of some other countries .

serbian riot police eventually restored order , but not before the fire had claimed the life of one protest participant .

some observers claimed that security was conspicuously lax and that the police's initially passive response may have been intentional .

serbia's president and prime minister condemned the violence and pledged to protect foreign missions in belgrade , although some other officials said that the united states was to blame for the violence for supporting kosovo's independence .

the u.n. security council and the european union condemned the february 21 "mob attack" on u.s. and other embassies in belgrade .

beyond consistent opposition to kosovo's independence , serbia's political leadership is deeply divided .

after the january 2007 parliamentary elections , president tadic of the ds and prime minister kostunica of the dss achieved a hard - fought agreement on forming a new coalition government , with kostunica remaining prime minister .

president tadic won a key electoral victory in early 2008 presidential elections over radical party candidate tomislav nikolic .

however , the coalition was split on how the kosovo situation should impact serbia's relations with the eu , and eventually fell , with early parliamentary elections scheduled for may 11 , 2008 .

tadic's ds party won an important victory in the vote , and may enter into a coalition with the small socialist party .

while serbia's government has rejected a military solution to the kosovo situation , observers are closely watching the extent of serbian implementation of its "action plan" of retaliatory measures to kosovo's declared independence .

many observers contend that serbia is focused on hardening the already - existing soft partition of kosovo , with the serb - controlled northern portions of kosovo proclaiming their own independence or appealing to become part of serbia , and exerting pressure on all of kosovo's serbs not to cooperate with pristina .

incidents at the border between serbia and kosovo , recurrent protests in northern mitrovica , as well as apparent serbian involvement in the mid - march courthouse incident in northern mitrovica , point to this tendency .

belgrade's commitment to hold state and local elections in serb - majority municipalities throughout kosovo on may 11 has been another point of contention with international authorities .

while kosovo serb participation in the parliamentary - level serbian vote is allowed under the ahtisaari plan , unmik viewed the intended extension of the serbian municipal vote into kosovo as "illegal. .

many fear that the international community does not have a viable plan to reverse serbia's moves to strengthen parallel institutions in serb - majority areas in kosovo .

the international deadlock over kosovo's status in 2007 somewhat complicated longstanding plans to carry out new international missions to take over for the united nations .

in the early planning stages for such missions , european officials repeatedly emphasized their wish for the u.n. security council to provide the new missions with a clear international mandate .

however , in the absence of a new u.n. security council resolution , international institutions considered ways to derive an international legal basis for new missions in kosovo .

for example , the eu and nato have invoked resolution 1244 as a legitimate framework for both a new eu - led civilian mission and the ongoing kfor military mission in kosovo .

an eu council meeting in december 2007 underlined the eu's readiness to play a leading role in implementing a settlement in kosovo and in strengthening stability .

in contrast , russian officials have called the new eu mission "illegal. .

in june 2008 , u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon announced plans to "reconfigure" unmik in view of significantly changed circumstances in kosovo , without abandoning the u.n.'s "status neutral" position on kosovo .

he called for unmik to maintain a residual presence in kosovo for some time .

unmik may be most visible in the north , where the local serb authorities do not recognize the eu presences .

the ahtisaari plan called for most governing powers to be held by kosovar authorities , but also envisaged an international civilian presence and an international military presence .

the civilian presence has two components: an international civilian representative ( icr ) and a civilian european security and defense policy ( esdp ) mission .

the icr also serves as the eu special representative ( eusr ) to kosovo and thus by definition can be filled by an official from an eu member state .

the icr is supposed to wield "final authority" over civilian aspects of the settlement .

he is supported by an international civilian office ( ico ) , an international agency much smaller in size than the unmik and including representatives from non - eu nations such as a u.s. deputy icr .

dutch diplomat pieter feith has been named eusr .

the esdp mission in kosovo is an eu rule of law mission involving training , monitoring , and developing police and judicial institutions .

the mission , named eulex , involves the deployment of approximately 2,000 eu and other international civilian personnel including police , judges , prosecutors , and customs police who will report to the icr / eusr .

the eu adopted a joint action giving the go - ahead to eulex in february .

eulex is led former french general ( and former kfor commander ) yves de kermabon , and was expected to become fully operational after a transition period of 120 days .

european and u.s. representatives convened the first meeting of the international steering group ( isg ) on kosovo on february 28 , 2008 , in vienna .

at this meeting , the isg formally appointed dutch diplomat and eusr pieter feith to be the international civilian representative in kosovo .

it called on kosovo's leader to fully implement the ahtisaari plan and urged the kosovo serb community to take part .

the governments of serbia and russia have protested that the creation of the steering group is illegal .

an april meeting of the isg , chaired by icr feith , welcomed the progress reached to date by kosovo's authorities , and expressed concerns about serbia's efforts to hold municipal elections in kosovo on may 11 .

the isg meeting also spoke against efforts to encourage "institutional separation along ethnic lines. .

the ahtisaari plan also called for nato to maintain a presence in kosovo to provide a safe and secure environment after a status settlement .

nato members have expressed readiness to assume responsibility for a new international military presence under the ahtisaari plan .

nato's policy is that kfor "shall remain in kosovo on the basis of u.n. security council resolution 1244 , unless the security council decides otherwise. .

nato has pledged to maintain kfor's strength at "current levels and with no new caveats. .

most observers believe that kfor's size and composition will not change much in the near - term post - settlement environment .

longer - term , however , nato may look to the eu to take over military stabilization duties in kosovo , as it did in bosnia in 2004 .

in addition , the united states may , within a year , seek to shift its troops from kosovo in order to meet demands for its troops in afghanistan , or elsewhere .

serbian and russian opposition to the new eu - led missions has added to current complexities on the ground , especially in the north .

belgrade , for example , only recognizes unmik and kfor authority in northern kosovo .

in contrast , eu officials insist that the ico and eulex mandates exist throughout the territory of kosovo .

many international officials acknowledge , however , that various international missions will maintain parallel presences for the near - term .

in addition to these missions on the ground , the eu plans to lead international financial assistance to kosovo following a status settlement , and will be hosting an international donors conference on july 11 , 2008 .

from the beginning of the conflict in kosovo in the late 1990s , the clinton administration condemned serbian human rights abuses and called for autonomy for kosovo within yugoslavia , while opposing independence .

the clinton administration pushed for air strikes against yugoslavia when belgrade rejected the rambouillet accords in march 1999 , but refused to consider the use of ground troops to eject yugoslav forces from kosovo .

however , even before the air strikes , the clinton administration said that u.s. troops would participate in a kosovo peacekeeping force if a peace agreement were reached .

after the conflict , president clinton said that the u.s. and nato troop commitment to kosovo could be reduced as local autonomous institutions took hold .

he said that the united states and the european union must work together to rebuild kosovo and the region , but that "europe must provide most of the resources. .

during the 2000 presidential campaign , condoleezza rice , later appointed national security advisor in president bush's first term , said that u.s. military forces were overextended globally , and that peacekeeping responsibilities in the balkans should be taken over by u.s. allies in europe .

however , after taking office , the administration appeared to adopt a more cautious tone .

in february 2001 , former secretary of state colin powell said that the united states had a commitment to peace in the balkans and that nato forces would have to remain in bosnia and kosovo for "years. .

he said the united states would review u.s. troop levels in bosnia and kosovo with the objective of reducing them over time , but stressed that the united states would act in consultation with its allies and was not "cutting and running. .

president bush reiterated this position during a visit to kosovo in july 2001 , stating that u.s. and international forces "came in together" and would "go out together," under a common goal to "hasten the day" when peace in kosovo would be self - sustaining .

the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks in the united states and subsequent major military operations in afghanistan and iraq reinforced the administration's desire to decrease the u.s. deployment in the balkans .

the number of troops in kfor has declined from about 38,000 in june 2002 to under 16,000 today , with the u.s. contingent falling from 5,500 to 1,600 , respectively .

although nato terminated its stabilization force in bosnia and turned over peacekeeping duties to the eu , no such transfer from nato to the eu has been agreed to for kosovo , reflecting the more precarious security situation in kosovo .

from fy1999-fy2007 , the united states obligated about $943 million in bilateral aid to kosovo .

supplemental funding for kosovo in fy2007 added $189,000 in fy2007 funding .

for fy2008 , the united states provided an estimated $146.8 million for kosovo .

the fy2009 request also includes over $125 million in u.s. assistance to kosovo to support implementation of the ahtisaari plan .

the bush administration supported the "standards before status" policy favored by unmik beginning in 2002 .

this approach called for the autonomous kosovo government to achieve a number of benchmarks ( including progress toward creating a functioning democratic government , free market economy , the rule of law and respect for ethnic minorities ) before the issue of kosovo's status is discussed .

in november 2003 , the bush administration launched an initiative to give greater impetus to the "standards before status" policy .

former undersecretary of state for political affairs marc grossman , backed by other members of the contact group , announced a "review date" strategy for the kosovo standards that will lead to an evaluation of the standards for kosovo by mid - 2005 .

should kosovo meet the standards , he said that the international community would be prepared "to begin a process to determine kosovo's future status. .

he also said that "all options are on the table," but that the united states would not take a position on final status at this time .

on march 17 , 2004 , the state department issued a statement strongly deploring the incidents of serious violence in kosovo and calling for the restoration of calm and order and cooperation with international agencies .

after that event , senior u.s. officials continued to emphasize the standards and review date strategy , while giving particular emphasis to the priority standards relating to the treatment of ethnic minorities in kosovo .

in may 2005 , the second bush administration announced a new phase in u.s. policy in the balkans .

emphasizing the need to "finish the work" in the region , undersecretary of state for political affairs r. nicholas burns testified before congress that the status quo of kosovo's unresolved status was no longer sustainable or desirable .

he expressed u.s. support for the standards review timetable in 2005 , possibly leading to status negotiations later in the year .

he said that a settlement could be expected to be achieved by the end of 2006 and that the united states would remain an active partner in kosovo .

in december 2005 , the administration named ambassador frank wisner to be the special representative of the secretary of state to the kosovo status talks .

on february 2 , 2007 , the administration expressed support for u.n .

envoy ahtisaari's comprehensive proposal for a kosovo status settlement .

the state department called it "fair and balanced," and a "blueprint for a stable , prosperous , and multi - ethnic kosovo. .

u.s. officials urged the serbian and kosovar parties to engage constructively with ahtisaari during final consultations over the status proposal , and endorsed the final version of the plan as presented to the security council in march .

they have also emphasized the need for international unity in supporting a future status settlement ; top u.s. officials have engaged their counterparts , including those from russia , on the kosovo question .

administration officials have also expressed the need to offer serbia's democratic leadership a clear path toward euro - atlantic integration , including closer association with nato and the eu .

in late 2006 , the administration supported serbia's entry into nato's partnership for peace program , long withheld over the issue of serbia's cooperation with the international war crimes tribunal .

following the g8 summit in germany , president bush made several statements on kosovo while visiting italy and albania in june .

stating that "the time is now," he pledged that the united states would work to get the process moving forward .

while acknowledging russia's disagreement with his position , bush also stated unequivocally that the end result of the status process should be independence for kosovo based on the ahtisaari plan .

the administration pursued agreement on kosovo in the u.n. security council throughout 2007 .

the administration strongly supported the troika process , although it did not support an extension to this process beyond the december 10 deadline .

absent a new resolution or a diplomatic breakthrough , the administration was widely expected to support a coordinated international effort to recognize a unilateral declaration of independence by the kosovar leadership sometime in early 2008 .

on february 18 , 2008 , one day after kosovo declared independence , secretary of state rice announced formal u.s. recognition of kosovo as a sovereign and independent state , and president bush accepted kosovo president's sejdiu's request for full diplomatic relations with the united states .

in response , serbia recalled its ambassador to the united states ; the u.s .

ambassador to serbia remains in belgrade .

following the february 21 attack on the u.s. embassy in belgrade , administration officials sharply condemned the violence and breach in security , pinning responsibility for foreign mission security on the serbian government .

secretary rice called serbia's police presence "inadequate or unresponsive. .

the administration thereafter ordered the withdrawal of non - essential u.s. personnel and dependents from serbia .

the administration has pledged to support kosovo's independence and implementation of the ahtisaari plan through participation in eu - led and nato missions in kosovo and economic assistance .

it asserts that kosovo's situation is unique and does not represent any precedent for other international circumstances .

u.s. officials have also spoken against any effort to partition kosovo along ethnic lines .

on march 19 , president bush issued a presidential determination to authorize the furnishing of defense articles and defense services to kosovo "to strengthen the security of the united states and promote world peace. .

in 1999 , the 106 th congress debated whether u.s. and nato air strikes in kosovo were in the u.s. national interest , and whether the president could undertake them without congressional approval .

in the end , congress neither explicitly approved nor blocked the air strikes , but appropriated funds for the air campaign and the u.s. peacekeeping deployment in kosovo after the fact .

in 2000 , some members unsuccessfully attempted to condition the u.s. military deployment in kosovo on congressional approval and on the implementation of aid pledges made by european countries .

many members of congress said that they expected u.s. allies in europe to contribute the lion's share of aid to the region and expressed concern that european countries were slow to implement their aid pledges .

congress moved to limit u.s. aid to kosovo to 15% of the total amount pledged by all countries .

the 107 th congress focused on limiting the cost of the continuing u.s. engagement in kosovo .

for example , the fy2002 foreign aid appropriations law ( p.l .

107-115 ) specified that aid to kosovo "should not exceed 15 percent of the total resources pledged by all donors for calendar year 2002 for assistance for kosovo as of march 31 , 2002. .

it also barred u.s. aid for "large scale physical infrastructure reconstruction" in kosovo .

kosovo's status has been another theme in legislation .

in the 108 th congress , several resolutions were introduced that advocate u.s. support for kosovo's independence .

in the first session , h.res .

11 and h.res .

28 were introduced , expressing the sense of the house that the united states should declare support for kosovo's independence .

in the senate , s.res .

144 expressed the sense of the senate that the united states should support the right of the people of kosovo to determine their political future once "requisite progress" is made in achieving u.n. benchmarks in developing democratic institutions and human rights protections .

in the wake of the march 2004 violence in kosovo , several resolutions were introduced to condemn the attacks , as well as subsequent attacks on islamic sites in serbia .

these included h.res .

587 , introduced by representative christopher smith , and h.res .

596 , introduced by representative burton .

on april 8 , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to s.res .

326 , introduced by senator voinovich .

the resolution , a slightly modified companion version of h.res .

596 , strongly condemned the violence ; recognized the commitment of kosovo and serbian leaders to rebuild what had been destroyed and encourage the return of refugees ; called on leaders in kosovo to renounce violence and build a multi - ethnic society based on the standards for kosovo ; recommended the restructuring of unmik ; and urged the reinvigoration of dialogue between kosovo and belgrade .

s.res .

384 , offered by senator lugar on june 18 , called on the united states to work with kfor , unmik , and the kosovo and serbian governments to implement the standards for kosovo .

the 109 th congress also considered legislation on kosovo .

on january 4 , 2005 , representative lantos introduced h.res .

24 , which expressed the sense of the house that the united states should support kosovo's independence .

on october 7 , 2005 , the senate passed s.res .

237 , a resolution supporting efforts to "work toward an agreement on the future status of kosovo and a plan for transformation in kosovo. .

it did not express support for any particular status option .

the resolution passed without amendment by unanimous consent .

an identical house resolution was introduced on december 17 , 2005 ( h.res .

634 ) .

at the start of the 110 th congress , representative lantos introduced h.res .

36 on january 5 , 2007 , which calls on the united states to , among other things , support kosovo's independence within its existing borders as a sovereign and democratic state .

it has been referred to the subcommittee on europe in the house committee on foreign affairs .

two identical bills , h.res .

309 and s.res .

135 , have been introduced expressing support for kosovo's independence .

on may 24 , 2007 , representative bean introduced h.res .

445 , which states that the united states should refrain from any unilateral action , especially outside the united nations , toward kosovo's independence .

in the 109 th congress , congress approved fy2007 supplemental funding for kosovo .

the administration reports that fy2007 funding for kosovo included $77.8 million in regular appropriations and $189 million in supplemental funding .

the administration's fy2008 budget request included over $151 million in bilateral assistance for kosovo ; fy2008 foreign aid appropriations became part of the consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

110-161 , and fy2008 estimated funding levels for kosovo are about $147 million .

the second session of the 110 th congress will consider the administration's fy2009 budget request , which includes $128 million in assistance for kosovo .

the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on kosovo on march 4 , 2008 ; the house foreign affairs committee held a hearing on kosovo and the balkans on march 12 .

