on february 4 , 2002 , president bush submitted his budget proposal for fy2003 .

the proposedfy2003 budget for the department of transportation ( dot ) is roughly $56.1 billion , a decrease of$3.5 billion ( 6% ) from the fy2002 enacted total .

this decrease was primarily due to a decline inhighway trust fund revenues during 2002 , which triggered an automatic reduction in highwayspending for fy2003 of $4.4 billion .

on march 21 , 2002 , president bush submitted an emergency supplemental budget request to congress for $27.1 billion ; $6.7 billion of which was for the dot .

the largest items were $4.4billion for the transportation security administration ( tsa ) for explosives detection equipmentand screeners and $1.8 billion for the federal transit administration's capital grants program forrebuilding sections of the manhattan transit system damaged by the september 11 attack .

other itemsincluded $255 million for the coast guard , $167 million for the federal highway administration,$100 million for the federal aviation administration , $19 million for the federal motor carriersafety administration's border enforcement program , and $3.5 million for the research and specialproject administration .

on june 7 , 2002 , president bush submitted a proposal for a new department of homeland security .

it would involve transferring the coast guard and tsa from the dot to the proposed newagency , along with elements of other existing federal agencies .

these two agencies represent 19%of the dot's total budget , and 40% of its discretionary budget ( generally , those activities funded outof the general fund rather than trust funds ) , for fy2003 .

on july 26 , 2002 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the dot appropriations bill , s. 2808 / s.rept .

107-224 .

the committee recommended $64.7billion , $8.6 billion more than the administration request .

the major differences were an increasein fhwa spending to fy2002 levels , $8.6 billion above the fy2003 request , and an increase of$679 million for amtrak , to $1.2 billion .

on august 2 , 2002 , the president signed the second fy2002 emergency supplemental bill ( p.l .

107-206 ) .

this bill included an additional $6.6 billion for the dot for fy2002 .

this included $3.9billion for the transportation security administration , $1.8 billion for the federal transitadministration ( for grants to rebuild new york city's subway system in manhattan ) , $728 millionfor the coast guard , and $205 million for amtrak .

on august 9 , 2002 , the president announced that he would not ask for the $5.1 billion in contingency emergency funding that was included in the supplemental bill ( p.l .

107-206 ) .

the actprovides that if the president requests any of the contingency emergency funding , all of it is released .

this decision reduced the supplemental funding to dot by $1.1 billion , from $6.6 billion to $5.5billion .

the biggest reductions were to tsa ( $480 million ) , the coast guard ( $262 million ) , andthe faa's grants - in - aid to airports ( $150 million ) .

on september 3 , 2002 , the administration submitted a budget amendment increasing the fy2003 request for tsa by $546 million .

on october 7 , 2002 , the house appropriations committee reported its version of the dot appropriations bill , h.r .

5559 / h.rept 107-722 .

the committee recommended $60.1billion , $4.0 billion more than the administration request .

the major difference was a $4.6 billionincrease in fhwa spending .

on november 19 , 2002 , the congress passed the fifth in a series of continuing resolutions ( cr ) to fund the department of transportation ( and other government agencies ) in fy2003 in theabsence of an fy2003 dot appropriations act .

this cr , p.l .

107-294 , provides funding throughjanuary 11 , 2003 , at the levels enacted in fy2002 , prorated on a daily basis .

on november 19 , 2002 , the congress passed legislation creating the department of homeland security ( h.r .

5005 ; p.l .

107-296 ) .

this legislation provides for the transfer of thecoast guard and the transportation security administration from the dot to the new departmentof homeland security during fy2003 .

on january 8 , 2003 , the house passed h.j.res .

2 , a bill without any transportation appropriations , as a vehicle for the senate .

on january 23 , 2003 , the senate passed h.j.res .

2 , now an omnibus fy2003 appropriations bill including transportation appropriations .

it provides a total of $65.1 billion todot and related agencies , $9 billion more than the administration request ( see table 1 ) ; the majordifferences are $8.6 billion more in highway spending and $679 million more for amtrak under thefederal railroad administration .

however , in an effort to keep total spending in line with theadministration's request , the senate included an across - the - board cut of 2.852% in the bill .

thehouse will now go to conference with the senate in an effort to produce a final omnibusappropriations act which will likely include transportation appropriations .

on february 13 , the conference committee passed out h.j.res .

2 , which was agreed to by both house and senate .

it provides $64.6 billion for dot and related agencies , butby agreement with the white house it also includes a 0.65% across - the - board rescission to holddown overall spending .

on february 20 , 2003 , president bush signed h.j.res .

2 ( p.l .

108-7 ) .

table 1 .

status of department of transportation appropriations for fy2003 note: h.r .

5559 and s. 2808 died at the end of the 107th congress .

fy2003 transportation appropriations are included in h.j.res .

2 , an omnibus fy2003appropriations bill .

the senate committee on appropriations report for h.j.res .

2 wasprinted in the congressional record for january 15 , 2003 .

arc: amtrak reform council aip: airport improvement program ( faa ) air21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation araa: the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-134 ) , the current amtrak authorizing legislation atsa: the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l .

107-71 ) , legislation which created the transportation security administration within the dot brr: bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( fhwa ) bts: bureau of transportation statistics cg: coast guard cmaq: congestion mitigation and air quality program ( fhwa ) dot: department of transportation eas: essential air service ( faa ) f&e: facilities and equipment program ( faa ) faa: federal aviation administration fahp: federal - aid highway program ( fhwa ) fair21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation fhwa: federal highway administration fra: federal railroad administration fta: federal transit administration hazmat: hazardous materials ( safety program in rspa ) hpp: high priority projects ( fhwa ) htf: highway trust fund im: interstate maintenance program ( fhwa ) its: intelligent transportation systems ( fhwa ) mcsap: motor carrier safety assistance program ( fmcsa ) new starts: part of the fta's capital grants and loans program which funds new fixed - guideway systems or extensions to existing systems nhs: national highway system ; also a program within fhwa nhtsa: national highway traffic safety administration nmcsa: national motor carrier safety administration o&m: operations and maintenance program ( faa ) oig: office of the inspector general of the dot ost: office of the secretary of transportation raba: revenue - aligned budget authority rd&t: research , development and technology program ( fhwa ) re&d: research , engineering and development program ( faa ) rspa: research and special projects administration scasd: small community air service development program ( faa ) stb: surface transportation board stp: surface transportation program ( fhwa ) tcsp: transportation and community and system preservation program ( fhwa ) tea - 21: transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) , the current highway and transit authorizing legislation tifia: transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( fhwa ) tsa: transportation security administratio .

transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget .

it isalso considered part of the discretionary budget .

funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources .

the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds .

the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds .

the transportation trust funds include: the highway trust fund , whichcontains two accounts , the highway trust account and the transit account ; the airportand airway trust fund ; and the inland waterways trust fund .

all of these accountsderive their respective funding from specific excise and other taxes .

in fy2002 trust funds accounted for well over two - thirds of total federal transportation spending .

together , highway and transit funding constitute the largestcomponent of dot appropriations .

most highway and transit programs are fundedwith contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund .

this is verysignificant from a budgeting standpoint .

contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate .

under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation ; although appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the oppositesituation .

that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under their controlalready exists , and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs also is inplace .

transportation budgeting uses a confusing lexicon ( for those unfamiliar with theprocess ) of budget authority and contract authority - - the latter , a form of budgetauthority .

contract authority provides obligational authority for the funding of trustfund - financed programs , such as the federal - aid highway program .

prior to tea - 21,changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had beenachieved in the appropriations process by combining changes in budget / contractauthority and placing limitations on obligations .

the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds tocongressional budget agreements .

contract authority is tantamount to , but does not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some future date .

under this arrangement , specifiedin title 23 u.s.c. , which tea - 21 amended , authorized funds are automatically madeavailable to the states at the beginning of each fiscal year and may be obligatedwithout appropriations legislation .

appropriations are required to make outlays atsome future date to cover these obligations .

tea - 21 greatly limited the role of theappropriations process in core highway and transit programs because the actenumerated the limitation on obligations level for the period fy1999 throughfy2003 in the statute .

highway and transit grant programs work on a reimbursable basis : states pay for projects up front and federal payments are made to them only when work iscompleted and vouchers are presented , months or even years after the project hasbegun .

work in progress is represented in the trust fund as obligated funds andalthough they are considered "used" and remain as commitments against the trustfund balances , they are not subtracted from balances .

trust fund balances,therefore , appear high in part because funds sufficient to cover actual and expectedfuture commitments must remain available .

both the highway and transit accounts have substantial short - and long - term commitments .

these include payments that will be made in the current fiscal yearas projects are completed and , to a much greater extent , outstanding obligations tobe made at some unspecified future date .

additionally , there are unobligatedamounts that are still dedicated to highway and transit projects , but have not beencommitted to specific projects .

two terms are associated with the distribution of contract authority funds to the states and to particular programs .

the first of these , apportionments , refers to fundsdistributed to the states for formula driven programs .

for example , all nationalhighway system ( nhs ) funds are apportioned to the states .

allocated funds , arefunds distributed on an administrative basis , typically to programs under directfederal control .

for example , federal lands highway program monies are allocated ; the allocation can be to another federal agency , to a state , to an indian tribe , or tosome other governmental entity .

these terms do not refer to the federal budgetprocess , but often provide a frame of reference for highway program recipients , whomay assume , albeit incorrectly , that a state apportionment is part of the federal budgetper se .

