a permanent cease - fire agreement between the angolan government and its long - time military adversary , the national union for the total independence of angola ( unita ) was signed on april 4 , 2002 .

it provides for the demobilization of unita forces and for their integration into a unified national military , in accordance with the lusaka protocol , an abortive peace accord .

a new law provides unita forces with a general amnesty for wartime offenses .

in mid - april , over 9,000 of about 55,000 unita troops had reported to demobilization areas .

the cease - fire agreement was holding .

some logistical delays related to the supply of food , medicine , and other goods to the newly established cantonment were reported .

the cease - fire accord followed the death of jonas savimbi , unita's founder and long - time leader .

he was killed in a government ambush in february , 2002 in the eastern province of moxico .

the former savimbi - led faction is led by general paulo "gato" lukamba , the unita secretary - general and head of unita's administrative affairs commission .

in mid - march , just prior to initial cease - fire talks , he issued a communiqué to unita fighters appointing an interim management commission , which he heads .

angola , a country of about 12.7 million people that is nearly twice the size of texas , has vast oil reserves , diamonds and other minerals deposits , and rich agricultural potential .

most angolans remain poor , however , due to a 25-year civil conflict that is estimated to have taken more than 1 million lives .

a tripartite agreement among the three major liberation movements to form a transitional government collapsed just after angola became independent of portugal in 1975 .

parties to the agreement included the popular liberation movement of angola ( mpla ) , the current ruling party ; its armed rival , unita ; and the national front for the liberation of angola ( fnla ) , led until recently by holden roberto .

although all three groups sought national liberation and included members from across angola , each drew the core of its support from different ethnic coalitions .

unita has been dominated by the ovimbundu ethnic group of central angola , although it has also drawn support from the chokwe , luena , and ovambo communities of eastern and southern angola .

the mpla was originally predominantly a coalition between the mbundu of northwest angola , persons of mixed race , and urban dwellers .

the fnla drew much of its support from the northern bakongo people and some rural mbundu .

a civil war began following the collapse of the agreement , as the mpla , unita , the fnla and other splinter groups fought one another for control of the government in luanda , then – and since – held by the mpla .

in the 1970s and 1980s , the conflict was shaped by the cold war .

the soviet union and cuba assisted the then - marxist mpla , which established a de facto one party state .

the united states and south africa aided unita and the fnla .

in 1985 , congress repealed a 1976 ban on covert aid to angolan belligerents ; in 1986 the reagan administration initiated covert military assistance to unita .

in 1979 , eduardo dos santos , angola's current president and leader of the governing mpla , succeeded agostino neto , the country's president at independence .

dos santos , born in1942 in luanda to a family of ethnic mbundu origins , studied petroleum engineering in the soviet union at the institute of oil and gas in baku .

before becoming president , he had been minister of foreign affairs in angola's first post - independence government , after serving as first deputy prime minister and minister of planning ( 1978-1979 ) .

dos santos oversaw a gradual liberalization of the mpla's socialist political ideology during the late 1980s and early 1990s , and later supported a reorientation toward liberal , free market policies , as did many other african leaders .

he has presided over the long - running civil war , and in recent years he appears to have taken closer control of its prosecution .

in 1999 , he abolished the post of prime minister and created a highly autonomous defense ministry .

the dos santos government has been labeled authoritarian by many observers because of its sometimes harsh repression of its domestic political opponents , and journalists – and for curtailing public expression and the opportunity for its citizens to change their government ( see " human rights " section , below ) .

the country's first and only national election was held in 1992 ; it ended in an aborted run - off election and a return to civil war .

the government's fierce prosecution of the war against unita , in which thousands of young angolans were impressed into military service , has also contributed to a hardline image of the government .

the united nations has supported past peace initiatives with verification and observer missions .

the mission of the u.n. angola verification mission ( unavem i ) verified the redeployment and phased withdrawal from angola of cuban troops that had assisted the government in its military efforts .

the withdrawal was completed in late may 1991 .

unavem ii ( may 1991 to february 1995 ) was established by the u.n. security council ( unsc ) to monitor a cease - fire and police activities under the bicesse accords .

it was later charged with observing and verifying the 1992 presidential and legislative elections in angola .

after renewed fighting in october 1992 the unavem ii mandate was altered to allow the mission to assist the two sides to agree on modalities for finalizing the peace process and to broker related national or local cease - fire agreements .

after the signing of the lusaka protocol in november 1994 , unavem ii was charged with verifying the first stages of the peace agreement .

it was superceded by unavem iii in february 1995 , which was to monitor and verify the implementation of the lusaka protocol .

in june 1997 unavem iii was replaced by the u.n. observer mission in angola ( monua ) , which was given an enlarged , multi - sectoral mandate .

its political unit monitored the implementation of the lusaka agreements and the normalization of state administration across angola , and monitored unita's integration into these institutions .

it also assisted with confidence - building and the mediation of conflicts arising from these activities .

a police affairs unit assisted with police - related aspects of political normalization and post - conflict integration ; verified police neutrality ; promoted security , freedom of movement and association ; and monitored the disarmament of civilians .

a human rights unit investigated human rights abuses , and promoted the observation of human rights and the development of national human rights education and monitoring capacities .

a military unit monitored cease - fire compliance , demobilization , and the integration of unita into the faa .

a u.n. organization , the humanitarian assistance coordination unit , supported the demobilization and social reintegration of unita ex - combatants , monitored humanitarian needs , and acted as a coordination unit for the delivery of humanitarian assistance .

the security situation deteriorated sharply in 1998 , leading to a resumption of full scale war , and in february 1999 the mission was terminated .

in october 1999 , the unsc established the u.n. office in angola ( unoa ) to liaise with the political , military , police and other authorities in angola .

unoa was mandated with exploring possible measures for restoring peace ; assisting in institutional capacity building ; the delivery of humanitarian assistance ; the promotion of human rights ; and related coordination activities .

in order to compel unita to comply with peace accords that it had signed during the lusaka peace process , existing u.n. sanctions on unita were strengthened in june 1998 .

the earlier sanctions had included an arms and fuel embargo on unita ; restrictions on unita travel ; bans on the delivery to unita of flight services , aircraft , and equipment ; and restrictions on unita's overseas representational activities .

the added sanctions included the freezing of unita assets abroad ; restrictions on official contacts with unita in angola ; a ban on diamond exports from angola not authorized by the angolan government ; and a ban on the provision to unita of mining equipment and services , and of water and road vehicles and spare parts .

in may 1999 , the u.n. security council created a panel of experts to trace violations of sanctions on arms trafficking , oil supplies and the diamond trade , and the movement of unita funds .

in april 2000 , the security council adopted resolution 1295 ( 2000 ) ; it tightened existing sanctions , created a new monitoring mechanism , and established a process by which the security council would consider actions to be taken against states suspected of violating the sanctions .

on february 26 , 2002 , president bush met at the white house with president dos santos , together with the presidents of botswana and mozambique .

according to a white house release , mr. bush stated that: i urged president dos santos to move quickly toward achieving a cease - fire in angola .

and we agreed that all parties have an obligation to seize this moment to end the war , and develop angola's vast wealth to the benefit of the angolan people .

president dos santos has it within his power to end 26 years of fighting by reaching out to all angolans willing to lay down their arms .

angolans deserve no less .

the united states has actively supported efforts to implement the lusaka protocol , to which the united states is an observer , and has provided significant humanitarian assistance to angola ( see appendix ) .

in recent years , u.s. policy toward angola has supported the government , and condemned unita's war effort , while at the same time backing political and economic reform .

in early october 2001 , the new u.s .

ambassador , christopher william dell , reiterated these positions , and vowed to work with government , churches , and civil organizations to build a strong democracy .

in january 2002 , principal deputy assistant secretary , william bellamy , reportedly met with angolan government officials and members of civil society during a visit to angola that focused on strengthening u.s. - angolan bilateral relations ; assessing the status of current angolan political and economic reforms ; and prospects for peace in the context of the lusaka protocol .

in late april 2001 , president bush reportedly sent a letter to president dos santos urging that angola implement transparent governance .

u.s. assistant secretary of state for african affairs walter kansteiner recently re - emphasized president bush's call for increased transparency , according to an april 9 , 2002 reuters news report .

kansteiner was quoted as stating that: the whole international community wants to see angola move to better economic policies including transparency.. .

they [the angolan government] need to out all of their revenue on budget .

they have a fair amount of revenue that's off budget and that's problematic... you're not going to get economic change or growth if you lose , say , 25 percent of your revenue stream .

congress has long monitored developments in angola .

congressional attention has focused primarily on conflict resolution and the amelioration of conflict - related humanitarian conditions in angola and the surrounding sub - region .

in the 1970s and 1980s , much debate focused on the delivery of covert aid and military assistance to angola .

in the 107 th and 106 th congresses , the issue of conflict diamonds has drawn particular congressional attention .

angola , along with sierra leone and the democratic republic of congo , has been the subject of several hearings and legislative proposals focusing on ways to end trade in diamonds that fund conflict .

in march 2001 , rep. alcee hastings introduced h.con.res .

16 , which condemns the assassination of congolese president laurent kabila and urges angola , as a party to the lusaka peace accord and as a foreign government involved in the congolese conflict , to abide by the accord and support a transition to peace and stability in the democratic republic of the congo .

in the 106 th congress , rep. maxine waters introduced h.res .

390 , which called for angolan and international efforts to end the angolan conflict and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to alleviate human suffering in angola .

officials of the state department's bureau of african affairs have stated support for a relationship between the united states and angola that is structured by u.s. investment in the angolan oil industry ; assurance of u.s. access to angolan oil exports ; and u.s. support for a resolution of the angolan conflict .

angola has provided between 3.5% and 5% of u.s. oil supplies in most recent years ; the proportion varies depending on fluctuations in world market prices and supplies , and according to whether volume or value is measured .

the exposure of the export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) totaled over $141 million in fy 2001 , down from over $150 million in fy 2000 .

the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) has also offered political risk insurance and other financial backing to projects in angola – notably a political risk insurance contract of up to $200 million in 1998 .

the united states has also supported world bank and other multilateral projects in angola .

u.s. officials have expressed support for the efforts of u.s. - africa business forums , such as the corporate council on africa and the u.s. - angolan chamber of commerce , an independent , non - profit organization of businesses that promotes bilateral trade and investment .

the chamber , formed in 1990 , has over sixty - five corporations , associations , and individuals as members .

to promote trade , investment and angolan economic development , the chamber sponsors trade missions to angola , represents private sector views to both governments , hosts bi - lateral exchanges , and promotes trade and investment opportunities in both countries .

during his february 2002 u.s. visit , president dos santos addressed the corporate council on africa and the united states - angola chamber of commerce .

he highlighted the role played by u.s. private sector investment in achieving economic growth in angola , commended u.s. government efforts to help end the angolan war , and stressed angola's role as a growing supplier of oil to the united states .

he observed that as a non - organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) oil exporter , angola plays a role in contributing to u.s. energy security .

he also called attention to u.s. investment in angola's non - oil industries , in such areas as agriculture , fisheries and manufacturing , and financial services , and predicted that u.s. investment opportunities would rise as angola undertakes anticipated post - war construction .

some observers maintain that u.s. angola policy has tended to dis - proportionately focus on the maintenance of strong bilateral business ties .

such concerns , they contend , have forestalled or superseded more forceful u.s. advocacy of angolan governmental and economic reforms , and greater equity in the distribution of income derived from angola's national resources among its overwhelmingly poor population .

u.s. policy makers contend , however , that the united states has advocated reform by , for example , pushing for the imf to undertake the oil diagnostic , and they note that the united states has been among the leading donors of emergency assistance to angola in recent years .

u.s. assistance to angola provides emergency and humanitarian relief to angola's displaced and war - affected populations , and supports capacity building and service provision in the health , agricultural , and educational sectors .

usaid health sector programming supports immunization efforts ; malaria and hiv / aids prevention ; maternal and child health ; nutritional support and supplemental feeding ; access to clean water and sanitation ; and the provision of prosthetic devices for persons injured by land mines .

usaid funds a range of efforts to strengthen civil society that focus on increasing participatory decision - making and enhancing the ability of civil organizations to communicate and organize , and to undertake public advocacy and education campaigns .

it also supports private sector growth capacity - building projects ; smallholder agriculture ; and land tenure reform .

u.s. assistance to angola has also included support for the removal of land mines – totaling $9.34 million from fy 1997 through fy 2001 – and for international military education and training .

