the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks and the subsequent deliberate release of anthrax sporesin the mail have focused policymakers' attention on the preparedness and response capability of theu.s .

public health system .

though small in scale compared to the scenarios envisioned bybioterrorism experts and played out in recent government exercises , the recent anthrax attacksstrained the public health system and exposed weaknesses at the federal , state , and local levels .

many bioterrorism experts believe that had those responsible for the anthrax attacks employed amore sophisticated delivery mechanism or released a deadly communicable biological agent suchas smallpox , the health care system may have been overwhelmed .

bioterrorism poses a unique challenge to the medical care and public health systems .

unlike an explosion or chemical attack , which results in immediate and visible casualties , the public healthimpact of a biological attack can unfold gradually over time .

until a sufficient number of peoplearrive at emergency rooms and doctors' offices complaining of similar illnesses , there may be nosign that an attack has taken place .

the speed and accuracy with which doctors and laboratoriesreach the correct diagnoses and report their findings to public health authorities has a direct impacton the number of people who become ill and the number that die .

the nation's ability to respondto a bioterrorist attack , therefore , depends crucially on the state of preparedness of its medical caresystems and public health infrastructure .

public health experts have for years complained about the deterioration of the public health system through neglect and lack of funding .

they warn that the nation is ill - equipped andinsufficiently prepared to respond to a bioterrorist attack .

for example , they point out that there aretoo few medical personnel trained to spot biological attacks , a shortage of sophisticated laboratoriesto identify the agents , and inadequate supplies of drugs and vaccines to counteract the threat .

theyalso contend that inadequate plans exist for setting up quarantines and emergency facilities to handlethe sick and infectious victims .

improving public health preparedness and response capacity offersprotection not only from bioterrorist attacks , but also from naturally occurring public healthemergencies .

public health officials are increasingly concerned about our exposure andsusceptibility to infectious disease and food - borne illness because of global travel , ubiquitous foodimports , and the evolution of antibiotic - resistant pathogens .

on june 12 , 2002 , the president signed into law the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 , h.r .

3448 ) , which is intendedto bolster the nation's ability to respond effectively to bioterrorist threats and other public healthemergencies .

this report provides a brief overview and legislative history of p.l .

107-188 , followedby a detailed side - by - side comparison of the act's provisions with preexisting law .

appendix a lists,by committee , all the bioterrorism - related hearings held in the 107th congress prior to enactment of p.l .

107-188 .

in most cases , hearing testimony is available on the committee web sites .

appendixb provides a list of bioterrorism - related web sites .

for a discussion of bioterrorism preparednessissues , see crs report rl31225 , bioterrorism: summary of a crs / national health policy forumseminar on federal , state , and local public health preparedness .

