because of what has been found to be a demonstrated threat to u.s. national security , support of international terrorism , maintenance of a communist , nonmarket economy , engagement in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and illicit use of currencies , u.s. law authorizes the president to restrict trade , aid , arms sales and arms transfers to north korea , and that country's access to assets held under u.s. jurisdiction .

three days after north korea's armed forces launched a full - scale invasion of south korea in june 1950 , the united states invoked a total embargo on exports to north korea .

the department of commerce imposed the most restrictive export controls available against north korea .

over the years , export controls were restated as the export administration regulations , or ears .

in 1965 , for example , the ears were revised to sort countries into categories of relative restriction ; north korea was classified as a member of country group z , the most restricted lot .

in 1989 , the ears were again modified to allow the export to north korea of commercially - supplied goods intended to meet basic human needs .

the regulations stipulated that shipments would require validated licenses on a case - by - case basis .

in 1995 , as part of the united states' engagement of north korea under the 1994 agreed framework , and again in september 1999 , in response to north korea's willingness to cease missile testing , president clinton announced the lifting of most export restrictions applied to that country .

regulations issued in june 2000 amended the ears to reflect north korea's new relatively unfettered status .

many items that previously had required a license were now eligible for export without a license ; certain items on the commerce control list ( ccl ) moved from a policy of denial status to case - by - case review .

departments issuing the new regulations , however , stated that "[t]his easing of sanctions does not affect u.s. anti - terrorism or nonproliferation export controls on north korea , including end - user and end - use controls maintained under the enhanced proliferation control initiative. .

today , the remaining export restrictions against north korea include a range of terms related largely to that country's place on the state department's list of state supporters of international terrorism .

thus , items that are controlled for national security concerns generally are not available to north korea .

the country is on the most restrictive list — country group e — which severely limits its access to computers , software , national security - controlled items , items on the ccl , and service or repair of such items .

north korea also is limited as an end - user by some licenses because it is a communist state , though this problem can be overcome by license exceptions issued by the department of commerce .

the president currently has authority to ease export restrictions imposed against north korea .

even if considered a supporter of international terrorism , licensing exceptions may be considered by the commerce department .

to lift all the export controls applied to north korea , that country would , at a minimum , have to be removed from the list of countries supporting acts of international terrorism maintained by the state department pursuant to section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act of 1979 .

the president holds the authority to make such a change in the sec .

6 ( j ) list .

following the november 29 , 1987 , destruction of korean air lines 858 , in flight , by a bomb reportedly planted by two north korean agents , secretary of state george shultz placed north korea on the list of countries supporting international terrorism .

most elements of trade , beneficiary developing country status , sales of items on the u.s .

munitions list , most foreign aid , export - import bank funding , and support in international financial institutions are denied to countries found to be supporting international terrorism under the export administration act of 1979 .

north korea was added to the list effective january 20 , 1988 .

placement on the sec .

6 ( j ) list not only results in the constriction of trade possibilities ; placement also may trigger denial of beneficial trade designation ( ntr or gsp ) , unfavorable tax status for investors , new limits on diplomatic relations , opposition in international financial institutions , and stricter licensing requirements for trade with the united states in food and medicine .

following the easing of sanctions that pertained to trade , travel , and related transactions in 2000 , there was some speculation that north korea would be removed from the sec .

6 ( j ) list of state sponsors of terrorism .

north korea was particularly interested in changing its status so that it could effectively apply for membership in the world bank and the international monetary fund .

the united states is required by law to oppose membership in the international financial institutions of , or financial support to , terrorist states .

the united states discussed the matter with south korea and japan in 2000 .

south korea supported north korea's bid for this step toward normalization ; japan opposed a change in status until the matter of kidnaped japanese citizens was resolved .

north korea remains on the united states' sec .

6 ( j ) list .

north korea is also among those countries listed as being in violation of section 40a of the arms export control act , which prohibits the selling or licensing of defense articles or defense services to any country that the president finds "is not cooperating fully with united states antiterrorism efforts. .

the president is required to make such a determination annually , and the prohibition may be waived on grounds that it is in the national interest to do so .

the trade agreement extension act of 1951 required the suspension of most - favored - nation trade status ( which has since been replaced by normal trade relations status ) for all communist countries except yugoslavia .

as a result , north korea was denied mfn trade status on september 1 , 1951 .

north korea remains listed in the headnotes of the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) as a rate of duty column 2 country ( along with cuba ) .

as a result , while trade is not prohibited with north korea under the relevant trade laws , tariffs are set at the highest rates for imports from that country .

a side result of being denied mfn or ntr is that any such country is also denied preferential trade treatment under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , pursuant to the trade act of 1974 .

on several occasions , north korean entities have been found to be in violation of u.s. missile nonproliferation laws .

once a finding is made , the imposition of sanctions is mandatory , though sanctions may be waived if the president finds it "essential to the national security of the united states" to do so .

the severity of the sanction depends on the type of material or technology transferred .

the duration of the sanction also depends on the material or technology involved ; generally sanctions are imposed for two years .

sanctions include , at a minimum , a denial of contracts with agencies of the u.s. government , denial of licenses for items on the u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) , and , at a maximum , a denial of all licenses for importing into the united states for the foreign person or entity .

because north korea is a nonmarket economy , all relevant activities of the government of north korea are also sanctioned when entities in north korea are found to have engaged in proliferation under u.s. law .

with the nuclear weapons test of october 8 , 2006 , the president has statutory authority — and in some cases is required — to cut off all foreign aid except humanitarian and food aid , deny sales or transfers of defense articles and defense services , deny export licenses for items on the u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) , deny foreign military financing , deny credit underwritten or provided by government coffers , withhold u.s. support in the international financial institutions , deny export licenses for dual - use items , and withhold export - import bank support .

the united states already maintained a fairly comprehensive sanctions regime on north korea , thus most of these relationships were already broken or limited .

because the secretary of state has identified the government of north korea as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism , it is denied most aid under the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

north korea's access to u.s. foreign assistance is also limited in annual foreign operations appropriations measures .

in most instances , it is not expressly stated that the restriction or prohibition is associated with north korea's place on the terrorist list .

even if the appropriations law prohibits the availability of foreign aid , there are numerous exceptions to the law .

thus , programs in nonproliferation , demining , child survival , conservation and biodiversity , food aid , debt buybacks , health and disease prevention , unanticipated contingencies , international disaster assistance , antiterrorism , may be funded or supported in spite of country - specific restrictions .

under the current foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , north korea is denied direct foreign aid and direct loans , credits , insurance and guarantees of the export - import bank .

in the same act , supporters of international terrorism , of which north korea is one , are denied bilateral assistance and participation in programs designed to provide debt relief to the poorest nations .

under the current department of defense appropriations act , north korea is denied assistance "unless specifically appropriated for that purpose. .

at the president's discretion , north korea would also be subject to the economic sanctions provided in three provisions of law addressing human rights conditions: the foreign assistance act of 1961 , under which north korea is annually castigated for its human rights record ; the international religious freedom act of 1998 , under which the administration has identified north korea as a "country of particular concern" since 2001 ; and the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , under which the administration has , since 2003 , classified north korea as a tier 3 ( most severe ) offender of standards pertaining to the trafficking of persons for slavery or sex trade .

any sanctions imposed pursuant to these acts would be largely redundant , however , with penalties already prescribed to north korea for the above - stated reasons .

the export - import bank act of 1945 also singles out marxist - leninist countries for denial of guarantees , insurance , credit , or other bank funding programs .

north korea is specifically cited as a marxist - leninist country for purposes of the export - import bank .

the foreign assistance act of 1961 denies most non - humanitarian foreign assistance to any communist country .

north korea is among five countries so designated , though the law is not limited to those countries named .

several laws deny benefits or assistance to communist countries , but do not explicitly name any particular state .

because north korea has been denied such benefits or aid in the course of the events of the early 1950s and thereafter , these other sections of law would probably be redundant if applied to or cited for north korea .

in some instances , the president may determine that , for purposes of a particular law , north korea is no longer a "marxist - leninist state. .

if , however , all other aspects of the u.s. - north korea relationship were to improve , it would probably be necessary for congress to remove north korea from the list set out in the export - import bank act and the foreign assistance act of 1961 , or necessary for the president to exercise waiver authority made available to his office under those acts , to make these other laws inapplicable to north korea .

the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) , administered by the department of state, begins: it is the policy of the united states to deny licenses and other approvals for exports and imports of defense articles and defense services , destined for or originating in certain countries .

this policy applies to belarus , cuba , iran , libya , north korea , syria and vietnam .

this policy also applies to countries with respect to which the united states maintains an arms embargo ( eg , burma , china , liberia , somalia , and sudan ) or whenever an export would not otherwise be in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the united states .

the first itar was issued on august 26 , 1955 ; north korea has been listed as a restricted country from the itar's inception .

the itar further states that any country found to be a supporter of international terrorism is subject to the itar prohibitions and those stated in section 40 of the arms export control act , which denies the export , directly or indirectly , of any munitions item , lease or loan , credits , guarantees , or other financial assistance to a terrorist country .

section 40 further prohibits u.s. individuals from engaging in such trade or support of such a country .

importing of defense articles and defense services is similarly restricted by the department of the treasury's bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms , the regulations of which state: it is the policy of the united states to deny licenses and other approvals with respect to defense articles and defense services originating in certain countries or areas .

this policy applies to cuba , iran , iraq , libya , mongolia , north korea , sudan , syria , vietnam , and some of the states that comprised the former soviet union ( armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , and tajikistan ) .

this policy applies to countries or areas with respect to which the united states maintains an arms embargo ( eg , burma , china , the federal republic of yugoslavia ( serbia and montenegro ) , haiti , liberia , rwanda , somalia , sudan , unita ( angola ) , and zaire ) .

it also applies when an import would not be in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the united states .

again , the president has the authority to change these regulations by removing north korea from the list of restricted countries .

on december 16 , 1950 , president truman invoked authority granted his office under the trading with the enemy act to declare that a u.s. national emergency existed because of recent events in korea ( and elsewhere , as "world conquest by communist imperialism is a goal of the forces of aggression that have been loosed upon the world" ) .

a few days later , the department of the treasury issued foreign assets control regulations ( facr ) to forbid any financial transactions involving , or on behalf of , north korea and china , including transactions related to travel or the access to north korean assets that were subject to u.s. jurisdiction .

korea - related facr have been modified on numerous occasions to take into consideration new circumstances ( i.e. , transactions relating to technology not in existence at the time the regulations were issued ) or to ease restrictions in response to changing conditions ( i.e. , signing of the agreed framework , emerging reports of famine , north korea's announced moratorium on missile testing ) .

today the regulations continue to forbid transactions except in the following instances , in which the regulations: unblock assets of north koreans who emigrated and established u.s. residency ( 1976 ) ( 41 f.r .

16554 ) ; ease travel - related restrictions for special activities ( 1989 ) ( 54 f.r .

5231 ) ; allow freer flow of informational materials ( change in legislation not specifically targeting north korea , 1989 ) ( 54 f.r .

5231 ; subsequently amended ) ; establish telecommunication between the two countries ( 1992 ) ( 57 f.r .

58986 ; subsequently amended ) ; authorize travel - related transactions , greater telecommunications , news bureaus , banking , and importing magnesite from north korea after the agreed framework was reached ( 1995 ) ( 60 f.r .

8934 ) ; authorize donations targeting basic human needs after flooding and famine events ( 1996 ) ( 61 f.r .

9344 ) ; authorize certain aviation - related fee payments ( 1997 ) ( 62 f.r .

17548 ) ; allow transactions related to the exporting of computer hardware and software , provided there is adherence to the relevant export administration regulations ( 2000 ) ( 65 f.r .

38165 ) ; allow north koreans to invest in property under u.s. jurisdiction , provided the property interest is created on or after june 19 , 1999 ( the date of president clinton's announcement to ease u.s. - north korea relations ) ( 2000 ) ( 65 f.r .

38165 ) ; allow imports from north korea that do not violate various proliferation laws and regulations ( 2000 ) ( 65 f.r .

38165 ) ; and engage in transactions with the government of north korea provided those transactions do not constitute a donation to a u.s. individual and do not violate laws and regulations relating to terrorism ( 2000 ) ( 65 f.r .

38165 ) .

generally , the president has the authority to change regulations , as long as those changes meet the requirements of any relevant law .

he also annually renews the state of national emergency , in place against north korea since 1950 .

he could allow the declaration to expire or he could lift it at any time .

congress could terminate a declaration of national emergency by passing a joint resolution , under terms of the national emergencies act .

on june 28 , 2005 , president bush expanded the authority granted his office to address the threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction — authority first exercised by president george h.w .

bush in 1990 — to freeze assets and property of those engaged in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

the 41 st president had declared that the united states faced a national emergency relating to weapons proliferation ( in the absence , at the time , of a reauthorized export administration act ) , and thus took steps in 1990 to control the exports of certain goods and services , and authorized a ban on foreign aid and credit , procurement contracts , imports and exports , support in international financial institutions , and landing rights .

the 43 rd president's order took additional steps to block property and assets under u.s. jurisdiction of any person found , in part — ... to have engaged , or attempted to engage , in activities or transactions that have materially contributed to , or pose a risk of materially contributing to , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery ( including missiles capable of delivering such weapons ) , including any efforts to manufacture , acquire , possess , develop , transport , transfer or use such items , by any person or foreign country of proliferation concern ; ... to have provided , or attempted to provide , financial , material , technological or other support for , or goods or services in support of , any activity or transaction described [above] ... or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order .. .

the executive order identifies eight foreign entities , of which three are north korean .

department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control has subsequently added another eight north korean entities to this restricted list , as well as a swiss company that was found to engage in transactions with one of the north korean restricted companies .

on january 9 , 2007 , the department of the treasury announced that it had designated bank sepah , a state - owned iranian financial institution , as an entity materially contributing to iran's proliferation activities .

bank sepah , coincidentally , according to treasury , is credited with transferring more than $500,000 for an associate of the korean mining development corporation .

that entity was cited on december 28 , 2006 , under the iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation act of 2000 , for exporting missile technology to iran .

on september 12 , 2005 , the treasury department found that banco delta asia — a macau - based bank in which north korea had substantial holdings — was a "financial institution of primary money laundering concern. .

treasury department's financial crimes enforcement center found that north korea may reap as much as $500 million annually from counterfeiting , and another $100-to - $200 million annually from narcotics trafficking .

the finding authorizes the secretary of the treasury to require "special measures" on the part of u.s. financial institutions and financial agencies that involve increased record keeping and reporting on banco delta asia's transactions .

though the department of the treasury has only issued a "proposed rulemaking" to impose the most stringent fifth special measure — to prohibit certain bank transactions — a regulation implementing this action has not yet been issued .

nonetheless , the finding and proposed rulemaking has had a chilling effect on banco delta asia's international business relations .

department of the treasury officials have testified that "some two dozen financial institutions across the globe have voluntarily cut back or terminated their business with north korea , notably including institutions in china , japan , vietnam , mongolia , and singapore .

the result of these voluntary actions is that it is becoming very difficult for the kim jong - il regime to benefit from its criminal conduct. .

appendix a .

other crs products relating to north korea overview crs report rl33567 , korea - u.s. relations: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33389 , north korea: a chronology of events in 2005 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32743 , north korea: a chronology of events , october 2002-december 2004 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32493 , north korea: economic leverage and policy analysis , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

proliferation crs report rl33709 , north korea's nuclear test: motivations , implications , and u.s. options , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33590 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons development and diplomacy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21391 , north korea ' s nuclear weapons: latest developments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21582 , north korean crisis: possible military options , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21473 , north korean ballistic missile threat to the united states , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31900 , weapons of mass destruction: trade between north korea and pakistan , by [author name scrubbed] .

counterfeiting , international narcotics control crs report rl32167 , drug trafficking and north korea: issues for u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33324 , north korean counterfeiting of u.s. currency , by [author name scrubbed] .

foreign aid crs report rs21834 , u.s. assistance to north korea : fact sheet , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31785 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix b .

north korea — economic sanctions currently imposed in furtherance of u.s. foreign policy or national security objectives appendix c. north korean entities cited for proliferation activities under u.s. la .

