this report ( 1 ) summarizes provisions of several laws and regulations , including the patentlaw , the atomic energy act , international traffic in arms control regulations , the usa patriotact ( p.l .

107-56 ) , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) , and the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 ) , that permit the federalgovernment to restrict disclosure of scientific and technical information that could harm nationalsecurity ; ( 2 ) describes the development of federal controls on "sensitive but unclassified" ( sbu ) scientific and technical information ; ( 3 ) summarizes current controversies about white house policyon "sensitive but unclassified information," and "sensitive homeland security information" ( shsi ) issued in march 2002 ; and ( 4 ) identifies controversial issues which might affect the development ofoffice of management and budget ( omb ) and agency guidelines for sensitive unclassifiedinformation , which were expected to be released during 2003 .

several laws permit the federal government to classify privately - generated scientific andtechnical information that could harm national security , even when it is not held by federal agencies .

these laws deal with patent law secrecy and atomic energy restricted data .

both the export administration act ( 50 u.s.c .

app .

2401-2420 ) ( 6 ) and the arms export controlact ( 22 u.s.c .

2751-2794 ) provide authority to control the dissemination to foreign nationals , bothin the united states and abroad , of scientific and technical data related to items requiring exportlicenses according to the export administration regulations ( ear ) or the international traffic inarms regulations ( itar ) .

both laws regulate export of technical data .

 ( 7 ) itar control the releaseof defense articles specified on the u.s .

munitions list ( 22 cfr 121 ) and technical data directlyrelated to them .

ear , among other things , control the export of dual - use items ( items that have bothcivilian and military uses ) on the [department of] commerce control list ( 15 cfr part 774 ) andtechnical data related to them .

licenses are needed to export controlled items .

the implementingregulations are administered by the department of commerce , which licenses items subject to ear,and by the department of state , which licenses items subject to itar and the munitions list ofitems .

 ( 8 ) they apply to "exporters" of both privateand federally funded scientific and technicalinformation .

fundamental research is excluded from itar and ear .

itar generally treats the disclosure or transfer of technical data to a foreign national , whether in the united states or abroad as an export .

 ( 9 ) someacademic researchers believe they need to beregistered with the state department to hold conversations or meetings with foreigners in the unitedstates about scientific developments .

 ( 10 ) accordingto itar regulations , publicly available scientificand technical information and academic exchanges and information presented at scientific meetingsare not treated as controlled technical data .

 ( 11 ) nevertheless , there has been considerable ambiguityand confusion regarding these provisions at some academic institutions because of uncertaintiesabout which research projects might not be excluded because they use space or defense articles,technologies , and defense services on the munitions list which is used to identify technologiesrequiring export licensing .

 ( 12 ) the exportadministration regulations also categorize as "deemed"exports communications to foreign nationals about technologies characterized as "sensitive" orcountries identified as "sensitive" under ear rules .

 ( 13 ) this is declaimed by some as a hindrance tointernational science and supported by others who view it as a needed national security protection .

 ( 14 ) since 1999 , export of information about satellites and spacecraft instruments , including technical discussions about them , has been under the jurisdiction of the state department and itar .

some academic researchers have complained that these rules curtailed their presentations atmeetings , their on - campus research , and international collaborations because "research activity thatonce was subject to the fundamental research exclusion under national security directive 189 , [seethe next section for details] was , for the first time , formally regulated ...." ( 15 ) reportedly , some foreignresearchers at u.s. universities had not been able to access this information and u.s. researchersbelieved they needed a license to discuss defense - related basic research information with foreigncolleagues .

universities sought clarifying rules .

under a new rule issued in march 2002 , the state department clarified language exemptingu.s .

universities from obtaining itar licenses for export of certain ( 16 ) space - based fundamentalresearch information or articles in the public domain to certain universities and research centers incountries that are members of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , the european union,or the european space agency , or to major non - nato allies , such as japan and israel .

also to bepermitted are exports of certain services and unclassified technical data for assembly of products intoscientific , research , or experimental satellites .

the exemption does not permit export of technicaldata for the integration of a satellite or spacecraft to a launch vehicle or missile technology controlregime controlled defense services or technical data .

a license will be needed for export ofexempted information ( including discussions ) and hardware to researchers from all other countries .

in addition , collaborators in approved countries would have to guarantee that researchers fromnon - approved countries were not receiving restricted information .

 ( 17 ) some university researchersmaintain that these rules do not go far enough in clarifying the situation and that academicresearchers will find it difficult to design and implement campus controls and to bloc access to suchinformation by students and scientists from disallowed countries .

 ( 18 ) .

several laws and directives govern classification of federally owned or federally fundedscientific and technical research results or information .

these are executive order ( e.o. ) .

12958,national security decision directive ( nsdd ) 189 , and rules related to pre - publication review .

before the 2001 terrorist attacks , u.s. laboratories that transported "select agents," that is , about 40 dangerous biological agents and toxins , had to register with the federal government ( 42 cfr72.6 ) .

pursuant to the usa patriot act , p.l .

107-56 and the public health security andbioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 , p.l .

107-188 , and the agriculturalbioterrorism protection act of 2002 , ( which is part of p.l .

107-56 ) , limits were placed on publicaccess was extended to an additional 60 select agents , defined as "certain biological agents andtoxins," ( 30 ) whose misuse could pose security risks .

registration requirements were extended toinclude registration of persons who used these agents .

to prohibit potential terrorists from accessto these agents , controls were placed on access by selected persons , including those who could bepotential terrorists , including criminals , illegal aliens , persons with mental defects , and or drugabusers ; aliens not admitted for permanent residence from certain countries "which the secretary ofstate has made a determination ( that remains in effect ) that such country has repeatedly providedsupport for acts of international terrorism," ( 31 ) orpersons who have been dishonorably dischargedfrom the armed services .

these controls will be administered by the justice department .

 ( 32 ) pursuant to these laws , the departments of health and human services and of agriculture , identified the new list of "select agents," which was released in the federal register on december13 , 2002 .

 ( 33 ) under the interim final rule , whichwas amended on november 3 , 2003 , ( 34 ) thelaboratories that use such agents will need to register and control access to such agents ; scientistswill have to register , submit to background checks , and obtain prior approval to use , send , or receiveselect agents used in experiments .

some say this process , while denying access to possible terrorists,might prove costly and burdensome to some researchers ( estimated in an article by malakoff at$700,000 per laboratory ) ( 35 ) and has the potentialof limiting the conduct of some scientific researchthat would otherwise be performed by such persons , including some foreign researchers .

in addition,privately funded scientists will be subject to the same requirements as government - fundedresearchers who need "prior approval from the dhhs ... for genetic engineering experiments thatmight make a select agent more toxic or more resistant to known drugs. .

 ( 36 ) civilian and criminalpenalties for noncompliance apply to universities , private companies and government laboratories .

laboratories that handle select agents were to be in compliance with the new rules by fall 2003 .

over time some agencies have established procedures to identify and safeguard "sensitive butunclassified information" ( sbu ) , also called "sensitive unclassified information. .

generally , thisunclassified information is withheld from the public for a variety of reasons , but needs to beaccessible to federal agency personnel .

as will be discussed next in this report , the term sbu hasbeen defined in various presidential - level directives and agency guidances , but , some critics say , onlyindirectly in statute .

agencies have given the term various meanings in their implementing rules andregulations .

some agency guidance documents have started to use interchangeably the terms "forofficial use only," "limited use," "sensitive," "sensitive but unclassified," and related terms , and havedefined sbu by referring to such statutes as privacy act of 1974 ( 5 usc 552a ) , ( 37 ) the freedom ofinformation act ( foia ) of 1966 ( 5 usc 552 ) , the computer security act of 1987 ( relevantportionscodified at 15 usc 278 g - 3 ) , and other language .

agencies have discretion to define sbu in waysthat serve their particular needs to safeguard information .

there is no uniformity in implementingrules throughout the government on the use of sbu .

agencies also may assign various criminal andcivilian penalties to improper release of "sensitive but unclassified" information .

acknowledging the serious potential threats from release of certain kinds of "sensitive"privately developed research information , professional scientific societies and groups haveconsidered developing ways to regulate , review , identify and deal with publication of "sensitive"journal articles .

 ( 116 ) some believe that privatescientific publishers and editors will feel compelled tomodel their publications policy for sensitive papers on guidelines that the federal governmentdevelops for release of agency documents .

there is considerable controversy about this issue .

national academies' policy .

the nationalacademy of sciences says it voluntarily deleted from a public version of a report , and put into aseparate appendix , certain information on vulnerabilities of u.s. croplands after review by the u.s.department of agriculture , the sponsoring agency .

 ( 117 ) the rationale was that terrorists might be ableto exploit information on vulnerabilities .

the information is being made available "on aneed - to - know basis" to a select list of persons including "federal , state , and local governmentworkers , officials involved in homeland security , and animal and plant health scientists , but notmembers of the media or the general public .

anyone interested in the appendix has to file a writtenrequest.... academy staff members then call applicants , ascertain their identify , and ask why theyneed the report...." ( 118 ) reportedly , the academycited foia exemption 2 , "which protects matters'related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency' " in justifying thisprocedure .

 ( 119 ) regarding another academyreport , dod's joint non - lethal weapons directoratereportedly took several months to review a study on non - lethal weapons , finally released innovember 2002 .

but there are "conflicting opinions of that review , including whether it was usedimproperly to suppress nas' criticism of dod's non - lethal weapons program. .

 ( 120 ) on october 18 , 2002 , the three presidents of the national academies issued a statement ( 121 ) which sought to balance security and openness in disseminating scientific information .

itsummarized the policy dilemma by saying that "restrictions are clearly needed to safeguard strategicsecrets ; but openness also is needed to accelerate the progress of technical knowledge and enhancethe nation's understanding of potential threats. .

the statement encouraged the government toreiterate that basic scientific research should not be classified , that nonclassified research reportingshould not be restricted , and that vague and poorly defined categories of research information , suchas sensitive but unclassified , should not be used .

"experience shows that vague criteria of this kindgenerate deep uncertainties among both scientists and officials responsible for enforcing regulations .

the inevitable effect is to stifle scientific creativity and to weaken national security. .

the statementoutlined "action points" for both government and professional societies to consider when developinga dialogue about procedures to safeguard scientific and technical information which could possiblybe of use to potential terrorists .

the national academies held a workshop on this subject early in 2003 ( 122 ) in cooperation withthe center for strategic and international studies .

 ( 123 ) reportedly , during this meeting , administrationofficials , stated the view that scientists should voluntarily craft a policy that protects sensitiveinformation and that they should assist the government "... to help it identify and censor trulysensitive findings," especially in the biological sciences .

 ( 124 ) one result is that the csis and theacademies established a "roundtable on scientific communication and national security," aworking group composed of scientific and security leaders which will hold continuing discussionsto try to develop a workable publications policy .

 ( 125 ) other groups .

some scientists , including dr. ronald atlas , president of the american society for microbiology , ( 126 ) have suggested that thescientific community should come together to discuss the issue of balancing secrecy in science andscientific publication in a move similar to the 1975 asilomar conference , which helped to developguidelines for information communication and institutional review boards to monitor and controlthe development of genetically modified organisms .

some suggest that perhaps the nationalacademy of sciences or a committee of a relevant professional society be established to evaluatewhether parts of methodology of especially sensitive research should be published .

 ( 127 ) reportedly,dr .

anthony fauci , director of the nih national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid ) , which is receiving the bulk of funds allocated to nih for counterterrorism r&d , said onoctober 3 , 2002 , that while transparency in publication should be the norm , consideration shouldbe given to developing a "specially appointed committee to determine whether publication isappropriate. .

he suggested the formation of a panel to determine whether it is appropriate to pursuecertain types of biomedical research," similar to the asilomar conference .

 ( 128 ) others have suggestedthat only certain kinds of sensitive research be restricted or classified , such as research relating tothe "weaponization of biological and toxin agents...." ( 129 ) the international council for science ( icsu ) , an international non - governmental scientific association , ( 130 ) announced that it will reviewthreats to scientific freedom , including limitations orrestrictions being placed on the conduct and communication of scientific information and thefreedom of movement of scientific materials .

 ( 131 ) the council of the american library associationadopted a resolution at its june 2002 meeting that urged that the provisions relating to "sensitive butunclassified" information be dropped from the card memorandum and that urged "governmentagencies ... ensure that public access to government information is maintained absent specificcompelling and documented national security or public safety concerns. .

 ( 132 ) the americanassociation of university professors ( aaup ) announced on september 11 , 2002 , that it was creatinga committee to review and analyze "post - september 11 developments which impinge on academicfreedom. .

 ( 133 ) in january 2004 , the american physical society ( aps ) council released a statement which concluded , "restricting exchange of scientific information based on non - statutory administrativepolicies is detrimental to scientific progress and the future health and security of our nation .

theaps opposes any such restrictions , such as those based on the label 'sensitive but unclassified'...." ( 134 ) professional groups views that scientists should voluntarily"self - regulate" research and publications .

some professional scientific groups,such as the american society for microbiology , have called upon their members to be cautious aboutreleasing or publishing information which might be useful to potential terrorists , includingspecifically the "methodology" sections of some scientific papers , and have established publicationreview committees to evaluate the sensitivity of articles presented for publication in their journals .

 ( 135 ) the society has established procedures to have an editorial panel review for sensitivity manuscriptswhich deal with "select agents. .

so far , reportedly only one paper has been asked to be revised .

 ( 136 ) in february 2003 , shortly after the academies / csis 2003 meeting , 32 journal editors and scientists , including officials with the american association for the advancement of science andthe american society of microbiology , issued a statement on "statement on scientific publicationsand security," published in science , nature and the proceedings of the nationalacademy ofsciences , saying that they would take security issues into account when reviewing research papersfor publication .

each scientific publication will develop its own process to review papers submittedfor publication .

 ( 137 ) a national academy of sciences report , entitled biotechnology research in an age of terrorism: confronting the "dual use" dilemma , published in 2003 and dubbed the "fink" reportfor its chairman , called for greater self - regulation by scientists , using institutional biosafetycommittees at academic and research institutions , for research that could possibly aid terrorists .

italso urged creation of a new federal national science advisory board for biodefense to provideguidance to nongovernmental researchers .

but it did not propose government control of suchresearch .

 ( 138 ) partly in reaction , the american association of university professors ( aaup ) special committee on academic freedom and national security in a time of crisis , in a report issued in2003 , urged a note of caution regarding self - restraint by the scientific community: "the academiccommunity must be careful not to impose on itself a regulatory burden that differs from thegovernment's only in the locus of administration. .

 ( 139 ) although there has been no evidence ofnegative effects on scientific research so far , " a realistic appraisal of what the scientific communityis doing to monitor its own members requires us to be aware of the possibility that researchers andjournal editors might exercise their responsibilities with too much rigor and thus inadvertently givetoo little attention to freedom's needs. .

 ( 140 ) policy options .

congress has also expressed interest in this topic .

shortly after publication on july 1 , 2002 , in science magazine online , of acontroversial scientific paper that described the synthesis of an infectious polio virus from mail ordercomponents , congressman weldon introduced h.res .

514 ( 107th congress ) .

itexpressed "serious concern" about the paper , which was funded by the defense advanced researchprojects agency ( darpa ) , and called for tighter controls on the publication of certain scientificresearch .

it also sought to have the scientific community and the executive branch ensure thatinformation that may be used by terrorists is not made widely available , or is properly classified .

 ( 141 ) the resolution was not reported from the committee .

for additional information see crs report rl31695 , balancing scientific publication andnational security concerns: issues for congress .

some who seek to clarify policies for controlling public or private scientific information thatis not classified believe that scientific progress and innovation , and even the fight against terrorism,will be harmed by limiting information flow .

yet these critics share the goal of trying to keeppotential terrorists from obtaining information that could be used to threaten the united states .

some have called for closer cooperation between the scientific and intelligence community to draftguidelines relating to safeguarding scientific information that might be useful to potentialterrorists .

 ( 155 ) these conflicting objectives raiseperplexing dilemmas for policymakers and scientistsalike .

policy options discussed below focus on several parts of this debate , including establishinguniformity in definitions and implementing guidelines ; establishing an appeals process for sbuinformation ; and the potential to classify or label as sbu more research information .

considerations related to a uniform definition of sbu .

since agencies define the term sbu differently , various interpretations couldlead to the possibility that information that should not be released to the public because of itspotential value to terrorists might be released ; that agencies might not release sbu information toother agencies , or to state or local officials ; or that the public may be denied access to informationwhose release might be permitted .

questions about ambiguities in the definition of the term sbumay raise interest about legislating , or overseeing the process of developing , uniform criteria forsbu , especially since , in p.l .

107-296 , congress encouraged nonfederal first responders tosafeguard such information via nondisclosure agreements .

 ( 156 ) in order help set standards for sbu and shsi , and to resolve policy dilemmas surrounding definitions and procedural controls , after release of the card memorandum in march 2002 , the whitehouse office of homeland security was reported to have drafted a definition for shsi , ( 157 ) and that"originally , there was an initiative to issue a presidential directive on unclassified but homelandsecurity - sensitive information. .

 ( 158 ) this wasnever publically released , but several agencies,including the nuclear regulatory commission , utilized it when developing criteria to define shsias discussed in the card and ashcroft memos .

 ( 159 ) subsequently the office of homeland securityasked the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) and the office ofmanagement and budget to develop guidance , which had been expected to be released in 2002 or2003 .

an objective of the proposed guidance was to withhold information from persons who shouldnot have access to it , but to allow such information to be shared with those who might have a needfor it , such as law enforcement and emergency response personnel .

 ( 160 ) omb and ostp met with stakeholder groups , including academics and scientists , to obtain their views about how to develop guidance .

 ( 161 ) during a meeting held in late august 2002 , withacademic and scientific officials and others discussing the march 2002 memos , their implementation,and definitions , "[a]cademic and scientific representatives ... argued [that] basic and appliedresearch , even research performed by the government , should not be subject to [sensitive butunclassified homeland security information] shsi guidelines and advocated following existing rulesfor the handling of sensitive information , such as the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) guidance for the handling of select agents. .

 ( 162 ) academic officials reportedly left the meetingconvinced that the march memo applied only to "information that was generated and owned by thegovernment , and not university research," nor to university research funded by federal governmentgrants .

 ( 163 ) during hearings on conductingresearch during the war on terrorism: balancingopenness and security , held by the house science committee on october 10 , 2002 , white houseoffice of science and technology ( ostp ) director john marburger testified that the administrationwants "to ensure an open scientific environment" while maintaining homeland security .

he saidshsi would apply to federal intelligence , law enforcement and public health information thatgenerally is not made public , but would not necessarily include research results .

 ( 164 ) several otherwitnesses endorsed this position .

according to ostp director marburger , sbu information related to homeland security "... may be withheld from public disclosure only when it warrants protection under one of the nineexceptions of the freedom of information act. .

 ( 165 ) the relationship between foia and theadministration's homeland security information policies was the theme of a conference held by thedepartment of justice's office of information and privacy for foia officers during june 25 , 2004 .

 ( 166 ) the topics of the meeting were summarized in a foia post article , but the discussion summarieswere not released to the public .

despite many meetings in 2002 and 2003 with various stakeholders and apparent attempts to draft policy , no sbu or shsi policy guidance was issued .

before july 2003 , the omb / ostp guidance had been expected to constitute the president's instructions to federal agencies to "prescribe and implement procedures" to "identify and safeguardsensitive homeland security information that is sensitive but unclassified," and to share thisinformation with other federal agencies and appropriate state and local personnel , as required bysection 892 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( b ) of p.l .

107-296 .

the secretary of dhs was assigned these functionspursuant to executive order 13311 , july 29 , 2003 and the dhs office of general counsel was,reportedly , developing the guidelines mandated by p.l .

107-296 .

it is not known which perspectiveswill be used in guidance to federal agencies - - the limited definition of sensitive as in the computersecurity act of 1987 , the more expansive , but somewhat limited , conceptualization of sbu in thecard memorandum and attachments , or the broader conceptualization of sbu used by thedepartment of energy .

it is expected that the definition will extend beyond shsi per se , that is,beyond information not routinely released to the public , such as law enforcement data , personnelinformation , and information on computer vulnerabilities , to include also a conceptualization of sbuinformation that could extend to some kinds of scientific and technical data .

some have speculated that the delay in issuing guidance is due to disagreement about whether there should be public comment - - which might involve discussions raised by critics relating toensuring allowing public access to information that could be used to continue to permit public andcommunity oversight of governmental and industrial activities .

another concern that might be raisedby the public in commenting on proposed regulations could focus on penalties for violatingnondisclosure agreements that might affect unsuspecting recipients of sbu information .

 ( 167 ) otherssay the delay "... may be ... a recognition of the voluntary restraints the academic community hasimposed on itself," referring specifically to professional groups' activities in support of voluntaryself - restraint ( 168 ) for sensitive scientificinformation .

although the law does not require publiccomment , an omb official ( 169 ) and a departmentof justice release had said that shsi guidance wouldbe subject to public notice comment before the regulation was implemented .

 ( 170 ) it is not clearwhether the department of homeland security will seek public comment now that it has been givenresponsibility to draft the regulations .

 ( 171 ) over75 public groups , "representing journalists , scientists,librarians , environmental groups , privacy advocates , and others" wrote to dhs secretary in august2003 , urging that he allow public input on procedures to be prescribed and implemented foridentifying , safeguarding , and sharing the sensitive but unclassified homeland security informationreferenced in section 892 .

 ( 172 ) factors agencies might use in developing nondisclosure policyfor sbu information .

the card and ashcroft memos , together with section 892of p.l .

107-296 , have given agencies a basis to make decisions about restricting access to certainelectronic and hard copy information that previously may have been accessible to the public , butwhose continued distribution might be detrimental to homeland security .

but it is unclear whatconceptualizations agencies and the dhs guidance will use .

as noted above , agencies havediscretion to identify and withhold from the public , as sensitive or as sensitive but unclassified,information which they determine is subject to nondisclosure ( pursuant to both the computersecurity act of 1987 and the administration's interpretation of foia ) .

since the basis of thesedeterminations is subject to interpretation , both agency program managers and the public who mightseek access to such information may confront ambiguity in definitions and different kinds ofbalancing tests .

there are questions about the uniformity of definitions used by different agenciesand which values or objectives should be encompassed in a risk analysis on which suchnondisclosure determinations might be based .

the definition of what information is sbu , at a minimum , is likely to encompass concepts that are defined as sensitive in the computer security act 1987 , that is to protect information whosedisclosure "could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of federal programs , or theprivacy to which individuals are entitled under ... the privacy act. .

also , it may encompass thenist criteria for sensitive information protection: confidentiality , integrity , and availability .

 ( 173 ) additionally , among the topics the administration instructed agencies to consider when making"discretionary disclosures" of sbu homeland security - related information that could be exempt fromfoia is the "need to protect critical systems , facilities , stockpiles , and other assets from securitybreaches and harm - - and in some instances from their potential use as weapons of massdestruction in and of themselves. .

 ( 174 ) theadministration also stressed that agencies , when applyingexemption 2 , should consider the needs for an informed citizenry to ensure accountability,"safeguarding our national security , enhancing the effectiveness of our law enforcement agencies,protecting sensitive business information , and not least preserving personal privacy. .

 ( 175 ) also to beconsidered were " ... benefits that result from the open and efficient exchange of scientific , technical,and like information. .

criteria for sensitive but unclassified shsi also are likely to reference thetypes of information p.l .

107-296 identifies as "homeland security information" - - "any informationpossessed by a federal , state , or local agency that - - relates to the threat of terrorist activity ; relatesto the ability to prevent , interdict , or disrupt terrorist activity ; would improve the identification orinvestigation of a suspected terrorist or terrorist organization , or would improve the response to aterrorist act" ( sec .

892 ( f ) ) .

because of the difficulty of balancing the needs for information with security , some critics of the white house march 2002 memo have focused on the need for developing guiding principles .

according to steven aftergood and henry kelly , "in deciding how to treat such information , theadministration should enunciate a clear set of principles , as well as an equitable procedure forimplementing them and appealing adverse decisions," with the appeals procedure "outside theoriginating agency. .

 ( 176 ) they said that "theguiding principles could be formulated as a set ofquestions , such as: is the information otherwise available in public domain ? .

 ( or can it be readily deduced from first principles ? ) .

if the answer is yes , then there is no valid reasonto withhold it , and doing so would undercut the credibility of official information policy .

is there specific reason to believe the information could be used by terrorists ? .

are there countervailing considerations that would militate in favor ofdisclosure , i.e. , could it be used for beneficial purposes ? .

documents that describe in detail howanthrax spores could be milled and coated so as to maximize their dissemination presumptively posea threat to national security and should be withdrawn from the public domain .

but not everydocument that has the word "anthrax" in the title is sensitive .

and even documents that are in someways sensitive might nevertheless serve to inform medical research and emergency planning andmight therefore be properly disclosed .

is there specific reason to believe the information should be public knowledge ? .

it is in the nature of our political system that it functions in response to publicconcern and controversy .

environmental hazards , defective products , and risky corporate practicesonly tend to find their solution , if at all , following a thorough public airing .

withholdingcontroversial information from the public means short - circuiting the political process , and riskinga net loss in security .

given the contending values and factors that affect a workable definition and implementing rules , congress may monitor the guidance that dhs develops to assist agencies in identifyingsensitive homeland security information and sbu .

because of the potential implications of theforthcoming dhs concepts for private scientific publications policy , various constituencies andscientific groups will undoubtedly seek to examine the balance between security and access toinformation in these guidelines .

the potential to classify more research information .

several activities have occurred that might increase the amount ofscientific research information that is classified .

as noted above , nsdd 189 and executive order12958 both prohibit classification of certain kinds of federal scientific research information exceptfor reasons of national security .

nsdd 189 deals with basic research and executive order 12958applies the prohibition to fundamental , or what it defines as basic and applied , research .

during2001 and 2002 , the heads of several federal agencies with substantial research responsibilities , whodid not have classification authority under executive order 12958 , the prevailing executive orderon classifying information , ( 177 ) were givenoriginal classification authority .

these include thesecretaries of health and human services ( 178 ) and of agriculture , ( 179 ) and also theadministrator of theenvironmental protection agency .

 ( 180 ) someof the agencies with new classification authority,especially health and human services and agriculture , support substantial amounts ofcounterterrorism research , as well as of fundamental research in a variety of scientific and technicalareas , often performed on an extramural basis by researchers in colleges and universities .

 ( 181 ) new executive order 13292 , issued on march 25 , 2003 , amends executive order 12958 on classified national security information .

the amendment permits classification of "scientific,technological , or economic matters relating to the national security , which includes defense againsttransnational terrorism " ( new clause in italics , sec .

1.4 ( e ) ) .

the amendment appears to highlightthat national security - related scientific , technological , and economic information dealing withdefense against international terrorism may be classified .

given that the definition of "nationalsecurity," in the two executive orders is not changed and that definition could have encompassedmatters related to transnational terrorism , it is unclear if the amended order widens the scope ofscientific , technological , and economic information to be classified .

 ( 182 ) in addition , the department of defense reportedly plans to reissue its guidelines relating to pre - publication review of extramural research that it funds outside of its own laboratories .

recentlyseveral university groups wrote a letter to the director of the office of science and technologypolicy complaining that more agency program officials are inserting pre - publication review clausesinto contracts , including for fundamental research , without explanation as to their justification .

thishas a "pernicious effects," they said , "not only with regard to the freedom to publish but also withregard to employment of foreign - born students and researchers on federally funded research projects .

if the contract clauses require blanket screening of any and all foreign - born scientists , universitieswill object. .

 ( 183 ) agencies which were given original classification authority in the last few years are now developing implementing guidelines and appointing security officers in operating units .

given thelong - standing federal policy embodied in executive order 12598 and in nsdd 189 of notclassifying basic scientific research , except if release would threaten national security , the balancebetween science and security in agency guidelines will remain a topic of interest and concern .

interest in this topic may be heightened because of the recent changes made in executive order13292 to the definition of the kinds of scientific , technological , and economic information that maybe classified .

the scientific and academic communities are expected to pay close attention to these issues .

among the questions that may be raised are: will new controls be placed on federally funded research , including both intramural research conducted in an agency's laboratories , and on extramural research , that mightbe federally funded but conducted in nonfederal academic and industrial research laboratories ? .

will controls encompass both classification levels and use of designations such as sensitive and sensitive but unclassified ? .

will designation of a controlled research project be made before the award offunds and the start of a project , or after a project is completed and during a pre - publication reviewphase ? .

what kinds of requirements will be placed upon nonfederal researchers tosafeguard research information ? .

how will such controls affect the conduct of academic research for the federalgovernment ? .

how will such controls differ from the controls on proprietary researchinformation that are deemed acceptable by most academic institutions eager to receive financialsupport from industry ? .

will research agencies with original classification authority modify theirlong - standing policies of encouraging publication and dissemination of federally funded researchresults ? .

under the expanded definition of scientific and technological informationsubject to classification in executive order 13292 , will agencies classify information that might haveotherwise been categorized as sbu ? .

appeals process for sbu information .

anothercontinuing issue is expected to be an appeals process for designating information as sbu .

stephenaftergood , with the federation of american scientists ( fas ) , suggested that " ... an appeals panelthat is outside of the originating agency and that therefore does not have [the] same bureaucraticinterests at stake would significantly enhance the credibility of the deliberative process .

the efficacyof such an appeals process has been repeatedly demonstrated by an executive branch body called theinteragency security classification appeals panel ( iscap ) . .

 ( 184 ) another suggested approach is that"to solve disputes that develop out of the new category of 'sensitive but unclassified' information,one could allow the information security oversight office ( a part of the executive branch ) toreceive appeals to review disputes and challenges to executive agency decisions regarding the releaseof documents and reports the office would oversee the appeals , it would have another set of eyesthat would examine the requested information and review it in a different context that the executiveagency .

the isoo might be able to work with both the agency involved and those requesting theinformation to reach a compromise that everyone could accept .

it would also have the effect ofkeeping the oversight of the information in the hands of the executive branch. .

 ( 185 ) determination of "tiered" access to sbu information .

some agencies have discussed developing procedures to permit"tiered," or selective , access to qualified and pre - screened individuals for some scientific andtechnical information , that could be categorized as sbu or shsi .

reportedly , epa requiresresearchers to obtain sponsorship from a senior epa official , have their requests approved inadvance and register before using the envirofacts database .

 ( 186 ) epa also has issued instructions toutilities to submit threat or vulnerability assessments to the agency .

using a protocol issued indecember 2002 , reportedly , epa "... will keep sensitive information in the assessments secure .

thedocuments will be kept in one location under lock and only individuals designated by epa will haveaccess to them. .

 ( 187 ) epa also will release otheragency information to selected individuals only inhard copy at epa offices and libraries throughout the nation .

 ( 188 ) the federal energy regulatorycommission ( ferc ) issued a final rule , effective april 2 , 2003 , which limits release of its criticalenergy infrastructure information on a selective or "tiered" basis to members of the public based ontheir need to know and the legitimacy of their need as determined by the commission .

 ( 189 ) ferc saidit would not alter its responsibilities under foia , but appears to be broadening , or at a minimum,reinterpreting implementation of exemptions to disclosure under foia .

 ( 190 ) the u.s. geologicalsurvey has announced that it will implement four levels of control for its information products: a .

no sensitivity is determined .

no restriction is required .

b .

product is determined to be sensitive .

do not distribute .

c. sensitivity has beendetermined for a previously distributed product that is widely available .

withdrawal would beineffective .

continue distribution of current version .

restrict distribution of new features to updatesfor l year .

d. product is restricted according to directive from another agency with specific authorityfor public safety or national security .

 ( 191 ) the equity of procedures for "tiered" or selective access ; the need to create public and or private panels to examine controls on the release of some information ; and the need to clarify relationshipsbetween the private sector and the government with respect to safeguarding information in scientificpublications to protect the public interest are issues which may be raised in the legislative context .

the development and history of atomic energy restricted data controls were explained in a document prepared in 1989 by arvin s. quist , a classification officer at the oak ridge gaseousdiffusion plant , oak ridge national laboratory , which is operated on contract for the departmentof energy .

 ( 192 ) excerpts below from the quistdocument explain the relevant provisions of these laws .

in the ... atomic energy act of 1946 , congress established a special category of information called "restricted data. .

restricted data was definedto encompass "all data concerning the manufacture or utilization of atomic weapons , the productionof fissionable material , or the use of fissionable material in the production of power. .

 ( 193 ) thus , byoperation of law , nearly all atomic ( nuclear ) energy information fell within the definition of rd .

theatomic energy act authorized the aec to control the dissemination of rd , specifying as aprerequisite to access to this information that an individual must have a security clearance.... ... two particularly unique and significant aspects ofrd warrant emphasis .

first , a positive action is not required to put information into the rd category.if information falls within the act's definition of rd , it is in this category from the moment of itsorigination ; that is , it is "born classified. .

the government has no power to determine thatinformation is rd ... only the power to declassify rd .

[in practice , the government ( departmentof energy ) determines whether information falls within the definition of restricted data. .

.. .

the"born classified" concept is unique with rd .

this concept assumes that newly discovered atomicenergy information might be so significant with respect to the nation's security that it requiresimmediate and absolute control .

...national security information is not so designated until anoriginal classifier makes a positive determination that the information falls within the definition ofnsi ... .

although rd is said to be born classified , the atomicenergy act does not specifically designate it as "classified" information .

the act defines rd andprescribes very strict methods for its control without stating that it is "classified" information .

however , the act does describe declassification of rd ; therefore , by implication , rd is "classified. .

a second unique aspect of rd is that information does not have to be owned or controlled by thegovernment to be classified as rd .

.. .

the circumstance could even arise in which an individualcould originate rd and then not be allowed to possess it because of lack of security clearance or"need to know. .

the atomic energy act does not forbid an individual to generate rd , but , oncerd is generated , the act prohibits its communication to persons not authorized to receive it .

in 1951 , congress amended the atomic energy act of 1946 to make certain atomic energy information available to other countries for purposes of weapons development , but the nationalsecurity council had to approve these information flows .

the atomic energy act of 1954 amendedthe 1946 act to include "an increased emphasis on wider dissemination of atomic energy information,to make more of it accessible to u.s. industry and to the world in order to permit the developmentof nuclear reactors for commercial production of electric power ... as a consequence of presidenteisenhower's [1953] atoms for peace initiative ...." the quist document says: with respect to the control of information , the 1954 act stated: "it shall be the policy of the commission to control thedissemination and declassification of restricted data in such a manner as to assure the commondefense and security .

consistent with such policy the commission shall be guided by the followingprinciples: ( a ) until effective and enforceable international safeguards against the use of atomicenergy for destructive purposes have been established by an international arrangement , there shallbe no exchange of restricted data with other nations except as authorized by section 2164 of thistitle ; and ( b ) the dissemination of scientific and technical information relating to atomic energyshould be permitted and encouraged so as to provide that free interchange of ideas and criticismwhich is essential to scientific and industrial progress and public understanding and to enlarge thefund of technical information .

...[42 u.s.c .

sec .

2161.] .

.. .

the 1954 actadded "industrial progress," "public understanding," and "enlarge the fund of technical information"as reasons to disseminate atomic energy information .

those additions provided the basis for thesubsequent declassification or downgrading of much atomic energyinformation .

.. .

the 1946 act had permitted declassification of rdonly when the aec determined that it could be published without "adversely affecting the commondefense and security ... .

the 1954 act changed "adversely affecting" to "undue risk," therebyshifting the balancing test towards declassification of more information ... .

the increased emphasisof the 1954 act in disseminating atomic energy information is further exemplified by a continuousreview requirement...: .. .

prior to the atomic energy act of 1954 , privatepersons could not have access to rd for commercial purposes ( eg , development of commercialnuclear power reactors ) .

the only reason for allowing private persons to have access to such datawas on a need - to - know basis , in connection with national defense work .

although the 1954 actenvisioned the commercial development of nuclear energy , the act contained no express provisionspermitting access to rd for commercial purposes .

this hurdle was overcome in 1956 when the aecused its administrative powers to establish an access permit program .. .

under this program , apermitted is able to have access to rd "applicable to civil uses of atomic energy for use in hisbusiness , trade or profession. .

12 fam 540 , sensitive but unclassified information ( sbu ) ( tl:ds - 61 ; 10-01-1999 ) 12 fam 541 scope ( tl:ds - 46 ; 05-26-1995 ) a. sbu describes information which warrants a degree of protection and administrativecontrol that meets the criteria for exemption from public disclosure set forth undersections 552 and 552a of title 5 , united states code: the freedom of information act andthe privacy act .

b. sbu information includes , but is not limited to: ( 1 ) medical , personnel , financial , investigatory , visa , law enforcement , or otherinformation which , if released , could result in harm or unfair treatment to any individualor group , or could have a negative impact upon foreign policy or relations ; and ( 2 ) information offered under conditions of confidentiality which arises in the course ofa deliberative process ( or a civil discovery process ) , including attorney - client privilege orwork product , and information arising from the advice and counsel of subordinates topolicy makers .

12 fam 542 implementation ( tl:ds - 46 ; 05-26-1995 ) previous regulations regarding lou material are superseded and lou becomes sbu asof the date of this publication .

12 fam 543 access , dissemination , and release ( tl:ds - 61 ; 10-01-1999 ) a. u.s. citizen direct - hire supervisory employees are responsible for access , dissemination,and release of sbu material .

employees will limit access to protect sbu information fromunintended public disclosure .

b .

employees may circulate sbu material to others , including foreign service nationals,to carry out an official u.s. government function if not otherwise prohibited by law,regulation , or interagency agreement .

c. sbu information is not required to be marked , but should carry a distribution restrictionto make the recipient aware of specific controls .

to protect sbu information stored orprocessed on automated information systems , the requirements found in 12 fam 600 ( information security technology ) must be met .

12 fam 544 sbu handling procedures: transmission , mailing , safeguarding / storage , and destruction ( tl:ds - 47 ; 06-08-1995 ) a .

regardless of method , transmission of sbu information should be effected throughmeans that limit the potential for unauthorized public disclosure .

since informationtransmitted over unencrypted electronic links such as telephones may be intercepted byunintended recipients , custodians of sbu information should decide whether specificinformation warrants a higher level of protection accorded by a secure fax , phone , or otherencrypted means of communication .

b. sbu information may be sent via the u.s .

postal service , apo , commercial messenger,or unclassified registered pouch , provided it is packaged in a way that does not discloseits contents or the fact that it is sbu .

c. during nonduty hours , sbu information must be secured within a locked office or suite,or secured in a locked container .

d. destroy sbu documents by shredding or burning , or by other methods consistent withlaw or regulation .

12 fam 545 responsibilities ( tl:ds - 46 ; 05-26-1995 ) unauthorized disclosure of sbu information may result in criminal and / or civil penalties.supervisors may take disciplinary action , as appropriate .

state offices responsible for theprotection of records are outlined in 5 fam .

see 3 fam for regulations and process ondisciplinary actions .

 ( 12 fam 550 provisions regarding incidents / violations do not pertainto sbu. ) .

iii .

sensitive but unclassified information in addition to information that could reasonably be expected to assist in the development or use of weapons of mass destruction , which should beclassified or reclassified as described in parts i and ii above , departments and agencies maintain andcontrol sensitive information related to america's homeland security that might not meet one ormore of the standards for classification set forth in part 1 of executive order 12958 .

the need toprotect such sensitive information from inappropriate disclosure should be carefully considered , ona case - by - case basis , together with the benefits that result from the open and efficient exchange ofscientific , technical , and like information .

all departments and agencies should ensure that in taking necessary and appropriate actions to safeguard sensitive but unclassified information relatedto america's homeland security , they process any freedom of information act request for recordscontaining such information in accordance with the attorney general's foia memorandum ofoctober 12 , 2001 , by giving full and careful consideration to all applicable foia exemptions .

see foia post , "new attorney general foia memorandum issued" ( posted 10 / 15 / 01 ) ( found atwww.usdoj.gov / oip / foiapost / 2001foiapost19.htm ) , which discusses and provides electronic links tofurther guidance on the authority available under exemption 2 of the foia , 5 u.s.c .

 552 ( b ) ( 2 ) ,for the protection of sensitive critical infrastructure information .

in the case of information that isvoluntarily submitted to the government from the private sector , such information may readily fallwithin the protection of exemption 4 of the foia , 5 u.s.c .

 552 ( b ) ( 4 ) .

as the accompanying memorandum from the assistant to the president and chief of staff indicates , federal departments and agencies should not hesitateto consult with the office of information and privacy , either with general anticipatory questions oron a case - by - case basis as particular matters arise , regarding any foia - related homeland securityissue .

likewise , they should consult with the information security oversight office on any matterpertaining to the classification , declassification , or reclassification of information regarding thedevelopment or use of weapons of mass destruction , or with the department of energy's office ofsecurity if the information concerns nuclear or radiologicalweapons .

