the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , 42 u.s.c .

§§12101 et seq .

 , provides broad nondiscrimination protection for individuals with disabilities in employment , public services , public accommodations and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications .

enacted in 1990 and amended in 2008 by p.l .

110-325 , the ada is a civil rights statute that has as its purpose "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

the ada has been the subject of numerous lower court decisions and the supreme court has decided 20 ada cases .

in the most recent supreme court decision , united states v. georgia , the court held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment .

however , the court did not reach the issue of whether the eleventh amendment permits a prisoner to secure money damages from a state for state actions that violate the ada but not the constitution .

in the same term , the supreme court decided arbaugh v. y .

& h corp. , a case under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which has implications for the ada's prohibition of discrimination where employers employ 15 or more employees .

on december 7 , 2007 , the supreme court granted certiorari in huber v. wal - mart stores , to determine whether an individual with a disability who cannot perform her current job must be reassigned to a vacant , equivalent position without competing with other workers .

however , the court dismissed the petition since the case was settled prior to oral argument .

the eighth circuit court of appeals in huber held that wal - mart was not required to automatically reassign her to the vacant position she wanted but could place another , better qualified , candidate in the position .

noting that wal - mart did place the plaintiff in a less lucrative position , the court of appeals stated that the plaintiff "was treated exactly as all other candidates were treated for the wal - mart job opening , no worse and no better. .

currently , there is a split in the circuits on this accommodation issue , and in light of the court's dismissal of the case , there will continue to be divergent views .

in olmstead v. georgia , the supreme court held that title ii of the ada requires states to place individuals with mental disabilities in community settings rather than institutions when the state's treatment professionals have determined that community placement is appropriate , community placement is not opposed by the individual with a disability , and the placement can be reasonably accommodated .

"unjustified isolation...is properly regarded as discrimination based on disability. .

the olmstead case had been closely watched by both disability groups and state governments .

although disability groups have applauded the holding that undue institutionalization qualifies as discrimination by reason of disability , the supreme court did place certain limitations on this right .

in addition to the agreement of the individual affected , the court also dealt with the issue of what is a reasonable modification of an existing program and stated: "sensibly construed , the fundamental - alteration component of the reasonable - modifications regulation would allow the state to show that , in the allocation of available resources , immediate relief for the plaintiffs would be inequitable , given the responsibility the state has undertaken for the care and treatment of a large and diverse population of persons with mental disabilities. .

this examination of what constitutes a reasonable modification may have implications for the interpretation of similar concepts in the employment and public accommodations titles of the ada .

in pennsylvania department of prisons v. yeskey , the court found that state prisons were covered under title ii of the ada .

the state had argued that state prisoners were not covered since such coverage would "alter the usual constitutional balance between the states and federal government. .

the supreme court rejected this argument , observing that "the ada plainly covers state institutions without any exception that could cast the coverage of prisons into doubt. .

the supreme court addressed issues involving prisoners under the ada in yeskey holding that state prisons are within the ada's statutory definition of "public entity," but did not address the constitutional issues .

these may be addressed next term in the pending decision of united states v. georgia which raises the issue of whether congress has validly abrogated state immunity from damage suits under title ii of the ada in situations involving accommodations for prisoners with disabilities .

the eleventh amendment states: "the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state. .

the supreme court has found that the eleventh amendment applies to suits by citizens against their own states and cannot be abrogated by the use of article i powers but that section 5 of the fourteenth amendment can be used for abrogation in certain circumstances .

section 5 of the fourteenth amendment states: "the congress shall have the power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article. .

the circumstances where section 5 of the fourteenth amendment can be used to abrogate the eleventh amendment have been discussed in various supreme court decisions which reiterated the principle that the congress may abrogate state immunity from suit under the fourteenth amendment and found that there were several conditions necessary for successful abrogation .

congressional power is limited to the enactment of "appropriate" legislation to enforce the substantive provisions of the fourteenth amendment .

the legislation must be remedial in nature .

there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be prevented and the means adopted to that end .

in recent years , the supreme court has examined numerous statutes to determine whether they properly abrogated the eleventh amendment and , in most cases , found the statutes lacking .

however , the court's federalism doctrine has been somewhat reined in by the recent decisions in tennessee v. lane ( discussed below ) and nevada dept .

of human resources v. hibbs , which upheld the family and medical leave act as a valid exercise of congressional power pursuant to section 5 of the fourteenth amendment .

the limited nature of these holdings renders their application to other as yet untried aspects of the ada regarding the eleventh amendment unclear .

the court's recent decision in united states v. georgia , raised the issue of whether congress had validly abrogated state immunity from damage suits under title ii of the ada in situations involving accommodations for prisoners with disabilities but the court decided the case on more narrow grounds , holding only that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment .

the supreme court addressed issues involving prisoners under the ada in pennsylvania department of corrections v. yeskey where the court held that state prisons are within the ada's statutory definition of "public entity" but did not reach the constitutional issues .

united states v. georgia involved the claims of a georgia prisoner who is paraplegic and uses a wheelchair .

the inmate claimed that he was confined for 23-24 hours a day to a cell so small that he was unable to maneuver his wheelchair .

in addition , he argued that he was deprived of access to a toilet , and a shower and was forced to sit in his own bodily waste because prison officials refused to provide assistance .

these conditions , he argued , violated the eighth amendment's prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment and the ada .

the eleventh circuit court of appeals did not address the sufficiency of the claim under title ii of the ada but found that the title ii claims for monetary damages against the state were barred by sovereign immunity .

the supreme court , in an unanimous opinion written by justice scalia , held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violates the fourteenth amendment .

in arriving at this holding , the court noted that the plaintiff's claims for money damages under the ada were based in large part on violations of section 1 of the fourteenth amendment and observed that this differed from other cases regarding the eleventh amendment such as tennessee v. lane .

justice scalia recognized that the supreme court has been split "regarding the scope of congress's 'prophylactic' enforcement powers under §5 of the fourteenth amendment," but found common ground in the recognition of section 5 powers to enforce the provisions of the fourteenth amendment by creating private remedies against actual violations of these provisions .

thus , justice scalia concluded for the court , "insofar as title ii creates a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment , title ii validly abrogates state sovereign immunity. .

united states v. georgia is a limited decision which does not address the split in the supreme court regarding when there is abrogation of the eleventh amendment under the ada .

in tennessee v. lane , the supreme court retreated somewhat from its recent approaches to the application of the eleventh amendment , holding that title ii of the ada , as it applies to the fundamental right of access to the courts , constitutes a valid exercise of congressional authority under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment .

lane was an action brought by george lane and beverly jones , both paraplegics who use wheelchairs for mobility , against tennessee .

mr. lane alleged that he was compelled to appear in court to answer criminal charges and had to crawl up two flights of stairs to get to the court room .

ms. jones , a certified court reporter , alleged that she was unable to gain access to a number of county courthouses , thus losing employment opportunities .

in a 5-4 decision , with the opinion written by justice stevens , the court noted that when analyzing an eleventh amendment immunity issue , two questions must be resolved: ( 1 ) whether congress unequivocally expressed its intent to abrogate ; and ( 2 ) , if so , whether it acted pursuant to a valid grant of congressional authority .

the ada specifically provides for abrogation so the court then applied the test set out in city of boerne v. flores , which found that legislation enacted pursuant to section 5 of the fourteenth amendment is valid if it had "a congruence and proportionality between the injury to be prevented or remedied and the means adopted to that end. .

justice stevens' opinion found that title ii of the ada , like title i , sought to prohibit irrational discrimination but noted that title ii also sought to enforce a variety of basic constitutional guarantees , including the right of access to the courts .

noting the pattern of disability discrimination that led to the enactment of the ada , and the "sheer volume of evidence demonstrating the nature and extent of unconstitutional discrimination against persons with disabilities in the provision of public services," the court held that the inadequate provisions of public services and access to public facilities was an appropriate subject for remedial prophylactic legislation .

the final issue was whether title ii was an appropriate response to this history and pattern of discrimination .

although the court had been urged to consider the entire sweep of title ii , justice stevens declined to broaden the ruling beyond the issue of the accessibility of judicial services .

the court held that the remedies were congruent and proportional to the goal of enforcing the right of access to the courts and emphasized that the title ii of the ada requires only "reasonable modifications" that would not fundamentally alter the nature of the service provided and that do not impose an undue financial or administrative burden , or threaten historic preservation interests .

thus , the court concluded , title ii "as it applies to the class of cases implicating the fundamental right of access to the courts , constitutes a valid exercise of congress' §5 authority to enforce the guarantees of the fourteenth amendment. .

the lane decision was close , 5-4 , with two concurring opinions and a dissenting opinion written by chief justice rehnquist .

it is also limited in its scope .

although the chief justice argued in his dissenting opinion that title ii of the ada ought to be considered as a whole , not on a case - by - case basis , the majority disagreed and reached a finding of constitutionality on the specific issue of the accessibility of judicial services .

the majority's emphasis on detailed fact finding in the legislative history and its statement in the ada's findings and purposes indicates how crucial these facts are to proper abrogation of the eleventh amendment .

in addition , the court's emphasis on the constitutional rights involved in the access to courts indicates that cases which do not involve such rights may not pass constitutional muster in subsequent decisions .

in a previous decision on title i of the ada , the supreme court reached a different conclusion regarding abrogation .

in garrett v. university of alabama , another 5-4 decision , the court held that the eleventh amendment bars suits to recover monetary damages by state employees under title i of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

the majority opinion in garrett stated that "congress is the final authority as to desirable public policy , but in order to authorize private individuals to recover money damages against the states , there must be a pattern of discrimination by the states which violates the fourteenth amendment , and the remedy imposed by congress must be congruent and proportional to the targeted violation .

those requirements are not met here...." a strong dissent by justice breyer , joined by justices stevens , souter and ginsburg , argued that the majority ignored powerful evidence of discriminatory treatment .

title iii of the ada prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in places of public accommodations , including golf courses .

in pga tour v. martin , the supreme court held , 7-2 , that professional golf tours are covered by title iii and that use of a golf cart by a golfer with a mobility impairment did not "fundamentally alter" the golf tournaments .

justice stevens , writing for the majority , found that "under the ada's basic requirement that the need of a disabled person be evaluated on an individual basis , we have no doubt that allowing martin to use a golf cart would not fundamentally alter the nature of petitioner's tournaments. .

justice scalia , joined by justice thomas , wrote a scathing dissent arguing that the majority distorted "the text of title iii , the structure of the ada , and common sense. .

the supreme court in spector v. norwegian cruise line , ltd. held , in a decision written by justice kennedy , that the ada applies to companies that operate foreign cruise ships in u.s. waters .

prior to this decision there had been a split in the circuits with the eleventh circuit holding in stevens v. premier cruises inc. that title iii of the ada does apply to foreign cruise ships and the fifth circuit in spector v. norwegian cruise lines holding that the ada would not be applicable since applicability would impose u.s. law on foreign nations .

the supreme court's decision specifically held that the statute is applicable to foreign ships in the united states waters to the same extent that it is applicable to american ships in those waters .

the majority concurred that cruise ships need not comply with the ada if modifications would conflict with international legal obligations since the ada only requires "readily achievable" accommodations .

the 5-4 decision , however , was fragmented with various justices joining for various aspects of the opinion .

it is difficult , therefore , to determine exactly what type of accommodations would be required by the application of the ada .

since the case below had been dismissed without a trial , it was remanded to determine the statutory requirements in this particular situation .

the question of whether title iii requires any permanent and significant structural modifications that interfere with the international affairs of any cruise ship , foreign flag or domestic , was specifically left undecided .

justice scalia , in his dissenting opinion , argued that the ada should not be interpreted to apply in the absence of a clear statement from congress .

the ada allows a court , in its discretion , to award attorneys' fees to a prevailing party .

in buckhannon board and care home , inc. , v. west virginia department of human resources , the supreme court addressed the "catalyst theory" of attorneys' fees which posits that a plaintiff is a prevailing party if the lawsuit brings about a voluntary change in the defendant's conduct .

the court rejected this theory finding that attorneys' fees are only available where there is a judicially sanctioned change in the legal relationship of the parties .

the supreme court in barnes v. gorman held in a unanimous decision that punitive damages may not be awarded under section 202 of the ada and section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 .

jeffrey gorman uses a wheelchair and lacks voluntary control over his lower torso which necessitates the use of a catheter attached to a urine bag .

he was arrested in 1992 after fighting with a bouncer at a nightclub and during his transport to the police station suffered significant injuries due to the manner in which he was transported .

he sued the kansas city police and was awarded over $1 million in compensatory damages and $1.2 million in punitive damages .

the eighth circuit court of appeals upheld the award of punitive damages but the supreme court reversed .

although the court was unanimous in the result , there were two concurring opinions and the concurring opinion by justice stevens , joined by justices ginsburg and breyer , disagreed with the reasoning used in justice scalia's opinion for the court .

justice scalia observed that the remedies for violations of both section 202 of the ada and section 504 of the rehabilitation act are "coextensive with the remedies available in a private cause of action brought under title vi of the civil rights act of 1964. .

neither section 504 nor title ii of the ada specifically mention punitive damages , rather they reference the remedies of title vi of the civil rights act .

title vi is based on the congressional power under the spending clause to place conditions on grants .

justice scalia noted that spending clause legislation is "much in the nature of a contract" and , in order to be a legitimate use of this power , the recipient must voluntarily and knowingly accept the terms of the "contract. .

"if congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys , it must do so unambiguously. .

this contract law analogy was also found to be applicable to determining the scope of the damages remedies and , since punitive damages are generally not found to be available for a breach of contract , justice scalia found that they were not available under title vi , section 504 or the ada .

the exact implications of gorman are not clear .

justice stevens argued that the reasoning used in justice scalia's opinion has "potentially far - reaching consequences that go well beyond the issues briefed and argued in this case" ; although he also noted that justice scalia did "cabin the potential reach of today's decision by stating that we do not imply , for example , that suits under spending clause legislation are suits in contract , or that contract - law principles apply to all issues that they raise. .

