the house appropriations committee introduced its military construction appropriations billfor fiscal year ( fy ) 2004 ( h.r .

2559 , h.rept .

108-173 ) on june 23 , 2003 .

the houseconsidered and passed the bill on june 26 , 2003 .

the senate appropriations committee introduced its companion bill ( s. 1357 , s.rept .

108-82 ) on june 26 .

on july 10 , the senate amended h.r .

2559 by striking thetext and substituting that of s. 1357 .

the senate passed the amended bill on july 11 ( 91-0 ) and requested a conference with the house .

on september 16 , the house disagreed with thesenate amendment ( motion to do so was carried without objection ) and appointed conferees .

theconference report was completed on november 4 , 2003 , and was passed by the house on november5 ( 417-5 ) .

the message on house action is being held at the desk in the senate .

in late september , the president submitted an emergency supplemental appropriations request .

while the senate considered its version of the bill ( s. 1689 ) , the house passed its bill ( h.r .

3289 ) on october 17 , 2003 ( 303-125 ) .

the senate substituted the text of s.1689 for that of h.r .

3289 , passed the amended bill by unanimous consent , andsent notice of its action to the house .

the conference report ( h.rept .

108-337 ) was filed on october30 .

the house approved the report on october 31 ( 298-121 , roll no .

601 ) , and the senate approvedby voice vote on november 3 .

the bill was presented to the president on november 5 .

conference action on the national defense authorization act for fy2004 ( h.r .

1588 ) began on july 22 and has not yet concluded .

the house voted to instruct its conferees onseptember 10 ( 406-0 ) .

table 1 shows the key legislative steps necessary for the enactment of the fy2004 militaryconstruction appropriations .

it will be updated as the appropriation process moves forward .

table 1 .

status of military construction appropriations , fy2004 notes: dashes indicate no action yet taken .

several issues regarding military construction have gained visibility during thelegislative deliberations of the current session of congress .

among these are overall funding levels , realignment of overseas bases , base realignment and closure ( brac ) ,and perchlorate ground water contamination remediation .

overall funding levels .

the fy2004 budget submitted by the president on february 3 , 2003 , as subsequentlyamended , requested $9.24 billion in new budget authority , an amount $1.46 billionbelow the 2003 enactment .

the emergency supplemental appropriations requestsubmitted in late september would increase the total request by $412 million andwould authorize the transfer of unspecified additional funds as they are needed .

realignment of overseas bases .

the department of defense has initiated efforts in germany and in the republic ofkorea to reduce the number and shift the locations of its permanent installations.known in europe as efficient basing - east and in korea as the land partnershipplan , they are part of a worldwide dod effort to transform itself into a lighter andmore agile military establishment .

as part of this endeavor , the secretary of defense has tasked his combatant commanders to review military construction projects in order that they might supportchanging military objectives overseas .

these commanders are required to submit abasing plan that enhances their abilities to project power , to support operations , andto conduct activities based upon the secretary's views of a military structuretransformed to meet the challenges of the 21st century .

based on the dod study ofoverseas basic requirements , the administration in its amendment asked for thedeletion of 16 construction projects totaling $269 million that had been requested forgermany and turkey in its original fy2004 submission .

this dod study is not yet complete , however , and the house appropriations committee , in its report , expressed concerns that current and projected militaryconstruction at overseas sites may not reflect a well - considered strategy .

thecommittee , noting that dod has announced the retrenchment of some garrisons inthe republic of korea , recommended rescinding $107 million from prior yearappropriations at sites slated to be closed and re - appropriating them to installationsexpected to remain in service .

the senate appropriations committee strongly supported the dod effort to reevaluate its overseas basing requirements , though both appropriations committeesnoted that a dod overseas basing master plan , due on april 1 , 2002 , had not yetbeen submitted .

the senate committee recognized that the dod study of rebasinghad not progressed beyond its embryonic stage .

in observing public statementsindicating that dod would likely reduce the number of troops stationed in germanyand would reconfigure its installations in korea , it did not find much of the newconstruction in europe and korea that had been requested in the may 1 , 2003 , budgetamendment .

the senate committee recommended that an eight - member commission on the review of the overseas military facility structure of the united states be formed toassess whether current overseas basing is adequate and assess the feasibility ofvarious new configurations .

appointed by congressional leadership , the commissionwould provide an independent view of overseas basing requirements and wouldsubmit its report , including findings , conclusions , recommendations for legislationand administrative action , and a proposed overseas basing strategy , to the presidentand congress by august 30 , 2004 .

the committee also directed the department ofdefense to submit master plans for changing the military infrastructure requirementswithin each overseas regional command and report annually , through fy2008 , on theplans' implementation .

notwithstanding congressional direction , the press has reported that the department of defense and the military services have begun taking action to realignforce levels and the basing "footprint" at overseas locations .

on july 23 , the pacific stars and stripes , a newspaper written for military members stationed throughout the pacific area , announced that u.s. and japaneseofficials had entered into an agreement to return to japanese control more than 700acres of land near yokosuka used by the american military .

 ( 16 ) in return , the japanesegovernment agreed to build 800 new residential housing units near the mainyokosuka naval base .

in europe , the press has reported that the u.s. european command is considering the closure of many of the military installations in germany and thereturn to the united states of many of the combat units now stationed there .

new,more austere , bases could be constructed to house lighter , smaller combat units sentmore to train than to garrison .

countries where these "bare - bones" bases might belocated include poland , bulgaria , romania , algeria , and morocco .

 ( 17 ) a more recentreport in the press indicated that two of the army divisions currently engaged inoperations in iraq , the first armored and the first infantry divisions , currently basedin wiesbaden and wã¼rzburg , germany , could be permanently redeployed to theunited states when they are relieved of their present assignments .

 ( 18 ) in the republic of korea during early june 2003 , officials announced that u.s. forces there would be realigned , with elements of the second infantry divisioncurrently based near the demilitarized zone between the republic of korea and thedemocratic peoples republic of korea moving south , and the garrison at theyongsan garrison in the capital city of seoul beginning its relocation "as soon aspossible. .

 ( 19 ) the conference report retained provisions for the establishment of a commission on review of overseas military facility structure of the united states.the commission's structure and duties remained much as the senate committee hadspecified , though the commission's report deadline was established as december 31,2004 .

the conferees also directed the department of defense to prepare comprehensive master plans for overseas military bases that are to be submitted withthe fiscal year 2006 budget submission ( the senate had proposed submission withthe fiscal year 2005 budget ) , and specified that a status report on the comprehensiveplans and their implementation are to be submitted each year through fiscal year2009 , along with the military construction budget request .

the conferees suggestedthat they may extend this reporting requirement to include installations located withinthe continental united states .

the conferees noted that movement of us military forces from their established garrisons near the demilitarized zone in korea to bases further south in the countryhas been planned by the department of defense .

nevertheless , they noted that nomaster plan exists for the consolidation of these troops within camp humphreys , thedepartment's stated goal .

the conferees agreed to allow planning for construction atcamp humphreys to proceed , but construction itself may not commence until amaster facilities plan is developed and cost - sharing arrangements for the relocationof us forces has been agreed with the government of the republic of korea .

base realignment and closure ( brac ) .

four brac rounds have been completed since the firstin 1989 .

a fifth round , expected to affect as many installations as the previous fourrounds combined , is scheduled to take effect in fy2005 .

under statutory language included in the national defense authorization act for fy2002 , the secretary of defense is required to publish by december 31 , 2003,an initial list of the criteria he will use to recommend base closure and realignmentactions .

the secretary's force structure plan , a comprehensive base inventory , andcertification that the brac round is needed are to be included with the presidentialsubmission of his fy2005 budget in early february 2004 .

congress will have theopportunity to disapprove the secretary's selection criteria during early 2004 .

thefinal presidential list of brac actions is due to the congress on november 7 , 2005 .

 ( 20 ) the efficient facilities initiative ( efi ) .

some press reports have referred to the fy2005 bracround as the "efficient facilities initiative. .

this substitution is inaccurate and hasled to some confusion .

in fact , brac and efficient facilities initiative are definedin statute and refer to two different processes .

the original efficient facilities initiative ( efi ) was a new approach to reducing and managing dod real property holdings and was intended to substitute for a repeatbrac round .

the efi was intended to encompass all military installations , bothdomestic and overseas , and would have instituted a different method of administeringmany of the surviving bases .

the efi was publicly announced by the department of defense on august 2 , 2001 , and the department's general counsel submitted proposed legislation tocongress on august 3 .

it included three major actions: the potential realignment andclosure of u.s. military installations overseas ; the potential realignment and closureof installations within the united states during fy2003 ; and the permanentauthorization of the brooks air force base development demonstration project,expanded to include all military services .

the language as proposed was not adoptedby congress .

instead , congress incorporated some aspects of the efi into the national defense authorization act for fy2002 .

 ( 21 ) because military bases on foreign territoryare established by agreement between governments , no legislation was needed tobegin the process of overseas bases .

congress ignored that portion of the efi.instead of approving the secretary's suggested process for review of domestic basesand establishment of a permanent department - wide brooks - like base managementsystem , congress created the fy2005 brac round in title xxx of the act andauthorized dod to carry out a "pilot efficient facilities initiative" for a maximumof four years at up to two military installations of each military department ( army,navy , and air force ) .

these pilot initiatives were to be modeled on the brooks airforce base development demonstration project in san antonio , texas .

the brooks air force base development demonstration project .

the brooks air force base developmentdemonstration project ( also known as the "base efficiency project" or the "brookscity - base project" ) is a partnership between the secretary of the air force and thecity of san antonio , texas , and represents an alternative to traditional base closingsor realignments .

usually , military reservations are federal land jurisdictionally independent of the surrounding communities and governed by the base commander .

congress authorizedthe secretary to "convert any military or civil service appropriated ornon - appropriated fund activity at brooks air force base , texas , into a contractedactivity or an exchange of services compensated for by the lease , sale , conveyance,or transfer of real or private property. .

 ( 22 ) thisempowered the secretary to transfertitle , in exchange for appropriate compensation , of the whole of federal real propertyat brooks to the city and to lease back for military use those parts that directlysupport the base's military mission .

 ( 23 ) the baseis then no longer federal property.the cost of maintaining and operating the facility's physical plant , including fire andpolice protection , upkeep , and the like , is effectively transferred along withownership from the department of defense to the local community .

funds generatedfrom the lease or sale of property , reimbursements , and so on , is placed in a specialproject fund , which the secretary of the air force may employ for operations,leaseback , maintenance and repair of department facilities , and other uses .

 ( 24 ) this has taken place at brooks , and one aim of the efi was to make the same management tools available permanently to all service secretaries for use where theyconsidered appropriate .

but congress granted this authority only as a pilot project oflimited scope and duration .

to date , the department of defense has not selectedcandidate sites .

perchlorate groundwater contamination remediation .

the senate appropriations committee includedlanguage in its report requiring the department of defense to report not later thanmarch 30 , 2004 , on the activities of the interagency perchlorate steering committeeof the department of defense .

the steering committee was established in january1998 to facilitate the flow of information between defense agencies on technologicalissues related to perchlorate contamination of drinking water supplies and irrigationwater supplies .

the report of the house appropriations committee on the defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

2658 , h.rept .

108-187 ) also addressedperchlorate groundwater contamination .

that committee directed the department ofdefense to conduct a joint study with the environmental protection agency onperchlorate contamination of water supplies in southern california , arizona , andnevada .

this report would be completed within 180 days of the enactment of thedefense appropriations bill and would recommend national groundwatercontamination standards , indicate the military and defense industry contaminationsources , and outline mitigation steps for which the federal government would beresponsible .

the conferees directed the department of defense to submit a report identifying sources of perchlorate contamination on base realignment and closure ( brac ) properties along with plans to remediate this contamination .

the conferees movedthe deadline for the submission of this report from the senate - recommended march30 , 2004 , to april 30 , 2004 .

between fy1985 and fy1998 , funding devoted to military constructiondeclined steadily as dod and congress struggled with a changing strategicenvironment , a shrinking military force , and the uncertainties associated with severalrounds of base realignments and closures .

appropriations began to rise with fy1998as congress sought to replace outdated facilities and improve the quality of life formilitary personnel at home and in the workplace .

administration requests for militaryconstruction funding ( not including brac and family housing ) continued to declineuntil fy2000 , but have risen for fy2001 and fy2002 .

the request for fy2004 risesabove the level requested for fy2003 , and dod projects that its annual constructionrequests will approximately triple between fy2003 and fy2007 ( see figure 1 ) .

table 4 breaks down the fy2004 request by appropriations account and compares it to fy2003 levels .

table 5 shows congressional action on currentmilitary construction appropriations by account .

table 6 compares administrationmilitary construction requests and enactments for guard and reserve projects fromfy1994-fy2004 .

crs report rl31310 .

appropriations for fy2003: military construction , by daniel else .

crs report rl31805 .

authorization and appropriations for fy2004: defense , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32090 , fy2004 supplemental appropriations for iraq , afghanistan , and the global war on terrorism: military operations & reconstructionassistance , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and rhodamargesson .

crs report rl31349 ( pdf ) .

defense budget for fy2003: data summary , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31187 ( pdf ) .

combating terrorism: 2001 congressional debate on emergency supplemental allocations , by [author name scrubbed] and larry q. nowels , crs report rl31305 .

appropriations and authorization for fy2003: defense , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30002 ( pdf ) .

a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30440 .

military base closures: estimates of costs and savings , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30051 .

military base closures: agreement on a 2005 round , by [author name scrubbed] .

legislative branch sites house committee on appropriations http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations / senate committee on appropriations http: / / www.senate.gov / ~appropriations / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov / general accounting office http: / / www.gao.gov / u.s. department of defense sites u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , fy2004 budget materials http: / / www.dod.mil / comptroller / defbudget / fy2004 / index.html u.s. department of defense , installations & environment home page http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / ie / white house sites executive office of the president , office of management and budget , budget materials http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / budget / fy2004 / office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / .

