the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) authorizes federal funding for theeducation of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , theprovision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) .

 ( 1 ) the statute also contains detailed dueprocess provisions to ensure the provision of fape .

originally enacted in 1975 , the act respondedto increased awareness of the need to educate children with disabilities and to judicial decisionsrequiring that states provide an education for children with disabilities if they provided an educationfor children without disabilities .

 ( 2 ) idea has been amended several times , most recently and most comprehensively by the 1997 idea reauthorization , p.l .

105-17 .

congress is presently examining idea again and h.r .

1350 , 108th congress , passed the house on april 30 , 2003 by a vote of 251 to 171 .

the bill was marked up by the house subcommittee on education reform on april 2 and markedup by the full committee on education and the workforce on april 9 and 10 , 2003 .

the committeeordered the bill favorably reported by a vote of 29 to 19 .

 ( 3 ) this report will discuss the major changesthat h.r .

1350 , if enacted as passed by the house , would make to current law .

notethat when this report refers to h.r .

1350 , it is referring to the bill as it was passed bythe house on april 30 , 2003 .

in the senate , s. 1248 was reported out of committee bya unanimous vote on june 25 , 2003 ( s. rept .

108-185 ) and placed on the senate legislative calendarunder general orders on november 3 , 2003 .

for a discussion of the senate bill see crs report rl31971 .

several issues relating to idea were not included in the final version of h.r .

1350 as passed by the house .

among these were mandatory full funding ( 4 ) and parental choice provisions .

 ( 5 ) .

provisions relating to evaluations and assessments and the iep would be amended by h.r .

1350 .

h.r .

1350 would also add a new section regarding determiningwhen a child has a specific learning disability and prohibiting the use of a discrepancy betweenachievement and intellectual ability .

current law requires informed parental consent prior to the evaluation to determine whether a child qualifies under idea .

it also provides some leeway to an lea if a parent does not consent butit is deemed necessary to evaluate the child .

h.r .

1350 would expand the lea'sflexibility , if the parent does not provide consent or the parent does not respond to a request fromthe lea to provide consent .

in those cases , the lea may proceed with an initial evaluation .

inaddition , if the parent does not provide consent for idea services or fails to respond to the lea'srequest , the lea "shall not provide special education and related services. .

under suchcircumstances , the lea is not obligated to hold an iep meeting or prepare an iep .

in addition , thelea "shall not be considered to be in violation of any requirement under this part ( including therequirement to make available a free appropriate public education ) . .

h.r .

1350 would make significant changes to the requirements of an iep , apparently intended to reduce paperwork requirements for teachers and schools .

 ( 37 ) among thechanges that the house bill would make is the discontinuation of a requirement for the iep to containbenchmarks and short term objectives beginning in school year 2005-2006 .

h.r .

1350 would also limit the participation of regular education teachers in iep team meetings in certain circumstances ; allow the parents of a child with a disability and the lea to jointly excuse anymember of the iep team from attending all or part of an iep team meeting ; allow the parents and lea to agree not to reconvene the iep team and insteaddevelop a written document to amend or modify the child's current iep ; allow the lea to offer to the parent of a child with a disability the option ofdeveloping a comprehensive multi - year iep , not to exceed three years ; and allow for the use of alternative means of meeting participation , such as videoconferences and conference calls when agreed to by the parents of a child with a disability and thelea .

h.r .

1350 appears to make only relatively modest changes to section 619 , whichauthorizes services for preschool children with disabilities , and to part c , which authorizes servicesfor infants and toddlers with disabilities .

for example , h.r .

1350 would include certainchildren with disabilities ages 3 to 5 in the definition of an infant or toddler with a disability and,based on an approved floor amendment offered by rep. nethercutt , would modify the exception inpart c that infants and toddlers with disabilities be served in "natural environments," i.e. , withnondisabled infants and toddlers .

under current law , the exception to this requirement occurs "onlywhen early intervention cannot be achieved satisfactorily .

 .

 .

in a natural environment. .

h.r .

1350 would add to this exception: "or in a setting that is most appropriate , asdetermined by the parent and the individualized family service plan team. .

part d , which authorizes national activities , has been substantially revised .

in brief , some of the changes are a matter of re - arranging language .

for example , part d of current law providesfindings in several sections , while h.r .

1350 places all findings at the beginning of thepart - including some findings in current law and adding some new findings .

h.r .

1350 continues some provisions of part d , although sometimes with substantial changes .

for example,the bill would retain the state competitive grants program authorized under subpart 1 of part d. however , it would focus these grants on professional development activities even more than currentlaw does by requiring that at least 90% of the grants be used for these activities .

 ( current lawrequires 75% of funds be used to ensure sufficient numbers of skilled and knowledgeable specialeducation personnel. ) .

h.r .

1350 would continue other provisions of part d without change .

for example , the bill would continue to authorize grants for community parent resource centers to help"ensure that underserved parents of children with disabilities .

 .

 .

have the training and informationthey need to enable them to participate effectively in helping their children with disabilities .

 .

 .

. .

finally , h.r .

1350 would add new provisions to part d. for example , the bill would establish a national center for special education research to conduct research on improvingspecial education and related services for children with disabilities .

in addition to the amendments to idea discussed above , h.r .

1350 would requirethe general accounting office ( gao ) to undertake a series of reports on idea and specialeducation .

these include: a review of federal and selected state and local requirements related to idea that "result in excessive paperwork ; " a review of differences among the states in the definition and identificationof certain groups of children with disabilities - for example , those identified as "emotionallydisturbed" or specific learning disabled ; " a study of distance learning and other technological approaches for deliveringprofessional development programs for special education personnel ; a study of how limited english proficient students are served under idea ; and a study of state costs for complying with the requirements ofidea .

