keeping an economy growing at a rate compatible with the full utilization of resources over the long run in an environment in which price inflation is stable has been an age - old goal for macroeconomic policy .

monetary policy and the institutional arrangements for carrying it out have long been regarded as important to achieving this goal .

such has been the importance accorded money in this respect , that numerous monetary arrangements and policies have been proposed which , if adopted , their proponents argue , would make such a goal attainable .

these arrangements include the gold standard , the real bills doctrine , a compensated dollar , 100% reserve requirement banking , a fixed growth rate rule for the money supply , a bimetallic standard , a currency board , free floating exchange rates and inflation targeting , to name but a few in what professor stanley fischer has called "the unending search for monetary salvation. .

the current policy prescription in fashion among economists that promises to promote such a goal is termed central bank independence ( hereafter cbi ) which , although it has several possible definitions , has come increasingly to focus on institutional arrangements , as well as the central bank's "mandate and ability to focus single mindedly on the attainment of price stability. .

the high inflation in the western world in general during the 1970s , and the difference in the inflation experience of individual industrial countries which were , on the whole , subjected to similar external economic shocks , motivated some economists to investigate the possible linkage between the rate of inflation and the institutional and political arrangements governing the establishment and functioning of central banks .

a major conclusion of these studies is that cbi is an important part of the explanation for why some countries have had much lower inflation rates on average than others .

the more "independent" the central bank , these studies conclude , the lower tend to be the average rate of inflation and volatility of inflation experienced by that country .

the reason for these results is that independence supposedly enhances the credibility of the central bank and increased credibility gives rise to reinforcing behavior via the expectations of economic agents , be they consumers , suppliers of labor and capital , or firms supplying output .

thus , shifts in central bank policy are transmitted more rapidly into changes in wages , interest rates , and prices and , thus , output and employment , than would be the case in the absence of strong credibility .

a minority of the studies even claims that the better governance , lower inflation , and greater macroeconomic stability provided by cbi have a positive effect on economic growth .

some newer studies question the methodology underlying these results , and claim that the relationship between inflation and cbi is weaker than the early studies found .

the evidence is mixed on whether central bank independence has a cost in terms of lower output growth or greater output variability .

these empirical studies have not gone unnoticed by policy makers .

in some ways , the federal reserve is more independent than many of its peers .

in other ways , it is less .

for example , some studies have defined a price stability goal as enhancing independence , and there has been periodic congressional interest in giving the fed such a goal .

if cbi proponents are correct , the fed's independence could be enhanced at little cost and much benefit to the u.s. economy .

the basic methodology of the academic studies involves the use of linear regression which is a statistical technique that attempts to estimate mathematically how important central bank independence and various parameters of that independence are to such important indicators of economic performance as the rate of inflation , the variability of inflation , the growth rate of output , the variability of the growth rate of output , and real interest rates .

to make such computations , the above definitions of central bank independence must be turned into something that can be measured .

the literature on central bank independence is extensive .

the discussion below is not comprehensive , but focuses on a few of the key papers in depth to give a flavor for the literature as a whole .

it concludes with the results of two literature reviews that give an overview of the literature's general findings .

an econometric study is only as good as the assumptions underlying it .

legitimate questions have been raised about the way these studies have been conducted that casts doubts on their findings .

much has been made of the empirical finding that central bank independence is negatively associated with the rate of inflation and that this comes as a "free lunch" in terms of no adverse effects on some very important and desirable performance characteristics of an economy .

yet , as demonstrated above , the phrase "central bank independence" is quite imprecise .

as used in the literature , the phrase applies to three aspects of independence: 1. the degree to which the cb's governing board is isolated from the political process ; 2. the degree to which central banks can refuse to monetize public debt , i.e. , finance the government ; 3. the degree to which price stability has a primacy as the ultimate goal of central bank activity .

when these three aspects of independence were tested against the rate of inflation , for example , ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) were often combined into one variable .

only debelle and fischer used meaning ( 3 ) as a separate independent variable .

and they found that it had a negative role to play in explaining inflation that was sometimes statistically significant .

thus , the df result lends some support to those who seek to redefine the mandate of the federal reserve , or in the words of df , to take away goal independence from the federal reserve ( the other indices would classify ( 3 ) as increasing independence ) .

this , of course , presupposes that causality runs in the direction assumed by df .

the variables included in ( 1 ) were seen to have no statistically significant effect on the indicators of economic performance .

from this , one could conclude that to add the secretary of the treasury , for example , to the board of governors of the federal reserve would , presumably , have no measurable effect on the indicators of economic performance .

a variable designed to capture the essence of definition ( 2 ) did turn up in all of the studies as statistically significant .

presently , however , the federal reserve is forbidden to purchase other than seasoned u.s. government securities .

it cannot directly purchase new treasury issues .

the empirical studies suggest that this feature of u.s. law contributes to a low rate of inflation .

proponents argue that the empirical evidence suggests that congress may , in the discharge of its oversight responsibilities for monetary policy , want to make the policy goal of the federal reserve more specific .

it may , they argue , wish to replace the current multi - goal directive with one directing the federal reserve to achieve and maintain price level stability , characteristic ( 3 ) .

some would argue that the evidence is not robust enough , and the direction of causality is incorrect , to base such a policy change on , however .

the emphasis in much of the body of research reviewed above is to establish the importance of central bank independence as a factor explaining differences in the rates of inflation among countries as well as differences in other major indicators of economic performance .

this is accomplished by the use of linear regression .

to appreciate the conclusions reached by these researchers , it will be helpful to have an elementary understanding of this research tool .

equations estimated by linear regression take their form from some hypothesized relationship in which the behavior of one or more variables ( the independent variables ) is held to influence some other variable ( the dependent variable ) .

the application of regression analysis involves fitting a straight line to a group of observations , usually a sample selected from the universe of those variables , that are suggested by the hypothesized relationship .

the straight line is fitted such that the deviations of the actual observations from those suggested by the straight line are minimized .

the value of the slope of that line then gives the effect of the independent variable ( or variables ) on the dependent variable .

while the calculated value of the slope of the line may be positive or negative ( or even zero ) , it's true value may not be statistically significantly different from zero .

because this is so , it will be necessary to briefly discuss what is meant by a calculated value being "statistically significant. .

to understand statistical significance , let us say that the calculated effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable is .10 .

thus , changes in the independent variable by one unit change the dependent variable by .10 .

this assumes , of course , that the value .10 is really different from zero .

recall , that it was calculated , not from the universe of the independent variable , but from a sample taken from that universe .

thus , it is possible that our assumption that the true value of the effect of this variable on the dependent variable is different from zero is wrong .

it is , however , possible to control for making this type of error — that is , for accepting as true a relationship that is , in fact , not true .

it is common to set the control factor at 1 to 5 chances in 100 of accepting the hypothesis that the variable is different from zero when it is not .

if the calculated value of the independent variable lies within a range that limits the error to 1% to 5% , it is said to be statistically significant ( or statistically significantly different from zero ) .

since the purpose of this study is to establish the importance of central bank independence as a factor affecting a range of variables by which we judge economic performance , one other summary statistic must be explained: goodness of fit or r 2 .

the r 2 is designed to measure the fraction of the variation of the dependent variable that is explained by the variation of the independent variable ( s ) .

the r 2 ranges in value between 0 and 1 .

the higher the r 2 is , the larger is the proportion of the variation in the dependent variable that is explained by the variation of the independent variable ( s ) .

