iraq has not previously had experience with a democratic form of government , although parliamentary elections were held during the period of british rule under a league of nations mandate ( from 1920 until iraq's independence in 1932 ) , and the monarchy of the sunni muslim hashemite dynasty ( 1921-1958 ) .

the territory that is now iraq was formed from three provinces of the ottoman empire after british forces defeated the ottomans in world war i and took control of the territory in 1918 .

britain had tried to take iraq from the ottomans earlier in world war i but were defeated at al kut in 1916 .

britain's presence in iraq , which relied on sunni muslim iraqis ( as did the ottoman administration ) , ran into repeated resistance , facing a major shiite - led revolt in 1920 and a major anti - british uprising in 1941 , during world war ii .

iraq's first hashemite king was faysal bin hussein , son of sharif hussein of mecca who , advised by british officer t.e lawrence ( "lawrence of arabia" ) , led the arab revolt against the ottoman empire during world war i. faysal ruled iraq as king faysal i and was succeeded by his son , ghazi , who was killed in a car accident in 1939 .

ghazi was succeeded by his son , faysal ii .

a major figure under the british mandate and the monarchy was nuri as - said , a pro - british , pro - hashemite sunni muslim who served as prime minister 14 times during 1930-1958 .

faysal ii , with the help of as - sa'id , ruled until the military coup of abd al - karim al - qasim on july 14 , 1958 .

qasim was ousted in february 1963 by a baath party - military alliance .

since that same year , the baath party has ruled in syria , although there was rivalry between the syrian and iraqi baath regimes during saddam's rule .

the baath party was founded in the 1940s by lebanese christian philosopher michel aflaq as a socialist , pan - arab movement , the aim of which was to reduce religious and sectarian schisms among arabs .

one of the baath party's allies in the february 1963 coup was abd al - salam al - arif .

in november 1963 , arif purged the baath , including prime minister ( and military officer ) ahmad hasan al - bakr , and instituted direct military rule .

arif was killed in a helicopter crash in 1966 and was replaced by his elder brother , abd al - rahim al - arif .

following the baath seizure of power in 1968 , bakr returned to government as president of iraq and saddam hussein , a civilian , became the regime's number two — vice chairman of the revolutionary command council .

in that position , saddam developed overlapping security services to monitor loyalty among the population and within iraq's institutions , including the military .

on july 17 , 1979 , the aging al - bakr resigned at saddam's urging , and saddam became president of iraq .

under saddam , secular shiites held high party positions , but sunnis , mostly from saddam's home town of tikrit , dominated the highest positions .

saddam's regime repressed iraq's shiites after the february 1979 islamic revolution in neighboring iran partly because iraq feared that iraqi shiite islamist movements , emboldened by iran , would try to establish an iranian - style islamic republic of iraq .

prior to the january 16 , 1991 , launch of operation desert storm to reverse iraq's august 1990 invasion of kuwait , president george h.w .

bush called on the iraqi people to overthrow saddam .

that administration decided not to try to do so militarily because ( 1 ) the united nations had approved only liberating kuwait ; ( 2 ) arab states in the coalition opposed an advance to baghdad ; and ( 3 ) the administration feared becoming embroiled in a potentially high - casualty occupation .

within days of the war's end ( february 28 , 1991 ) , shiite muslims in southern iraq and kurds in northern iraq , emboldened by the regime's defeat and the hope of u.s. support , rebelled .

the shiite revolt nearly reached baghdad , but the mostly sunni muslim republican guard forces were pulled back into iraq before engaging u.s. forces and were intact to suppress the rebellion .

many iraqi shiites blamed the united states for not intervening on their behalf .

iraq's kurds , benefitting from a u.s. - led "no fly zone" set up in april 1991 , drove iraqi troops out of much of northern iraq and remained autonomous thereafter .

the thrust of subsequent u.s. policy was containment through u.n. security council - authorized weapons inspections , an international economic embargo , and u.s. - led enforcement of no fly zones over both northern and southern iraq .

president george h.w .

bush reportedly supported efforts to promote a military coup as a way of producing a favorable government without fragmenting iraq .

after a reported july 1992 coup failed , he shifted to supporting ( with funds ) the kurdish , shiite , and other oppositionists that were coalescing into a broad movement .

several senior bush administration officials had long been advocates of a regime change policy toward iraq , but the difficulty of that strategy led the bush administration initially to continue its predecessor's containment policy .

some believe the september 11 attacks provided administration officials justification to act on longstanding plans to confront iraq militarily .

during its first year , the administration tried to prevent an asserted erosion of containment of iraq by achieving u.n. security council adoption ( resolution 1409 , may 14 , 2002 ) of a "smart sanctions" plan .

the plan relaxed u.n. - imposed restrictions on exports to iraq of purely civilian equipment in exchange for renewed international commitment to enforce the u.n. ban on exports to iraq of militarily useful goods .

bush administration policy on iraq clearly became an active regime change effort after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

in president bush's state of the union message on january 29 , 2002 , given as major combat in the u.s. - led war on the taliban and al qaeda in afghanistan was winding down , he characterized iraq as part of an "axis of evil" ( with iran and north korea ) .

some u.s. officials , particularly then - deputy defense secretary paul wolfowitz , asserted that the united states needed to respond to the september 11 , 2001 attacks by "ending states," such as iraq , that support terrorist groups .

vice president cheney visited the middle east in march 2002 reportedly to consult regional leaders about confronting iraq militarily , although the arab leaders opposed war with iraq and urged greater u.s. attention to the arab - israeli dispute .

some accounts , including the books plan of attack and state of denial by bob woodward ( published in april 2004 and september 2006 , respectively ) , say that then secretary of state powell , central intelligence agency experts , and others were concerned about the potential consequences of an invasion of iraq , particularly the difficulties of building a democracy after major hostilities ended .

other accounts include the mid - 2002 "downing street memo" — a paper by british intelligence officials , based on conversations with u.s. officials — saying that the administration was seeking information to justify war against iraq .

president bush and then - british prime minister tony blair deny this .

 ( on december 20 , 2001 , the house passed h.j.res .

75 , 392-12 , calling iraq's refusal to readmit u.n. weapons inspectors a "mounting threat." ) .

the primary theme in the bush administration's public case for the need to confront iraq was that iraq posted a "grave and gathering" threat that should be blunted before the threat became urgent .

the basis of that assertion in u.s. intelligence remains under debate .

wmd threat perception .

senior u.s. officials , including president bush , particularly in an october 2002 speech in cincinnati , asserted the following about iraq's wmd: ( 1 ) that iraq had worked to rebuild its wmd programs in the nearly four years since u.n. weapons inspectors left iraq and had failed to comply with 16 u.n. previous resolutions that demanded complete elimination of all of iraq's wmd programs ; ( 2 ) that iraq had used chemical weapons against its own people ( the kurds ) and against iraq's neighbors ( iran ) , implying that iraq would not necessarily be deterred from using wmd against the united states ; and ( 3 ) that iraq could transfer its wmd to terrorists , particularly al qaeda , for use in potentially catastrophic attacks in the united states .

critics noted that , under the u.s. threat of retaliation , iraq did not use wmd against u.s. troops in the 1991 gulf war .

a "comprehensive" september 2004 report of the iraq survey group , known as the "duelfer report," found no wmd stockpiles or production but said that there was evidence that the regime retained the intention to reconstitute wmd programs in the future .

the formal u.s. - led wmd search ended december 2004 , although u.s. forces have found some chemical weapons left from the iran - iraq war .

unmovic's work was formally terminated by u.n. security council resolution 1762 ( june 29 , 2007 ) .

links to al qaeda .

iraq was designated a state sponsor of terrorism during 1979-1982 and was again so designated after its 1990 invasion of kuwait .

although they did not assert that saddam hussein's regime was directly involved in the september 11 attacks , senior u.s. officials asserted that saddam's regime was linked to al qaeda , in part because of the presence of pro - al qaeda militant leader abu musab al - zarqawi in northern iraq .

although this issue is still debated , the report of the 9 / 11 commission found no evidence of a "collaborative operational linkage" between iraq and al qaeda .

a march 2008 study by the institute for defense analyses for the joint forces command , based on 600,000 documents found in post - saddam iraq , found no direct ties between al qaeda and saddam's regime .

 ( see crs report rl32217 , al qaeda in iraq: assessment and outside links , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

u.s. goals are for a unified , democratic , and federal iraq that can sustain , govern , and defend itself and is an ally in the global war on islamic militancy .

the formal political transition from the saddam regime to representative government is largely completed , but tensions remain among the dominant shiite arabs , sunni arabs that have been displaced from their former perch in iraqi politics , and the kurds who fear renewed oppression by all of iraq's arabs .

there are also substantial schisms within these communities .

since the fall of saddam hussein , a total of about $50 billion has been appropriated for reconstruction funding ( including security forces ) .

a major source of reconstruction funds was the iraq relief and reconstruction fund .

about $20.9 billion was appropriated for the irrf in two supplemental appropriations: fy2003 supplemental , p.l .

108-11 , which appropriated about $2.5 billion ; and the fy2004 supplemental appropriations , p.l .

108-106 , which provided about $18.42 billion .

however , as violence began to diminish in late 2007 and 2008 , the bush administration concurred with the substantial bipartisan sentiment that iraq , flush with oil revenues , should begin assuming the financial burden for its own reconstruction and security costs .

since fy2008 , u.s. aid to iraq , particularly aid to the isf , has fallen sharply .

in fy2009 , including an fy2009 supplemental appropriation ( h.r .

2346 , p.l .

111-32 ) , about $609 million in civilian economic aid was provided , and $500 million for such functions were requested for fy2010 ( and appropriated in p.l .

111-117 ) .

for more detailed breakdowns of u.s. aid to iraq , see crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

the irrf funds were spent as follows: $5.03 billion for security and law enforcement ; $1.315 billion for justice , public safety , infrastructure , and civil society ( some funds from this category discussed above ) ; $1.014 billion for democracy ( breakdown is in the above section ) ; $4.22 billion for electricity sector ; $1.724 billion for oil infrastructure ; $2.131 billion for water resources and sanitation ; $469 million for transportation and communications ; $333.7 million for roads , bridges , and construction ; $746 million for health care ; $805 million for private sector development ( includes $352 million in debt relief ) ; $410 million for education , refugees , human rights , democracy , and governance ( includes $99 million for education ) ; and $213 million for usaid administrative expenses .

since the fall of saddam hussein , the united states has employed a multi - faceted approach to securing iraq .

in late 2006 , the effort was determined by the administration to be faltering as violence and u.s. casualties escalated .

however , a strategy revision in january 10 , 2007 , a so - called "troop surge," took advantage of an iraqi sunni turn against hard - line militants and paved the way for a quieting of the security environment .

in february 2009 , president obama announced a winding down of u.s. military involvement in iraq by the end of 2011 , although some senior u.s. military officers assert that the iraqi government might require , and might request , a continued u.s. military training and advisory presence after that time .

u.s. military headquarters in baghdad ( combined joint task force - 7 , cjtf - 7 ) is a multi - national headquarters "multinational force - iraq , mnf - i," is headed as of september 2008 , by general raymond odierno .

his predecessor , gen. david petraeus , took over as head of u.s. central command ( centcom ) on october 31 , 2008 .

a key question is what options the obama administration might consider if security in iraq deteriorates as the united states reduces its military and political involvement there .

on the other hand , the u.s. withdrawal plan appears set and very few observers have been advancing any new u.s. options for iraq policy .

the iraq study group report , produced in late 2006 , was seen by some as offering recommendations that were later adopted and assisted policy formation .

among the most significant of the 79 recommendations , some of which were discussed previously and many of which came to be adopted by the bush administration , are the following: transition from u.s. - led combat to iraqi security self - reliance ( recommendations 40-45 ) , with continued u.s. combat against aq - i , force protection , and training and equipping the isf .

the "troop surge" strategy rejected an early transition to isf - led combat , but the bush administration noted that the iraq study group expressed support for a temporary surge .

heightened regional and international diplomacy , including with iran and syria , and including the holding of a major international conference in baghdad ( recommendations 1-12 ) .

after appearing to reject this recommendation , the bush administration later backed a regional diplomatic process , as discussed .

as part of an international approach , renewed commitment to arab - israeli peace ( recommendations 13-17 ) .

this was not a major feature of president bush's 2007 iraq plan , although he later stepped up u.s. diplomacy on that issue .

additional economic , political , and military support for the stabilization of afghanistan ( recommendation 18 ) .

this was not specified in president bush's iraq plan , although , separately , there were increases in u.s. troops and aid for afghanistan .

the obama administration has placed significant weight on this recommendation .

 ( see crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

setting benchmarks for the iraqi government to achieve political reconciliation , security , and governance , including possibly withholding some u.s. support if the iraqi government refuses or fails to do so ( recommendations 19-37 ) .

the bush administration at first opposed reducing support for the iraqi government if it failed to uphold commitments , but president bush signed p.l .

110-28 , which linked u.s. economic aid to progress on the benchmarks .

giving greater control over police and police commando units to the iraqi ministry of defense , which is considered less sectarian than the ministry of interior that controls these forces ( recommendations 50-61 ) .

these recommendations were not adopted .

securing and expanding iraq's oil sector ( recommendations 62-63 ) .

the united states has consistently prodded iraq to pass the pending oil laws , which would encourage foreign investment in iraq's energy sector .

increasing economic aid to iraq and enlisting more international donations of assistance ( recommendations 64-67 ) .

president bush's 2007 security plan increased aid , as discussed above , although u.s. aid is now being reduced because of improved iraqi financial capabilities .

in the 110 th congress , an amendment to h.r .

2764 , the fy2008 foreign aid bill , would have revived the iraq study group ( providing $1 million for its operations ) to help assess future policy after the "troop surge. .

the provision was not incorporated into the consolidated appropriation ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

in the senate , some senators from both parties in june 2007 proposed legislation ( s. 1545 ) to adopt the recommendations of the group as u.s. policy .

the sections below discuss options that were under discussion before the iraq study group report , the troop surge , or the november 2008 u.s. presidential election .

some argued that the "surge" was too limited — concentrated mainly in baghdad and anbar — and that the united states should have increased troops levels in iraq even further to prevent sunni insurgents from re - infiltrating cleared areas .

this option faded during 2008 because of progress produced by the surge , and virtually no expert or official argues for this option at this time .

however , some believe president obama might revisit this question if security deteriorates sharply as u.s. troops in iraq thin out , although most observers believe that the united states is not likely to send additional troops to iraq once a major drawdown has begun in earnest .

the bush administration consistently opposed this option , arguing that the isf were not ready to secure iraq alone and that doing so would result in full - scale civil war , possible collapse of the elected iraqi government , revival of aq - i activities , emboldening of al qaeda more generally , and increased involvement of regional powers in the fighting in iraq .

supporters of the bush administration position said that al qaeda terrorists might "follow us home" — conduct attacks in the united states — if there were a rapid withdrawal .

those who advocated rapid withdrawal maintained that the decision to invade iraq was a mistake , that the large u.s. presence in iraq could reignite the insurgency , and that u.s. forces are still policing a civil war .

those who supported an immediate withdrawal include most of the approximately 70 members of the "out of iraq congressional caucus," formed in june 2005 .

some members of this group have criticized the obama draw - down plan as too slow , and questioned why as many as 50,000 u.s. forces would remain after august 2010 .

in the 109 th congress , representative john murtha , ranking member ( now chairman ) of the defense appropriations subcommittee , introduced a resolution ( h.j.res .

73 ) calling for a u.s. withdrawal "at the earliest practicable date" and the maintenance of an "over the horizon" u.s. presence , mostly in kuwait , from which u.s. forces could continue to battle aq - i .

a related resolution , h.res .

571 , expressed the sense "that the deployment of u.s. forces in iraq be terminated immediately ; " it failed 403-3 on november 18 , 2005 .

the bush administration had long opposed mandating a withdrawal timetable on the grounds that doing so would allow insurgents to "wait out" a u.s. withdrawal .

the iraq study group suggested winding down of the u.s. combat mission by early 2008 but did not recommend a firm timetable .

forms of this option exhibited some support in congress .

iraqi leaders also long opposed a timetable , but their growing confidence caused maliki to negotiate a relatively firm withdrawal timetable in the security agreement .

various legislation to require a u.s. withdrawal timetable did not become law .

a binding provision of an fy2007 supplemental appropriations legislation ( h.r .

1591 ) required the president , as a condition of maintaining u.s. forces in iraq , to certify ( by july 1 , 2007 ) that iraq had made progress toward several political reconciliation benchmarks , and by october 1 , 2007 that the benchmarks have been met .

even if the requirements were met , the amendment would require the start of a redeployment from iraq by march 1 , 2008 , to be completed by september 1 , 2008 .

the bill passed the house on march 23 , 2007 .

the senate - passed version of h.r .

1591 set a non - binding goal for u.s. withdrawal of march 1 , 2008 .

the conference report retained the benchmark certification requirement and the same dates for the start of a withdrawal but made the completion of any withdrawal ( by march 31 , 2008 , not september 1 , 2008 ) a goal rather than a firm deadline .

president bush vetoed the conference report on may 1 , 2007 , and the veto was sustained .

the revised provision in the fy2007 supplemental ( p.l .

110-28 ) is discussed above .

a house bill , ( h.r .

2956 ) , which mandated a beginning of withdrawal within 120 days and completion by april 1 , 2008 , was adopted on july 12 , 2007 by a vote of 223-201 .

a proposed amendment ( s.amdt .

2087 ) to h.r .

1585 contained a similar provision .

on november 13 , 2007 , some in congress revived the idea , in an fy2008 supplemental appropriation ( h.r .

4156 ) , of setting a target date ( december 15 , 2008 ) for completion of a u.s. withdrawal , except for force protection and "counter - terrorism" operations .

the bill passed the house but cloture was not invoked in the senate .

the debate over a timetable for withdrawal continued in consideration of an fy2008 supplemental appropriation , but was not included in the enacted version ( p.l .

110-252 ) .

in the 109 th congress , the timetable issue was debated extensively .

in november 2005 , senator levin introduced an amendment to s. 1042 ( fy2006 defense authorization bill ) to compel the administration to work on a timetable for withdrawal during 2006 .

then - chairman of the senate armed services committee john warner subsequently submitted a related amendment that stopped short of setting a timetable for withdrawal but required an administration report on a "schedule for meeting conditions" that could permit a u.s. withdrawal .

that measure achieved bi - partisan support , passing 79-19 , and was incorporated into the conference report on the bill ( h.rept .

109-360 , p.l .

109-163 ) .

on june 22 , 2006 , the senate debated two iraq - related amendments to an fy2007 defense authorization bill ( s. 2766 ) .

one , offered by senator kerry , setting a july 1 , 2007 , deadline for u.s. redeployment from iraq , was defeated 86-13 .

another , sponsored by senator levin , called on the administration to begin redeployment out of iraq by the end of 2006 , but with no deadline for full withdrawal .

it was defeated 60-39 .

some have long argued that the united states should not be policing iraqi cities and should instead scale back its mission to: ( 1 ) operations against aq - i ; ( 2 ) an end to active patrolling of iraqi streets ; ( 3 ) force protection ; and ( 4 ) training the isf .

this option appears to be encapsulated in president obama's announcement of february 27 , 2009 .

in mid - 2008 , the previous u.s. administration had judged that security conditions had improved to the point where the u.s. mission could be reduced gradually to an "overwatch" posture focused on supporting and training iraqi forces rather than taking the lead on combat operations .

the mission change idea was incorporated into the security agreement , which requires u.s. forces to pull out of iraqi urban areas by june 30 , 2009 .

in 2007 , some members maintained that the bush administration should plan for a withdrawal if one were decided .

bush administration officials said they would not publicly discuss the existence or form of such planning because doing so would undermine current policy .

however , secretary of defense gates toured facilities in kuwait in august 2007 in what was reported as an effort to become familiar with the capabilities of the u.s. military to carry out a redeployment .

then senator hillary clinton reportedly was briefed on august 2 , 2007 by defense department officials on the status of planning for a withdrawal , and she later introduced legislation on august 2 , 2007 ( s. 1950 ) , to require contingency planning for withdrawal .

in the house , h.r .

3087 ( passed by the house on october 2 , 2007 by a vote of 377-46 ) would have required the administration to give congress a plan for redeployment from iraq .

as noted above , many of the iraq study group recommendations proposed increased regional and international diplomacy .

one idea , included in the study group report , was to form a "contact group" of major countries and iraqi neighbors to prevail on iraq's factions to compromise .

the bush administration took significant steps in this direction , including the multilateral and bilateral meetings on iraq discussed above .

some experts expected the obama administration to continue this trend , but the international and regional dimension of the iraq stabilization mission has faded since 2008 as iraq has stabilized and as the obama administration has indicated a wind down of the mission .

some argue , however , that the regional dimension is even more crucial now to compensate for and address possible deterioration that will follow the u.s. drawdown .

in the 110 th congress , a few bills ( h.r .

744 , h.con.res .

43 , and h.con.res .

45 ) support the iraq study group recommendation for an international conference on iraq .

in the 109 th congress , these ideas were included in several resolutions , including s.j.res .

36 , s.res .

470 , s.j.res .

33 , and s. 1993 , although several of these bills included timetables for a u.s. withdrawal .

other ideas involved recruitment of new force donors .

in july 2004 , then - secretary of state powell said the united states would consider a saudi proposal for a contingent of troops from muslim countries to perform peacekeeping in iraq , reportedly under separate command .

some iraqi leaders believed that such peacekeepers would come from sunni muslim states and would inevitably favor sunni factions within iraq .

with international partners now departing , such ideas are not widely discussed among experts .

another idea was to identify a high - level international mediator to negotiate with iraq's major factions .

some members of congress wrote to president bush in november 2006 asking that he name a special envoy to iraq to follow up on some of the administration's efforts to promote political reconciliation in iraq .

this proposal faded as security stabilized in 2008 .

some experts say that iraq's legislative achievements and security improvements have not produced lasting political reconciliation and that , at some point , iraq will again see high levels of violence .

were that to occur , some might argue that the obama administration will need to press iraqis to overhaul the political structure to create durable political reconciliation .

some believe that the existing iraqi government should be reorganized by the united states to be more inclusive of resentful groups , particularly the sunni arabs .

however , there is little agreement on what additional or alternative incentives , if any , would persuade sunnis leaders and their constituents to fully support a government that is headed by shiites .

sunni resentment is unlikely to ease because shiite domination is likely to continue following the scheduled 2010 national elections for a new national assembly .

some have believed that sunni arabs might be satisfied by a wholesale cabinet / governmental reshuffle that gives several leading positions , such as that of president , to a sunni arab , although many kurds might resent such a move because the kurds expect to hold onto that post .

the ability of the u.s. to determine a new power structure might be limited , even if there were a decision by president obama to try to do so .

some maintain that sunni grievances can be addressed in the constitutional review process under way .

others oppose u.s. - led governmental change because doing so might appear to be un - democratic .

some argue that iraq could adopt the "lebanon model" in which major positions are formally allotted to representatives of major factions .

for example , iraqis might agree that henceforth , the president might be a sunni , the prime minister might be shiite , and the cor speaker might be kurdish , or some combination of these allocations .

some believe such as system has worked relatively well in lebanon helping it avoid all out civil war since the late 1980s , although others argue that lebanon is perpetually unstable and that this model is not necessarily successful .

another view expressed by some is that the united states should place all its political , military , and economic support behind the mainstream shiite and kurdish factions that have all along been the most supportive of the u.s. - led overthrow of saddam .

according to this view , sometimes referred to as the "80% solution" ( shiites and kurds are about 80% of the population ) , most sunni arabs will never fully accept the new order in iraq and the united states should cease trying to pressure the shiites and arabs to try to satisfy them .

opponents of this strategy say that it is no longer needed because sunnis have now begun cooperating with the united states , and are beginning to reconcile with the shiites and kurds .

others say this is unworkable because the shiites have now fractured , and the united states now supports one group of shiites against another — the sadrists and their allies .

these factors demonstrate , according to those with this view , that it is possible to build a multi - sectarian multi - ethnic government in iraq .

others say that iraq's sunni neighbors will not accept a complete u.s. tilt toward the shiites and kurds , which would likely result in even further repression of the sunni arab minority .

still others say that a further u.s. shift in favor of the shiites and kurds would contradict the u.s. commitment to the protection of iraq's minorities .

at the height of the violence in iraq in 2006 and 2007 , some maintained that iraq could not be permanently stabilized as one country and should be broken up , or "hard partitioned," into three separate countries: one kurdish , one sunni arab , and one shiite arab .

this option is widely opposed by a broad range of iraqi parties as likely to produce substantial violence as iraq's major communities separate physically , and that the resulting three countries would be unstable and too small to survive without domination by iraq's neighbors .

others view this as a u.s. attempt not only to usurp iraq's sovereignty but to divide the arab world and thereby enhance u.s. regional domination .

still others view any version of this idea , including the less dramatic derivations discussed below , as unworkable because of the high percentage of mixed sunni - shiite arab families in iraq that some say would require "dividing bedrooms. .

this recommendation was rejected by the iraq study group as potentially too violent .

a derivation of the partition idea , propounded by senator ( now vice president - elect ) joseph biden and council on foreign relations expert leslie gelb ( may 1 , 2006 , new york times op - ed ) , as well as others , is forming — or allowing iraqis to form — three autonomous regions , dominated by each of the major communities .

a former u.s .

ambassador and adviser to the kurds , peter galbraith , as well as others , advocates this option , which some refer to as a "soft partition," but which supporters of the plan say is implementation of the federalism already enshrined in iraq's constitution .

according to this view , decentralizing iraq into autonomous zones would ensure that iraq's territorial integrity is preserved while ensuring that these communities do not enter all - out civil war with each other .

others say that decentralization is already de - facto u.s. policy as exhibited by the increasing transfer of authority to sunni tribes in the sunni areas and the relative lack of u.s. troops in the shiite south .

proponents of the idea say that options such as this were successful in other cases , particularly in the balkans , in alleviating sectarian conflict .

proponents add that the idea is a means of bypassing the logjam and inability to reconcile that characterizes national politics in iraq .

some believe that , to alleviate iraqi concerns about equitable distribution of oil revenues , an international organization should be tapped to distribute iraq's oil revenues .

opponents of the idea say it was proposed for expediency — to allow the united states to withdraw from iraq without establishing a unified and strong central government that can defend itself .

still others say the idea does not take sufficient account of iraq's sense of iraq national identity , which , despite all difficulties , is still expressed to a wide range of observers and visitors .

others maintain that any soft partition of iraq would inevitably evolve into drives by the major communities for outright independence .

observers in the balkans say that the international community had initially planned to preserve a central government of what was yugoslavia , but that this became untenable and yugoslavia was broken up into several countries .

others say , drawing some support from recent events between turkey and the iraqi kurds , that the autonomous regions of a decentralized iraq would inevitably fall under the sway of iraq's neighbors .

still others say that , no matter how the concept is implemented , there will be substantial bloodshed as populations move into areas where their sect or group predominates .

the federalism , or decentralization , plan gained strength with the passage of on september 26 , 2007 , of an amendment to the senate version of h.r .

4986 ( p.l .

110-181 ) , an fy2008 defense authorization bill .

the amendment passed 75-23 ( to h.r .

1585 , the original version that was vetoed over other issues ) , showing substantial bipartisan support .

it is a "sense of congress" that states that: the united states should actively support a political settlement , based on the "final provisions" of the iraqi constitution ( reflecting the possibility of major amendments , to the constitution , as discussed above ) , that creates a federal iraq and allows for federal regions .

a conference of iraqis should be convened to reach a comprehensive political settlement based on the federalism law approved by the cor in october 2006 .

the amendment does not specify how many regions should be formed or that regions would correspond to geographic areas controlled by major iraqi ethnicities or sects .

subsequently , with the exception of the kurds and some other iraqi arab officials , many of the main blocs in iraq , jointly and separately , came out in opposition to the amendment on some of the grounds discussed above , although many of the iraqi statements appeared to refer to the amendment as a "partition" plan , an interpretation that proponents of the amendment say is inaccurate .

a u.s. embassy iraq statement on the amendment also appeared to mischaracterize the legislation , saying "as we have said in the past , attempts to partition or divide iraq by intimidation , force , or other means into three separate states would produce extraordinary suffering and bloodshed .

the united states has made clear our strong opposition to such attempts. .

some iraqis criticized the visit of vice president biden during july 3-5,2009 for his former support for the federalism concept , although u.s. officials publicly responded by saying the idea of segregating iraq into three autonomous regions is not u.s. policy .

another option that received substantial discussion in 2007 , a time of significant u.s. criticism of maliki's failure to achieve reconciliation , is for the united states to oust maliki , either through force or by influencing the cor to vote no confidence in his government .

some believe maliki should be replaced by a military strongman , or by someone more inclined to reach compromise with the restive sunni arabs .

this option could imply that the united states might express support for those parliamentary blocs opposed to maliki .

some say former prime minister allawi still is trying to position himself as an alternative figure , claiming that his term in office was characterized by non - sectarianism and rule of law .

possibly in part because maliki has emerged as a stronger leader than initially observed , experts in the united states see no concrete signs that such an option might be under consideration by president obama .

using u.s. influence to force out maliki would , in the view of many , conflict with the u.s. goal of promoting democracy and rule of law in iraq .

others say the planned u.s. draw - down has reduced u.s. influence to the point where the united states could not implement this option , even if such a decision were made to do so .

some believe that the key to permanently calming iraq is to accelerate economic reconstruction .

accelerated reconstruction could , in this view , drain support for insurgents by creating employment , improving public services , and creating confidence in the government .

this idea was incorporated into the president's january 10 , 2007 , initiative .

others doubt that economic improvement alone would produce major political results because the differences among iraq's major communities are fundamental and resistant to economic solutions .

another idea has been to set up an iraqi fund , or trust , that would ensure that all iraqis share equitably in iraq's oil wealth .

in an op - ed in the wall street journal ( december 18 , 2006 ) then senator hillary clinton and senator john ensign supported the idea of an "iraq oil trust" modeled on the alaska permanent fund .

the two put this idea forward in legislation on september 11 , 2008 , ( s. 3470 ) .

many members believe that iraq , now relatively flush with revenues and unspent assets , should begin assuming more of the financial burden for iraq and that the united states should sharply cut back reconstruction funding for iraq .

some members advocate that any or all u.s. reconstruction funding for iraq be provided as loan , not grant .

a similar provision to make about half of the $18 billion in u.s. reconstruction funds in the fy2004 supplemental ( p.l .

108-106 ) , discussed above , was narrowly defeated ( october 16 , 2003 , amendment defeated 226-200 ) .

a provision of the fy2009 defense authorization ( p.l .

110-417 ) calls for u.s. - iraq negotiations for iraq to defray some u.s. combat costs , a provision to which the administration took exception in its signing statement on the bill .

the administration argues that iraq is already assuming more of the burden , and , as discussed above , u.s. assistance to iraq has dropped sharply since fy2007 .

