on january 23 , 2004 , president bush signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( h.r .

2673 ; p.l .

108-199 ) , which included the conference version of thetransportation , treasury and independent agencies appropriations bill ( division f ) ; thehouse had passed the bill on december 8 , 2003 , the senate on january 22 , 2004 .

transportation - treasury conferees agreed on a total of $89.8 billion ; the act includes anacross - the - board rescission of 0.59% ( the figures in this report do not reflect the impact of thatrescission ) .

the act also includes an additional $1.1 billion in funding for transportation andelection reform projects , located in division h ( "miscellanous appropriations and offsets" ) .

on november 21 , 2003 , congress passed the fourth continuing resolution for fy2004 funding , extending funding for those programs whose fy2004 appropriations bills had not already beenpassed by congress to january 31 , 2004 .

on october 23 , the senate passed its version of the fy2004 transportation , treasury and independent agencies appropriation bill .

the committee recommended $91.0 billion , $5.1 billionmore than the administration requested .

the major financial change from the administrationrequest was an additional $4.5 billion in highway funding .

on september 9 , 2003 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

2989 , the fy2004 transportation , treasury and independent agencies appropriation bill .

the bill provides$85.8 billion .

key financial differences from the administration request include an additional $4.4billion in highway funding ; another major difference , the deletion of the $3.4 billion for grants - in - aidto airports , was the result of a point of order against funding the administrative expenses of theprogram from contract authority .

 table 6 .

title ii: department of the treasuryappropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures were taken from an fy2004 transportation - treasury appropriationsbill conference report budget authority table provided by the house committee onappropriations .

a .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 contains an across - the - boardrescission of 0.59% ; that rescission is not reflected in these figures .

 table 7 .

title iii: united states postal serviceappropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures were taken from an fy2004 transportation - treasury appropriations billconference report budget authority table provided by the house committee onappropriations .

note: the senate table of budget authority lists the postal service appropriation under the"related agencies" ( "independent agencies" in the senate report ) title , rather than as aseparate title .

the conference report table follows this convention .

a .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 contains an across - the - board rescission of0.59% ; that rescission is not reflected in these figures .

the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) generates nearly all of its funding - - about $67 billion - - annually through the sale of products and services .

it does receive aregular appropriation from congress , however , to compensate for revenue it forgoesin providing , at congressional direction , free mailing privileges for the blind andvisually impaired and for overseas voting .

under the revenue forgone reform actof 1993 , congress is required to reimburse usps $29 million each year until 2035,for services performed but not paid for in the 1990s ( for more information , see crs report rs21025 , the postal revenue forgone appropriation: overview andcurrent issues ) .

the terrorist attacks in the fall of 2001 , however , including use ofthe mail for delivery of anthrax spores to congressional and media offices , generatednew funding needs that usps contends should be met through appropriations .

in fy2003 , usps received a revenue forgone appropriation of $59.6 million , including $30.8 million for revenue forgone in fy2003 but not payable until october1 , 2003 , and the $29 million ( $28.8 after rescission ) due annually under the revenueforgone reform act of 1993 .

in its fy2004 budget , the administration proposed an appropriation of $55.7 million for revenue forgone in fiscal 2004 , and $29 million for the fy2003installment under the revenue forgone reform act of 1993 - - reduced by $19.2million as a reconciliation adjustment to reflect actual versus estimated free mailvolume in 2001 - - for a total of $65.5 million .

of this amount , $36.5 million wouldnot be available for obligation until october 1 , 2004 , which is in fy2005 .

however,usps will also have available for obligation during fy2004 the $31 millionprovided for revenue forgone in fiscal 2002 , for a total of $60 million .

in its fy2002budget , the bush administration had proposed to "reverse the misleading budgetpractice of using advance appropriations simply to avoid [annual] spendinglimitations. .

the administration did not renew the proposal in its fy2003 orfy2004 budgets .

in its detailed justification of its fy2004 budget request , usps asked congress for an additional $350 million ( above the omb proposal of $65.5 million ) inemergency response funds to protect the safety of employees and customers fromthreats such as the 2001 anthrax attack .

the funds would be used to continueacquisition and deployment of ventilation and filtration equipment that was begunwith $762 million provided in fy2002 specifically for emergency response .

neitherthe administration's fy2003 budget nor its fy2004 budget included any additionalfunds for emergency preparedness for the postal service .

as a condition to receivingthe largest part of its previous emergency response funding , on march 6 , 2002 uspssubmitted to its oversight and appropriations committees an emergency preparednessplan to combat the threat of biological and chemical substances in the mail .

 ( 19 ) themarch 6 , 2002 emergency preparedness plan did identify substantial neededappropriations of $799.8 million for fy2003 , and $897.5 million for fy2004 .

both the house and the senate versions of the fy2004 bill ( h.r .

2989 ) mirrored the administration's request , providing $60 million for fy2004,made up of $29 million for past revenue forgone , and $31 million payable in fy2004though appropriated in the fy2003 law .

the house and the senate also provided$36.5 million as an advance appropriation for revenue forgone to be payable infy2005 , a provision carried through in the end - of - session consolidatedappropriations bill .

neither committee's report referred to the postal service'ssupplementary request for bio - terrorism prevention .

both versions of the bill and thefinal consolidated appropriations act , 2004 continue long - standing languageforbidding usps to reduce service below the six - day delivery and rural deliverystandards that have prevailed since 1983 , or to close rural or other small post officesduring fy2004 .

the end - of - session consolidated appropriations act ( h.r.2673 ; p.l .

108-199 ) also contained a provision ( division f , title v , section541 ) amending 39 u.s.c .

414 ( h ) to extend the authorized sales period for the breastcancer research semi - postal stamp .

sales of the stamp , which fund research into acure for breast cancer , had been authorized only through december 31 , 2003 .

theamendment extends the sales authorization through december 31 , 2005 .

the administration's budget also contained a proposal to correct an anticipated over - funding of usps obligations for the retirement benefits of postal workers underthe civil service retirement system .

congress has passed legislation ( p.l .

108-18 ) to reduce the annual usps contribution to the civil service retirement anddisability fund , which will have the effect of saving usps $2.9 billion in fy2003and $2.6 billion in succeeding years .

for more on this legislation , see crs report rl31684 , funding postal service obligations to the civil service retirementsystem .

 table 8 .

title iv: executive office of the president ( eop ) and funds appropriated to the president appropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures were taken from an fy2004 transportation - treasury appropriations billconference report budget authority table provided by the house committee onappropriations .

a .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 contains an across - the - board rescission of0.59% ; that rescission is not reflected in these figures .

the transportation , treasury and general government appropriations bill funds all but three offices in the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

of thethree exceptions , the council on environmental quality and office of environmentalquality , and the office of science and technology policy are funded under theveterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agenciesappropriations ; and the office of the united states trade representative is fundedunder the commerce , justice , state , and the judiciary and related agenciesappropriations .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed to consolidate and financially realign several annual eop salaries and expenses appropriations that directly support thepresident into a single annual appropriation , called "the white house. .

thisconsolidated appropriation would total $183.8 million in fy2004 , a decrease of 3.0%from the $189.4 appropriated in fy2003 for the accounts proposed to beconsolidated .

the accounts included in the consolidated appropriation would be: compensation of the president white house office ( including resources for the office ofhomeland security ) executive residence / white house repair andrestoration office of policy development council of economic advisers national security council office of administration the budget stated that the consolidation "initiative provides enhanced flexibility in allocating resources and staff in support of the president and vice president , andpermits more rapid response to changing needs and priorities. .

 ( 20 ) the administrationproposed similar consolidations in the fy2002 and fy2003 budgets , but theconference committees for the treasury and general government appropriationsact , fy2002 ( p.l .

107-67 ) and fy2003 ( p.l .

108-7 , division j ) agreed to continuewith separate appropriations for the eop accounts .

a concern of the administrationhas been the "needless complexity [of different accounts] that adds expense , thatadds burdens , that adds administrative hurdles that they must go through toaccomplish anything. .

 ( 21 ) a concern of congressabout consolidation has been its"legitimate needs and desires to have oversight over spending of public funds. .

 ( 22 ) included with the fy2004 budget request for consolidation is a proposal for a title vi general provision that would provide for a 10% transfer authority among thefollowing accounts: the white house ( compensation of the president , white house office ( including the office of homeland security ) , executive residence,white house repair and restoration , office of administration , office of policydevelopment , national security council , council of economicadvisers ) office of management and budget office of national drug control policy special assistance to the president and official residence ofthe vice president ( transfers would be subject to the approval of the vicepresident ) council on environmental quality and office of environmentalquality office of science and technology policy office of the united states traderepresentative ( 23 ) according to the eop budget submission , the transfer authority would "allow the president to address , in a limited way , emerging priorities and shifting demands"and would "provide the president with flexibility , improve the efficiency of the eop,and reduce administrative burdens. .

 ( 24 ) the ombdirector , or such other officer as thepresident may designate , could , 15 days after giving notice to the senate and housecommittees on appropriations , transfer up to 10% of any appropriation to any otherappropriation , to be merged with , and available for , the same time and for the samepurposes as the appropriation to which transferred .

an appropriation could not beincreased by more than 50% by such transfers .

 ( 25 ) both the house and the senate committees on appropriations recommended and the law provides that separate appropriations for the eop accounts will becontinued and that the transfer authority proposal is not agreed to .

according to thecommittee report accompanying s. 1589 : last year , the committee gave this request considerable deliberation and concluded that the existing structure served thecommittee's and the public's need for transparency in the funding and operation ofthese important functions well .

the existing structure also provides the executivebranch with the flexibility it needs to reprogram funds within accounts to addressunforseen budget needs upon the notification and approval of the committee .

asnoted in discussions with administration officials in past years , at no time has thiscommittee rejected an administration's request to reprogram existing funds withinaccounts in this title .

 ( 26 ) eop offices funded through treasury and general government appropriations .

the president's fy2004budget for eop programs funded under the treasury and general governmentappropriations proposed an appropriation of $790.6 million , an increase of 1.7% overthe $777.0 million appropriated in fy2003 .

the fy2004 budget proposals forspecific accounts are discussed below .

compensation of the president .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $450,000 , whichincludes an expense allowance of $50,000 .

this is the same amount as wasappropriated in fy2003 .

the salary of the president is $400,000 per annum ,effective january 20 , 2001 .

the house and senate committees on appropriationsrecommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same amountas the president requested .

the law also amends 3 u.s.c .

102 to provide that anyunused amount of the expense allowance shall revert to the treasury pursuant to 31u.s.c .

1552 and that no amount of the allowance shall be included in the president'sgross income .

white house office ( who ) .

this account provides the president with staff assistance and administrative services .

thepresident's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $70.3 million , an increaseof 39.5% over the $50.4 million appropriated in fy2003 .

the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $66.057 million , of which $8.65 million would be forreimbursements to the white house communications agency .

the amount is $4.2million less than the president's request .

the reduction is taken from the office ofhomeland security funding which is included in the white house officeappropriation ( see below ) .

the committee again requests that the executive officeof the president , within 30 days of the act's enactment , provide "a detailed report onthe status of efforts to safely resume public tours of the white house. .

such a reporthad been requested in the 2003 appropriations bill , but the committee reportaccompanying h.r .

2989 states that the eop "provided a cursory,four - sentence 'report' that said very little about the status of efforts in this regard. .

 ( 27 ) ( this provision is not included in the conference agreement as the report has beensubmitted. ) .

the committee also directs that both the house and senate committees on appropriations receive a report on the renovations of the eisenhower executiveoffice building no later than november 15 , 2003 .

according to the committee reportaccompanying h.r .

2989 : on repeated occasions , the committee has sought specific answers to questions about the use of non - federal funds forrenovating and furnishing gsa facilities occupied by agencies of the executiveoffice of the president .

in particular , the committee believes more information isneeded on the use of non - federal funding for renovation and furnishing efforts for theeisenhower executive office building [eeob] , for which $65,757,000 is includedin this bill .

the committee directs eop to review and report on the use ofnon - federal funds for renovation and furnishings in the [eeob] .... should identifythe federal agency that coordinated the work funded by non - federal sources , thespecific sources and amounts of non - federal funding used , a description of eachproject , and an explanation of why non - federal funds were used in each specificinstance .

finally , the report should determine which agency's gift authority was usedto accept the contribution of non - federal funds and whether this authority was usedproperly .

given eop's reluctance to provide information on this subject thus far , aprovision is included in the bill prohibiting the obligation of more than $35,000,000on this project until this report is submitted to thecongress .

 ( 28 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed an appropriation of $61.9 million , "a decrease of $8,331,000 below the budgetestimate as funds requested under this account for the homeland security councilare provided in a separate account. .

 ( 29 ) of the total,$8.65 million would be availablefor reimbursements to the white house communications agency .

the law provides an appropriation of $69.168 million .

of the total , $8.65 million would be available for reimbursements to the white house communicationsagency .

office of homeland security ( ohs ) .

this office provides support and advice to the president andinteragency coordination of all aspects of homeland security , including theimplementation of the national strategy for homeland security .

the funding forohs is included in the white house office request .

of the $70.3 million requestedfor the who for fy2004 , $8.3 million is for the ohs .

the ohs fy2003appropriation was $19.3 million .

the homeland security council functionsestablished in the homeland security act of 2002 , p.l .

107-296 , are supported bythe ohs budget .

the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $4.1 million , which is $4.2 million less than the president'srequest of $8.3 million .

the committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 explained the recommendation as follows .

it is clear that most of [the responsibilities of ohs] have now been assumed by the secretary of the departmentof homeland security [dhs] .

although the administration has changed the "officeof homeland security" to the "homeland security council," it is not clear what workremains that cannot be effectively performed by the [dhs] .

although the committeeunderstands the president's need for policy support and advice , it is not clear whythat would require 66 staff , given the existence and support of the[dhs] .

 ( 30 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed the same appropriation as the president requested .

the committee did not approvefunding for the council within the white house office , believing that the council"should be funded as a separate account , which is consistent with the budgetarytreatment of its predecessor , the office of homeland security. .

 ( 31 ) the law provides an appropriation of $7.231 million and funds the council under the white house office .

executive residence ( white house ) operation and care .

these accounts provide for the care , maintenance , andoperation of the executive residence and its repair , alteration , and improvement .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an overall appropriation of $16.7 million for this account , an increase of 25.4% over the $13.3 million appropriated infy2003 .

for the executive residence , the budget proposed an appropriation of $12.5million , an increase of 2.9% over the $12.3 million appropriated in fy2003 .

forrepair and restoration of the white house , the budget proposed an appropriation of$4.2 million , an increase of 254.4% over the $1.2 million appropriated in fy2003 .

the eop budget submission states that the repair and restoration funding would beused to renovate various specific electrical , mechanical , and control systemcomponents ; replace two power servers ; and complete the second phase of therestoration of the east and west wing exterior .

 ( 32 ) maintenance and repair costs for the white house are also funded by the national park service as part of that agency's responsibility for national monuments.entertainment costs for state functions are funded by the department of state.reimbursable political events in the executive residence are to be paid for inadvance by the sponsor , and all such advance payments are to be credited to areimbursable expenses account .

the political party of the president is to deposit$25,000 to be available for expenses relating to reimbursable political events duringthe fiscal year .

reimbursements are to be separately accounted for and thesponsoring organizations billed , and charged interest , as appropriate .

the staff of theexecutive residence must report to the committees on appropriations , after theclose of each fiscal year , and maintain a tracking system on the reimbursableexpenses .

the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriations as the presidentrequested .

the house committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 statesthat the repair and restoration funds "will finance the ongoing restoration of the eastand west wing exterior ( $3,500,000 ) , replacement or repair of various electrical,mechanical , and control system components ( $530,000 ) , and replacement ofcomputer servers and backup power supplies ( $195,000 ) . .

 ( 33 ) special assistance to the president ( office of the vice president ) .

this account funds the vice president in carryingout the responsibilities assigned to him by the president and by law .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $4.5 million for salaries and expenses , an increase of 10.4% over the $4.0 million appropriated infy2003 .

according to the eop budget submission: an additional programmatic increase of $70,000 , or 1.7 percent was requested for costs associated with official vicepresidential travel .

since september 11 , 2001 , the vice president's travel has beenaugmented by travel to undisclosed locations for security purposes .

this travel is 100percent official ... ( 34 ) the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriation as the presidentrequested .

this funding level "will allow for 24 full - time permanent positions infiscal year 2004," according to the senate committee report accompanying s. 1589 .

 ( 35 ) the law places the appropriationat the end of the title asproposed by the house .

official residence of the vicepresident .

this account provides for the care and operation of thevice president's official residence and includes the operation of a gift fund for theresidence .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $331,000 for the operating expenses of the official residence , an increase of 2.8% over the $322,000appropriated in fy2003 .

the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriation as the presidentrequested .

in its report accompanying s. 1589 , the senate committeestated that it "has had a longstanding interest in the condition of the residence andexpects to be kept fully apprised by the vice president's office of any and allrenovations and alterations made to the residence by the navy. .

 ( 36 ) the law places theappropriation at the end of the title as proposed by the house .

council of economic advisers ( cea ) .

the three - member council was created in 1946 to assist andadvise the president in the formulation of economic policy .

the council analyzes andevaluates the national economy , economic developments , federal programs , andfederal policy to formulate economic advice .

the council assists in the preparationof the annual economic report of the president to congress .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $4.5 million , an increase of 20.4% over the $3.8 million appropriated in fy2003 .

the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $4 million , $502,000 less than the president's request .

thesenate committee on appropriations recommended , the senate passed , and the lawprovides the same appropriation as the president requested .

office of policy development .

the office supports and coordinates the domestic policy council ( dpc ) and thenational economic council ( nec ) in carrying out their responsibilities to advise andassist the president in formulating , coordinating , and implementing economic anddomestic policy .

the office also supports other policy development andimplementation initiatives .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $4.1 million , an increase of 27.2% over the $3.2 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total , anestimated $2.1 million supports the office of policy development's dpc functionsand $2.0 million supports the office's nec functions .

 ( 37 ) the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriation as the presidentrequested .

national security council ( nsc ) .

the nsc advises the president on integrating domestic , foreign , military,intelligence , and economic policies relating to national security .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $10.6 million , an increase of 35.8% over the $7.8 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total , $9.8million funds the operations of the nsc , including the office for combatingterrorism , and $741,000 funds the president's foreign intelligence advisoryboard .

 ( 38 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $9 million , $1.6 million less than the president's request .

thesenate committee on appropriations recommended , the senate passed , and the lawprovides the same appropriation as the president requested .

this funding level "willsupport 60 full - time equivalent positions , or the same since the fiscal year 1996 levelfor the normal activities of the nsc. .

 ( 39 ) office of administration .

the office of administration provides administrative services , including informationtechnology ; human resources management ; library and records management ; financial management ; and facilities , printing , and supply , to the executive officeof the president .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $77.2 million , a decrease of 15.1% from the $90.9 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total,$56.6 million is for salaries and expenses and $20.6 million is for capitalinvestment .

 ( 40 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $82.8 million of which $17.5 million would remain availableuntil expended for the capital investment plan for continued modernization of theinformation technology infrastructure within the eop .

this amount is $5.7 millionmore than the president's request .

the committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 stated that the "recommendation maintains funding tocontinue the core enterprise pilot program in this account ( +$8,258,000 ) andacknowledges program savings for security guard services provided to the office ofscience and technology policy ( - $1,096,000 ) and for information technologycontract services provided to the homeland security council ( - $1,500,000 ) . .

thecommittee also recommended continuation of the "pilot project to determinewhether economies of scale could be achieved through centralized procurement ofcertain common goods and services. .

 ( 41 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed the same appropriation as the president requested .

of the total , $20.578 millionwould remain available until expended for the capital investment plan for continuedmodernization of the information technology infrastructure within the eop .

theeop would submit a report to the committees on appropriations that includes acurrent description of ( 1 ) the enterprise architecture , as defined in omb circulara - 130 and the federal chief information officers council guidance ; ( 2 ) theinformation technology ( it ) human capital plan ; ( 3 ) the capital investment plan forimplementing the enterprise architecture ; and ( 4 ) the it capital planning andinvestment control process .

the report would be reviewed and approved by omb,and reviewed by gao .

in its report accompanying s. 1589 , thecommittee states its continuing support for the centralized procurement pilotproject , "but recommends funding for such items [information technology , rent,printing and reproduction , supplies and materials and equipment] in individualoffices within the eop until saving and other benefits are identified. .

 ( 42 ) the law provides the house - passed appropriation .

of the total , $20.578 million would remain available until expended for the capital investment plan for continuedmodernization of the information technology infrastructure within the eop .

the lawincludes funding for the core enterprise pilot program ( +$8,258,000 ) and reflectsreductions for security guard services provided to the office of science andtechnology policy ( - $1,096,000 ) and for information technology contract servicesprovided to the homeland security council ( - $1,500,000 ) .

the administration isencouraged to include all eop funds for the core enterprise pilot program under thisappropriation in the fy2005 budget request .

office of management and budget ( omb ) .

omb assists the president in discharging budgetary,management , and other executive responsibilities .

the agency's activities includepreparing the budget documents ; examining agency programs , budget requests , andmanagement activities ; preparing the government - wide financial management statusreport and five - year plan ( with the chief financial officer council ) ; reviewing andcoordinating agency regulatory proposals and information collection requirements ; and promoting economical , efficient , and effective procurement of property andservices for the executive branch .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $77.4 million , an increase of 24.9% over the $62.0 million appropriated in fy2003 .

according to theeop budget submission , "since the start of the administration , omb has maintaineda very tight budget" and "in light of constrained funding levels over the past twoyears , the majority of the increase in the fy2004 request will permit omb tocontinue current operations. .

 ( 43 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $62.8 million , $14.6 million less than the president's request .

savings would be derived from deferring proposed discretionary initiatives ( $2.4million ) , assuming 20 fewer staff years than budgeted ( $1.5 million ) , limitingreception and representation expenses to half of the budget estimated amount ( $1,500 ) , reducing funding for the office of information and regulatory affairs ( $2.5million ) , and transferring funds back to the pilot project on centralized procurementof common goods and services discussed under the office of administration ( $8.3million ) .

the committee also directs omb to the extent that omb establishes individual agency targets in its internal guidance [on competitive sourcing targets],the agency is directed within 30 days of establishing such targets , to submit a reportto the house and senate committees on appropriations that indicates each agency'scompetitive sourcing target .

the report should specifically detail the research andanalysis that was used in determining each agency's individual target , goal or quota .

to the extent that such targets change over time , omb is directed to maintain anup - to - date record of such changes and convey the changes periodically to the[appropriations committees] and the appropriate legislativecommittees .

[t]o submit a report to the house and senate committees on appropriations , not later than april 1 , 2004 , detailing theamount of federal funds used by federal grantees to pay dues , fees , or other types ofmembership costs to national associations or other types of professionalorganizations .

[t]o involve the house and senate committees on appropriations in the development of part [program assessmentrating tool] ratings [which rate the effectiveness of federal programs] at all stages inthe process .

 ( 44 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed an appropriation of $75.4 million , $2 million less than the president's request .

"[t]he reduction is manageable by limiting the growth for staff and professionaldevelopment," according to the committee report accompanying s. 1589 .

 ( 45 ) the committee also expressed its concern"that agencies are shieldingsignificant , influential data and related documents funded by the federal governmentfrom the requirements of the federal data quality act [fdqa]" and "directs theadministrator of the office of information and regulatory affairs [oira] to submita report to the house and senate committees on appropriations not later than 30days on how guidelines to agencies may be updated to address these concerns andimprove the transparency of agency science. .

expressing strong support for thetruman scholarship program , the committee directs the program's board "to strictlyadhere to its statutory mandate to assure that at least one truman scholar shall beselected each year from each state in which there is at least one resident applicantwho meets the minimum criteria established by the foundation. .

 ( 46 ) the law provides an appropriation of $67.159 million and includes the following instructions for the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) and the implementation of the federal data quality act .

the conferees direct that $1,000,000 of the total funding provided in [the oira] appropriation be withheld from obligationuntil resolution of existing programmatic concerns by house conferees are addressedand the house and senate committees on appropriations approve of suchobligation .

the conferees are concerned that agencies are not complying fully with the requirements of the federal data qualityact ( fdqa ) .

the conferees agree that data endorsed by the federal governmentshould be of the highest quality , and that the public should have the opportunity toreview the data disseminated by the federal government for its accuracy and haveavailable to it a streamlined procedure for correcting inaccuracies .

theadministrator [of oira] is directed to submit a report to the house and senatecommittees on appropriations by june 1 , 2004 on whether agencies have beenproperly responsive to public requests for correction of information pursuant to thefdqa , and suggest changes that should be made to the fdqa or omb guidelinesto improve the accuracy and transparency of agencyscience .

 ( 47 ) the house - and senate - passed funding and the law provide that none of the funds appropriated or made available to omb may be used for the purpose of reviewing any agricultural marketing orders or any activities or regulations under theprovisions of the agricultural marketing agreement act of1937 ; may be expended for the altering of the transcript of actual testimony of witnesses , except for testimony of officials of theoffice of management and budget , before the committees on appropriations or thecommittees on veterans' affairs or their subcommittees ... the preceding shall notapply to printed hearings released by the committees on appropriations or thecommittees on veterans' affairs ; may be available to pay the salary or expenses of any employee of the office of management and budget who calculates,prepares , or approves any tabular or other material that proposes the sub - allocationof budget authority or outlays by the committees on appropriations among theirsubcommittees .

office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) .

the ondcp develops policies , objectives , and prioritiesfor the national drug control program .

the account also funds general policyresearch to support the formulation of the national drug control strategy .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $27.3 million , an increase of 3.8% over the $26.3 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total , $25.9million is for salaries and expenses operations and $1.4 million is for policyresearch .

 ( 48 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $28.8 million ( policy research and evaluation would be fundedat $1.35 million and the national alliance for model state drug laws would befunded at $1.5 million ) .

this amount is $1.5 million more than the president'srequest .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended , the senate passed , and the law provides an appropriation of $27.997 million , $706,500 more than thepresident's request .

of the total , $1.35 million would remain available untilexpended for policy research and evaluation and $1.5 million is to be used for thenational alliance for model state drug laws .

the counterdrug technology assessment center ( ctac ) .

the ctac is the central counterdrug research anddevelopment organization for the federal government .

the president's fy2004 budget requested $40 million , a decrease of 16.1% from the $47.7 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total , $18 million is forcounternarcotics research and development projects ( which shall be available fortransfer to other federal departments or agencies ) and $22 million is for the continuedoperation of the technology transfer program .

 ( 49 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed the same appropriation as the president requested .

counternarcotics research anddevelopment projects would be funded at $18 million ( and available for transfer toother federal departments or agencies ) and the continued operation of the technologytransfer program would be funded at $22 million .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed an appropriation of $42 million , $2 million more than the president's request .

of thetotal , $18 million would be for counternarcotics research and development projectsand would be available for transfer to other federal departments or agencies .

thecontinuation of the technology transfer program to state and local law enforcementin their efforts to combat drugs is funded at $24 million .

several committeeexpectations with regard to ctac are stated in the report accompanying s. 1589 .

in addition , ondcp is directed "to report to the house andsenate committees on appropriations , no later than december 15 , 2003 , on ctacfunding allocations , specifically providing a detailed spending plan for the researchand development program as well as the technology transfer program for fiscal years2001 , 2002 , and 2003. .

the committee requests "that the fiscal year 2005 budgetrequest include a specific accounting of the total number of grant applicationsreceived and the number awarded in the previous year so that the committee mayhave a true understanding of ctac's ability to meet demand. .

 ( 50 ) the law provides the senate - passed appropriation and includes the following instructions .

the conferees direct ondcp to report to the committees on appropriations , no later than december 31 , 2003 , on ctacfunding allocations , specifically providing a detailed spending plan for both theresearch and development program and the technology transfer program for fiscalyears 2001-2003 .

in addition , the conferees direct the chief scientist to notify thecommittees on appropriations on how fiscal year 2004 funds will be spent , as wellas to provide biannual reports on priority counterdrug enforcement research anddevelopment requirements and the status of projects funded by ctac .

finally , theconferees direct ondcp to include in the fiscal year 2005 budget request a specificaccounting of the total number of grant applications received and the numberawarded in the previous fiscal year .

 ( 51 ) federal drug control programs .

the high intensity drug trafficking areas ( hidta ) program provides assistance tofederal , state , and local law enforcement entities operating in those areas mostadversely affected by drug trafficking .

funds are disbursed at the discretion of thedirector of ondcp for joint local , state , and federal initiatives .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $206.4 million , a decrease of 8.2% from the $224.9 million appropriated in fy2003 .

no less than51% of the total would be transferred to state and local entities for drug controlactivities , which would be obligated within 120 days of enactment of thetransportation / treasury appropriations act .

up to 49% of the total would remainavailable until september 30 , 2005 , and could be transferred to federal agencies anddepartments at a rate to be determined by the director , of which not less than $2.1million would be used for auditing services and associated activities , and at least$500,000 of the $2.1 million would be used to develop and implement a datacollection system to measure the performance of the high intensity drug traffickingareas program .

 ( 52 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $226.350 million , $20 million more than the president's request .

according to the committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 , theincrease is to meet requirements to fully fund existing hidta program activity , to expand hidtas where such expansion isjustified , to fund new hidtas as appropriate , and to fund hidta activities throughthe central priority organization targets ( cpot ) initiative ... .

the committeedirects that hidtas existing in fiscal year 2003 shall receive funding at least equalto the fiscal year 2003 initial allocation level , which does not include fundingprovided through the cpot initiative .... as ondcp reviews candidates for newhidta funding , the committee recommends that it consider the following: increased funding for the central florida , central valley , lake county , and midwest ( platte and madison counties , nebraska ) hidtas ; and expansion of the appalachianhidta ( letcher county , kentucky ) .

 ( 53 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate also passed an appropriation of $226.350 million , $20 million more than the president'srequest .

the additional amount , which is subject to reprogramming guidelines , is tofully fund existing hidta program activities , expand existing hidtas wherewarranted , and fund new hidtas and new hidta activities that are consistent withthe program's mission .

existing hidtas are to be funded at no less than the fy2003initial allocation level , unless the ondcp director submits to , and the house andsenate committees on appropriations approve , a request to reprogram funds "basedon clearly articulated priorities for the hidta program , as well as published ondcpperformance measures of effectiveness. .

 ( 54 ) nofunds would be used for any furtheror additional consolidation of the southwest border hidta , except for the operationof an office with a coordinating role , until the office submits a report on the structureof the hidta .

according to the committee report accompanying s. 1589 : in allocating the hidta funds , the committee expects the director of ondcp to ensure that the activities receivingthese limited additional resources are used strictly for implementing the strategy foreach hidta , taking into consideration local conditions and resource requirements .

these funds should not be used to supplant existing support for ongoing federal,state , or local drug control operations normally funded out of the operating budgetsof each agency .

the remaining funds may be transferred to federal agencies anddepartments to support federal antidrugactivities .

 ( 55 ) several committee expectations with regard to the hidta program are stated in the report .

additionally , the committee directs ondcp to consult with the houseand senate committees on appropriations "in the developmental stages of any newgrant programs that it plans to institute in the future. .

 ( 56 ) ondcp also is directed bythe committee "to coordinate with other federal agencies with a core mission totarget international drug traffickers in an effort to pool personnel , intelligence , andavailable resources to further the originally conceived cpot [consolidated priorityorganizational targets] program and to report to the house and senate committeeson appropriations no later than 90 days after enactment of this act on the progressof these efforts. .

the general accounting office is directed "to conduct a study onthe effectiveness of the cpot program , its conformity with the hidta mission ...and what resources other federal law enforcement agencies contribute to theprogram. .

 ( 57 ) committee views with regard tomethamphetamine reduction , and issuesspecific to the midwest , new england , southwest border , appalachia , northwest,and southern ohio hidtas also are expressed in the report .

 ( 58 ) the law provides the same appropriation as passed by the house and senate .

no less than 51% of the total shall be transferred to state and local entities for drugcontrol activities , which shall be obligated within 120 days of enactment of thetransportation / treasury appropriations act .

up to 49% of the total shall remainavailable until september 30 , 2005 , and may be transferred to federal agencies anddepartments at a rate to be determined by the director , of which not less than $2.1million shall be used for auditing services and associated activities , and at least$500,000 of the $2.1 million shall be used to develop and implement a datacollection system to measure the performance of the hidta program .

hidtasdesignated as of september 30 , 2003 shall be funded at no less than the fy2003initial allocation levels unless the director submits to the committees onappropriations and the committees approve , justification for changes in those levelsbased on clearly articulated priorities for the hidta programs as well as publishedondcp performance measures of effectiveness .

a request , complying withreprogramming guidelines , shall be submitted to the committees on appropriationsfor approval prior to the obligation of funds of an amount in excess of the fy2004budget request .

other federal drug control programs ( formerly the special forfeiture fund ) .

the account , administered by the directorof ondcp , supports high - priority drug control programs .

the funds may betransferred to drug control agencies or directly obligated by the ondcp director .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $250 million , an increase of 12.7% over the $221.7 million appropriated in fy2003 .

of the total,$170 million is to support a national media campaign , as authorized by the drug - freemedia campaign act of 1998 ; $70 million is for a program of assistance andmatching grants to local coalitions and other activities , as authorized in chapter 2 ofthe national narcotic leadership act of 1988 , as amended ; $4.5 million is for thecounterdrug intelligence executive secretariat ; $2 million is for evaluations andresearch related to national drug control program performance measures ; $1 millionis for the national drug court institute ; $1.5 million is for the united statesanti - doping agency for anti - doping activities ; and $1 million is for the unitedstates membership dues to the world anti - doping agency .

 ( 59 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $230 million .

the money would be allocated in the same manneras the president proposed except that $150 million would support a national mediacampaign .

this amount is $20 million less than the president's request .

accordingto the committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 , "the committee haschanged the name of the special forfeiture fund account to other federal drugcontrol programs as requested by the president , reflecting the fact that this accountreceives no forfeiture funds but only direct appropriations. .

the report "encouragesondcp to explore options for using alternative media in schools as a way ofutilizing traditional learning tools in non - traditional ways , such as children's bookstailored with an anti - drug message , provided that such media can be utilized in amanner consistent with the goals and parameters of the media campaign. .

the report also states the committee's belief "that without a convincing demonstration that the media campaign has had an impact on youth drug use thatcan be at least somewhat different from the general trends in such use , any increasein funding for the media campaign cannot be justified at this time. .

the directorof ondcp is directed to submit an evaluation plan for the media campaign for fiscalyears 2004-2008 to the committees on appropriations no later than 120 days afterthis act's enactment .

the committee also is requiring "that no less than 77 percentof funds be spent on advertising time and space. .

 ( 60 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed an appropriation of $174 million , $76 million less than the president's request .

ofthe total , $100 million is for continuation of the national youth anti - drug mediacampaign ; $7.2 million is for the united states anti - doping agency ; $60 millionis for the drug - free communities program ( including $1 million to continue thenational community anti - drug coalition institute ) ; $1.5 million is for thecounterdrug executive secretariat ; $1 million is for the national drug courtinstitute ; $2 million is for performance measures development ; and $800,000 is forunited states dues to the world anti - doping agency .

noting that the current sourceof funding for this account is direct appropriations , the committee concurred withchanging the name of the account .

the committee report accompanying s. 1589 includes several directives related to the national media campaign .

according to the report: today , a large portion of the campaign's budget pays for outside media and advertising consultants and the committee isconcerned about the amount of resources that are being consumed by these parties .

the committee has provided $100,000,000 for the national media campaign anddirects that no less than 80 percent of the funding provided be used for the purchaseof advertising time and space unless ondcp submits and the house and senatecommittees on appropriations approves a request for reprogramming of the fundsbased on clearly articulated principals and priorities .

the committee directs thegeneral accounting office to conduct a study to determine the extent to whichoutside consultants are being used by the media campaign , the cost - effectiveness ofthis method , and if this system is producing more effective ads that aid ondcp inits core mission .

 ( 61 ) with regard to the campaign's industry match program , under which federal funds for paid advertising were to be matched dollar - for - dollar by industry , thecommittee report states that: it has come to the committee's attention however , that while ondcp is purchasing peak time for specific ads , they areagreeing to have that time and space matched with different ads at different times .

the committee believes that this violates the intent of congress and directs ondcpto provide a detailed report to the house and senate committees on appropriationsregarding all advertising , their placement and what matches are being provided by allmedia in all markets .

further , the committee directs ondcp to more closelyscrutinize the matching proposals and to ensure that the one to one match moreappropriately mirrors the time and space that has beenpurchased .

 ( 62 ) the report also states that "the committee intends to rely on the scientifically rigorous nida study to gauge [the advertising campaign's] ultimate impact. .

 ( 63 ) the law provides an appropriation of $229 million .

of the total , $145 million is to support a national media campaign ( no less than 78% shall be used to purchaseadvertising time and space ) ; $70 million is to continue a program of matching grantsto drug - free communities ( of which $1 million is a directed grant to the communityanti - drug coalitions of america for the national community anti - drug coalitioninstitute ; $3 million is for the counterdrug intelligence executive secretariat ; $2million is for evaluation and research related to national drug control programperformance measures ; $1 million is for the national drug court institute ; $7.2million is for the united states anti - doping agency ( usada ) for anti - dopingactivities ; and $800,000 is for the united states membership dues to the worldanti - doping agency .

the funds may be transferred to other federal departments andagencies to carry out such activities .

with regard to the usada , the conferees direct the agency to provide the committees on appropriations with a prior year expenditure report and a detailedspending plan for fy2004 no later than 120 days after the enactment of thetransportation and treasury appropriations act .

each report is to include usada'sefforts to secure funding from sources other than the federal government .

as for thenational youth anti - drug media campaign , the conferees reemphasize the need todemonstrate that "welcome trends in the incidence of youth drug use" can be linkedto the media campaign .

ondcp is directed to submit an fy2004-fy2008evaluation plan for the media campaign to the committees on appropriations no laterthan 120 days after the enactment of the transportation and treasury appropriationsact .

the conferees further direct ondcp to provide a detailed report to thecommittees on appropriations on the "type and content of all advertising , its timingand placement in media markets , and the matches provided for all advertising. .

 ( 64 ) unanticipated needs .

the account provides funds for the president to meet unplanned and unbudgetedcontingencies for national interest , security , or defense purposes .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $1 million .

this is virtually the same amount as was appropriated in fy2003 ( $993,000 afterrescission ) .

the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended,the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriation as thepresident requested .

 table 9 .

title v: related agenciesappropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures were taken from an fy2004 transportation - treasury appropriations billconference report budget authority table provided by the house committee onappropriations .

note: a newly created independent agency which begins operation in fy2004 , the electionassistance commission , received an additional appropriation of $1 billion for electionreform grants in a separate division of the appropriations act .

*the senate committee on appropriations and the conference report table list the postalservice under the independent agencies title , rather than as a separate title .

forcomparative purposes , the postal service appropriation ( $97 million ) has been subtractedfrom the independent agencies total senate and conference reports' total figure .

a .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 contains an across - the - board rescission of0.59% ; that rescission is not reflected in these figures .

federal election commission ( fec ) .

the fec administers federal campaign finance law,including overseeing disclosure requirements , limits on contributions andexpenditures , and the presidential election public funding system ; the agency retainscivil enforcement authority for the law .

the office of election administration,which serves as a clearinghouse for information on voting laws and procedures forstate and local election officers , is another part of the fec .

the president's fiscal 2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $50.4 million for the fec , an increase of $898,000 above the fiscal 2003 appropriation of $49.5million .

the fec , in its separate budget submission to congress , concurred with theadministration proposal , both in the request for overall appropriations and for 391employees .

the agency noted in its submission that the 1.8% increase over the 2003appropriated amount represented "essentially a current services request," reflectingonly an adjustment for inflation and salary and benefits increases but no additionalfunds or staff for new programs or initiatives .

the agency attributed the essentiallystable budget request to the greater efficiency resulting from mandatory electronicfiling and the new administrative fine and alternative dispute resolution programs .

the house - passed bill contained the same $50.4 million funding level as requested by the administration and the agency , with a stipulation that no less than$6.4 million be used for automated data processing systems .

the house bill alsocontained two legislative provisions added by the appropriations committee: toextend the fec's administrative fines program by two years , through the end of2005 , and to allow reports filed by overnight delivery , priority , or express mail to beconsidered as timely based on the postmark or , if by non - u.s .

postal service carriers,by the date delivered to that carrier .

the bill passed by the senate contained the same $50.4 million recommended by the administration , the fec , and the house .

the senate version , however , didnot include the house bill's stipulation regarding spending on data systems , nor didit include the legislative provisions in the house bill .

the conference version appropriates $51.2 million for the fec , with the additional $800,000 above the house and senate figure designated for interimactivities of the agency's office of election administration , pending its incorporationinto the newly created election assistance commission .

conferees included thehouse bill's stipulation that no less than $6.4 million be used for automated dataprocessing systems , as well as the house's legislative provisions dealing withextension of the administrative fines program and the timing of filing of reports .

ina separate division of the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( division h,section 159 ) , conferees added $1 billion for the activities of the election assistancecommission .

federal labor relations authority ( flra ) .

the flra serves as a neutral party in the settlement ofdisputes that arise between unions , employees , and federal agencies on mattersoutlined in the federal service labor management relations statute ; decides majorpolicy issues ; prescribes regulations ; and disseminates information appropriate to theneeds of agencies , labor organizations , and the public .

the flra also engages incase - related interventions and training and facilitates labor - managementrelationships .

it has three components: the authority which adjudicateslabor - management disputes ; the office of the general counsel which , among otherduties , investigates all allegations of unfair labor practices filed and processes allrepresentation petitions received ; and the federal service impasses panel whichresolves impasses which occur during labor negotiations between federal agenciesand labor organizations .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $29.6 million for the flra , an increase of 3.0% over the $28.8 million appropriated in fy2003 .

thehouse and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house andsenate passed , and the law provides the same amount as the president requested .

table 10 .

general services administration appropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures were taken from an fy2004 transportation - treasury appropriations billconference report budget authority table provided by the house committee onappropriations .

a .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 contains an across - the - board rescission of0.59% ; that rescission is not reflected in these figures .

general services administration ( gsa ) .

the general services administration administers federalcivilian procurement policies pertaining to the construction and management offederal buildings , disposal of real and personal property , and management of federalproperty and records .

it is also responsible for managing the funding and facilitiesfor former presidents and presidential transitions .

as reconciled by agreement to the conference report ( h.rept .

108-401 ) , p.l .

108-199 authorizes a total of $56.4 million for government - wide policy and $88.1million for operating expenses ; $39.2 million for the office of inspector general ; $3.4 million for allowances and office staff for former presidents ; and $3.0 millionto remain available until expended for the electronic government fund .

as agreed to in the senate , s.amdt .

1943 ( to h.r .

1989 ) recommended a total of $61.8 million for government - wide policy and $85.1million for operating expenses ; $39.2 million for the office of inspector general ; $3.4 million for allowances and office staff for former presidents ; and $5.0 millionto remain available until expended for the electronic government fund .

s. 1589 , as introduced and reported , recommended a total of $61.8 million for government - wide policy and $85.1 million for operating expenses ; $39.2million for the office of inspector general ; $3.4 million for allowances and officestaff for former presidents ; and $5.0 million to remain available until expended forthe electronic government fund .

h.r .

2989 , as introduced , reported , and passed by the house , provided a total of $56.4 million for government - wide policy and $79.1 million foroperating expenses ; $39.2 million for the office of inspector general ; $3.4 millionfor allowances and office staff for former presidents ; and $1.0 million to remainavailable until expended for the electronic government fund .

the president's fy2004 budget contained a request of $74.0 million for government - wide policy and $85.1 million for operating expenses ; $39.2 millionfor the office of inspector general ; $3.4 million for allowances and office staff forformer presidents ; $45.0 million for interagency electronic government initiatives ; and $17.6 million to be deposited into the federal consumer information centerfund .

federal buildings fund ( fbf ) .

revenue to the fbf is the principal source of funding .

congress , however , directsthe gsa as to the allocation or limitation on spending of funds .

as reconciled by agreement to the conference report ( h.rept .

108-401 ) , p.l .

108-199 authorizes that an additional $446.0 million be deposited into the fbf , fora total of $6,758.2 million .

of this total , $708.3 million is to remain available untilexpended for new construction , including $204.6 million for nine courthouses .

anadditional $991.3 million is to remain available until expended for repairs andalterations .

this amount includes $208.2 million for repairs to five existingcourthouse ; $5.0 million to implement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; $20.0 millionfor a glass fragmentation program ; and amounts necessary to provide suchreimbursable fencing , lighting , guard booths , and other facilities on private or otherproperty as may be appropriate to enable the u.s. secret service to perform itsprotective functions .

as agreed to in the senate , s.amdt .

1943 ( to h.r .

2989 ) recommended that an additional $407.0 million be deposited into the fbf , fora total of $6,717.3 million .

of this total , $659.7 million was to remain available untilexpended for new construction .

an additional $1,000.9 million was to remainavailable until expended for repairs and alterations .

s. 1589 , as introduced and reported , recommended that an additional $407.0 million be deposited into the fbf , for a total of $6,717.3 million .

of this total , $659.7 million was to remain available until expended for newconstruction , including $204.6 million for nine courthouses .

an additional $1,000.9million was to remain available until expended for repairs and alterations .

thisamount included $208.2 million for repairs to five existing courthouses ; $20.0million to implement a glass fragmentation program ; $5.0 million to implement achlorofluorocarbons program ; and amounts to provide such reimbursable fencing,lighting , guard booths , and other facilities on private or other property not in federalownership as may be appropriate to enable the u.s. secret service to perform itsprotective functions .

h.r .

2989 , as introduced , reported , and passed by the house , recommended that an additional $247.4 million be deposited into the fbf , for a totalof $6,557.5 million .

of this total , $406.1 million was to remain available untilexpended for new construction .

an additional $1,010.5 million was to remainavailable until expended for repairs and alterations .

this amount included $208.2million for repairs to five existing courthouses ; $20.0 million to implement a glassfragmentation program ; $5.0 million to implement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; and for funding any costs associated with implementing security improvements infederal buildings .

the president's fy2004 budget requested that an additional $217.0 million be deposited into the federal buildings fund , for a total of $6,579.9 million .

anamount not to exceed $400.6 million was to remain available until expended for newconstruction projects .

an additional $1,012.7 million was to remain available untilexpended for repairs and alterations .

this amount included $217.2 million forrepairs to five existing courthouses ; $20.0 million to implement a glass fragmentationprogram ; $5.0 million to implement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; and "amountsto provide such reimbursable fencing , lighting , guard booths , and other facilities onprivate or other property not in government ownership or control as may beappropriate to enable the united states secret service to perform its protectivefunctions pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

3056. .

electronic government fund .

the senate and house adopted the conferees' recommended allocation of $3 million forthe e - gov fund , a midpoint compromise between the amounts initially approved byeach chamber .

this appropriation is $2 million less than the amounts provided infy2002 and fy2003 and considerably less than the $45 requested by the presidentfor fy2004 .

the senate had initially approved the appropriators' recommended $5 million for the e - gov fund for fy2004 , the same amount recommended and ultimatelyapproved for fy2003 .

house appropriators had initially recommended only $1million for the e - gov fund for fy2004 , and this was subsequently approved by thehouse .

the house committee report offered no explanation for the reduced amount .

the account statement noted that the fund has been authorized by the e - governmentact of 2002 , which had previously been a matter of concern for appropriators .

 ( 65 ) under the terms of the authorizing provision , the fund is administered by theadministrator of general services as a gsa account to support projects approved bythe director of omb .

no transfers of monies from the fund to federal agencies maybe made until 10 days after a proposed spending plan and justification for eachproject to be undertaken using such monies has been submitted to the committeeson appropriations .

funding for the electronic government fund was a somewhat contentious matter between the president and congress in fy2003 , as it had been in fy2002 .

on february 28 , 2001 , in advance of his proposed budget for fy2002 , the president released: a blueprint for new beginnings: a responsible budget for america'spriorities .

intended as a 10-year budget plan , the blueprint , among otherinnovations , proposed the establishment of an electronic government account seededwith "$10 million in 2002 as the first installment of a fund - - that will grow to a totalof $100 million over three years - - to support interagency electronic government ( e - gov ) initiatives. .

managed by omb , the fund was foreseen as supporting"projects that operate across agency boundaries," facilitating "the development of apublic key infrastructure to implement digital signatures that are accepted acrossagencies for secure online communications," and furthering "the administration'sability to implement the government paperwork elimination act of 1998 , whichcalls upon agencies to provide the public with optional use and acceptance ofelectronic information , services and signatures , when practicable , by october2003. .

 ( 66 ) about one month later , on march 22,omb deputy director sean o'keefeannounced that the bush administration had decided to double the amount to beallocated to the e - gov fund , bringing it to $20 million .

 ( 67 ) as included in the president's fy2002 budget , the fund was established as an account within the general services administration ( gsa ) , to be administered by theadministrator of general services "to support interagency projects , approved by thedirector of the office of management and budget , that enable the federalgovernment to expand its ability to conduct activities electronically , through thedevelopment and implementation of innovative uses of the internet and otherelectronic methods. .

the president's initial request for the fund was $20 million , to remain available until september 30 , 2004 .

congress , however , appropriated $5 million for the fundfor fy2002 , to remain available until expended .

appropriators specified thattransfers of monies from the fund to federal agencies could not be made until 10 daysafter a proposed spending plan and justification for each project to be undertakenusing such monies had been submitted to the committees on appropriations .

expressing general support for the purposes of the fund , they also recommended , andboth chambers agreed , that the administration work with the house committee ongovernment reform and the senate committee on governmental affairs to clarifythe status of its authorization .

the president's budget for fy2003 recognized "gsa as operator of the official federal portal for providing citizens with one - stop access to federal services via theinternet or telephone" and , therefore , a key agency in implementing the president'se - gov vision , which will "require cross - agency approaches that permit citizens,businesses , and state and local governments to easily obtain services from , andelectronically transact business with the federal government. .

in this regard , anadministration interagency quicksilver e - gov task force , according to the budget,"identified 23 high priority internet services for early development. .

seeking $45 million for the e - gov fund , the budget acknowledged that this amount was "a significant increase over the $20 million requested in 2002," butnoted that the request "is supported by specific project plans developed by thequicksilver task force. .

 ( 68 ) furthermore,according to the fund account statement,these monies "would also further the administration's implementation of thegovernment paperwork elimination act ( gpea ) of 1998 , which calls upon agenciesto provide the public with optional use and acceptance of electronic information,services , and signatures , when practicable , by october 2003. .

the house appropriators again rejected the amount requested by the president and recommended $5 million for the fund , reiterating , as previously , that transfers ofmonies from the fund to federal agencies could not be made until 10 days after aproposed spending plan and justification for each project to be undertaken using suchmonies had been submitted to the committees on appropriations .

the housecommittee also declined to recommend an appropriation for the fund as a gsaaccount , but did fund it as an account under the jurisdiction of the office ofmanagement and budget within the executive office of the president .

 ( 69 ) senateappropriators , however , recommended the full $45 million requested by thepresident .

their report stated that omb "would control the allocation of the fundand direct its use for information systems projects and affect multiple agencies andoffer the greatest improvements in access and service. .

 ( 70 ) final funding , as providedby p.l .

108-7 , nonetheless , was $5 million .

national archives and records administration ( nara ) .

the custodian of the historically valuable records of thefederal government since its establishment in 1934 , nara also prescribes policy andprovides both guidance and management assistance concerning the entire life cycleof federal records .

it also administers the presidential libraries system ; publishes thelaws , regulations , and presidential and other documents ; and assists the informationsecurity oversight office ( isoo ) , which manages federal security classification anddeclassification policy ; and the national historical publications and recordscommission ( nhprc ) , which makes grants nationwide to help nonprofitorganizations identify , preserve , and provide access to materials that documentamerican history .

the senate and house adopted the conferees' recommended allocation of $316.3 million for nara .

this appropriation results from several adjustments innara funding as initially approved by the two chambers .

the confereesrecommended $256.7 million for operating expenses , with $600,000 of this amountdesignated for the preservation of the records of the freedman's bureau .

for theelectronic records archive , $35.9 million was recommended , of which $22 millionis to remain available until the end of fy2006 .

similarly , while $13.7 million wasrecommended for repairs and restoration , portions of this amount were specified forthree particular projects: $500,000 for the military personnel records centerrequirements study ; $2.25 million for land acquisition for a new regional archivesand records facility in anchorage , alaska ; and $5 million for repair of the plaza ofthe lyndon baines johnson presidential library .

finally , $10 million wasrecommended for the nhprc .

the senate had initially approved the appropriators' recommended $276.674 million for nara for fy2004 , about $29 million less than the president's requestand approximately $23 million less than the house appropriators' recommendation .

of this amount recommended in the senate , $258.191 million was proposed foroperating expenses ; $13.483 million for repairs and restoration , with $2.025 millionspecified for the construction of a regional archival facility in alaska and $5 milliondesignated for repair of the plaza of the lyndon baines johnson presidential library ; and $5 million for the nhprc .

the house had initially approved the funding for nara recommended by house appropriators - - a total amount of $299.8 million , which was about $5 millionless than the president's request , but about $23 million more than the amountrecommended by senate appropriators .

of this amount approved by the house,$255.2 million was proposed for nara operating expenses , which was almost $39million less than the funding the president had requested for this account .

however,some of these funds were included in a new electronic records archive account , forwhich the committee had recommended $35.9 million .

the president's requestedamount for repairs and restoration was approved , as was twice the amount requestedby the president for the nhprc .

the president's budget requested $305.6 million for fy2004 , which was slightly more than $42 million above the fy2003 appropriation for nara .

of therequested amount , $294.1 million was sought for operating expenses , $6.5 millionfor repairs and restoration , and $5 million for the nhprc grants program .

compared with fy2003 funding , increased monies were being sought for operatingexpenses ; amounts sought for the latter two accounts were below the amountsappropriated for them for fy2003 .

merit systems protection board ( mspb ) .

the mspb serves as guardian of the federal government'smerit - based system of employment .

the agency carries out its mission by hearingand deciding appeals from federal employees of removals and other major personnelactions .

the mspb also hears and decides other types of civil service cases , reviewsopm regulations , and conducts studies of the merit systems .

the agency's efforts areto assure that personnel actions taken involving employees are processed within thelaw and that actions taken by opm and other agencies support and enhance federalmerit principles .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $35.5 million for the mspb .

the request is 11.6% more than the $31.8 million appropriated infy2003 .

the mspb budget submission states that the amount requested includes"$75,000 to provide for employee and managerial development opportunities" and"$100,000 to comply with the accountability of tax dollars act of 2002 , public law107-289 , which requires audited financial statements for agencies with over$25,000,000 in appropriated funds in their budget. .

 ( 71 ) according to the budgetsubmission: beginning in fiscal year 2004 , at the request of [omb] , the [mspb] is not requesting funds be transferred from the civilservice retirement and disability trust fund .

instead , the funding previouslysupplied from the trust fund for adjudication of civil service retirement appealsis being requested as part of the regular appropriation total of $35,503,000 .

omb hasrecommended this change to simplify the financial record keeping for both the[mspb] and the civil service retirement and disability trust fund .

we checkedwith the office of personnel management , which has responsibility for the trustfund , and they have no objection to this change .

 ( 72 ) the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides an appropriation of $32.9 million , $2.6million less than the president's request .

in addition , up to $2.6 million foradministrative expenses could be transferred from the civil service retirement anddisability fund to adjudicate retirement appeals .

the conferees agreed to the trustfund transfer rather than providing a direct appropriation as the president hadrequested .

according to the house committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 the decrease from the president's request reflects the committee's decision to continue the practice of appropriatingfunds to mspb from the civil service retirement and disability fund rather thandiscontinuing this practice as requested by the president ; this request has not beenadequately justified .

 ( 73 ) office of personnel management ( opm ) .

the budget for opm is comprised of budget authority forboth permanent and current appropriations .

this report discusses the budgetauthority for current appropriations .

the agency is responsible for administeringpersonnel functions .

the opm helps agencies to develop merit - based humanresources management accountability systems to support their missions .

thestrategic human resources policy division designs and develops human resourcespolicies and strategies linked to agency accomplishment of missions .

the humancapital leadership and merit systems accountability division assists agencies inimplementing and assessing human capital strategies .

the human resourcesproducts and services division supports federal agencies by administering retirementand insurance programs , providing personnel investigation services , managerial andexecutive training , and other human resources services .

 ( 74 ) the office of inspectorgeneral ( oig ) conducts audits , investigations , evaluations , and inspectionsthroughout the agency and may issue administrative sanctions related to the operationof the federal employees health benefits program .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $18.0 billion for opm .

this total included discretionary funding of $118.7 million ( 75 ) for salaries andexpenses and $1.5 million for oig salaries and expenses .

it also included mandatoryfunding of $7.5 billion for the government payment for annuitants of the employeeshealth benefits program , ( 76 ) $35.0 million for thegovernment payment for annuitantsof the employee life insurance program , and $10.0 billion for payment to the civilservice retirement and disability fund .

included in this total as well were trust fundtransfers of $135.9 million ( 77 ) for salaries andexpenses and $14.4 million ( 78 ) for oigsalaries and expenses .

 ( in fy2003 , $120.8 million for salaries and expenses and$10.9 million for oig salaries and expenses were transferred from trust funds. ) .

according to opm's budget submission , the $118.7 million requested for salaries and expenses "includes $111,748,000 in annual funds [for such things asenhanced information technology support and competitive sourcing studies],$4,500,000 in no - year funds for e - government ( e - gov ) projects , and $2,500,000 toremain available through the end of fy2005 to coordinate and conduct programevaluation and performance management. .

 ( 79 ) with regard to the oig , the budget states that the amount requested will finance more audit staff , special agent criminal investigators , associated analytical staff , and improved informationsystems .

opm expects to reduce the audit cycle from 5 years to 3.6 years forcommunity - related carriers .

recoveries are expected to increase by $16 millionannually as a result .

 ( 80 ) the opm budget request is 8.8% more than the $16.6 billion appropriated in fy2003 .

specifically , it is 7.7% less than the $128.6 million appropriated in fy2003for salaries and expenses ; 0.7% less than the $1.5 million for oig salaries andexpenses ; 5.3% more than the $6.9 billion for the government payment for annuitantsof the employees health benefits program ; 2.9% more than the $34.0 million for thegovernment payment for annuitants of the employee life insurance program ; and6.1% more than the $9.4 billion for payment to the civil service retirement anddisability fund .

 ( 81 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $119.498 million for salaries and expenses ( $750,000 more thanthe president's request ) , of which $2 million would be for the cost of the enterprisehuman resources integration project ; $2.5 million would be for the cost of leading thegovernment - wide initiative to modernize federal payroll systems and servicedelivery ; and $2.5 million would be to coordinate and conduct program evaluationand performance measurement .

the committee recommended the same amounts asthe president requested for oig salaries and expenses , the government payment forannuitants of the employees health benefits program , the government payment forannuitants of the employee life insurance program , and payment to the civil serviceretirement and disability fund .

in addition , the committee recommended trust fundtransfers of $126.9 million for salaries and expenses , $9.1 million less than thepresident requested , and $14.4 million for oig salaries and expenses , the sameamount as the president requested .

the committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 states that the increase of $750,000 above the president's request is to provide additional funding for the ongoing 'retirementreadiness' project being done by opm in conjunction with the internationalfoundation for retirement education ( infre ) .. .

the committee directs opm toaward this money to infre as a grant or contract , and to report to the committee onthe progress of this project no later than 60 days after enactment of thisact .

 ( 82 ) the report also "urges the director of opm to certify that any transfer of dss [defense security service] functions to opm will not have a detrimental impact onthe ability of opm to handle its current caseload," directs opm to "notify thecommittees if any research , audit , or investigation regarding pbms [pharmacybenefit managers] has been delayed or terminated at the formal or informal requestof another federal agency" by september 1 , 2003 , encourages opm to complete thecomprehensive outside audit to determine the true cost of mandated services underthe federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) and "promptly submit areport of the results to the committee," and "directs opm to consider hampshire andhampden counties [in massachusetts] for inclusion into the hartford [ct] localitypay area. .

 ( 83 ) the committee directs opm to conduct a study in both the aggregate and by state to: ( 1 ) determine the approximate number of federal employees andretirees who are eligible to participate in the fehbp , but who are not covered by thisprogram or by any other health insurance program ; ( 2 ) the principal reasons whythese individuals do not obtain health insurance ; and ( 3 ) by which agencies thesepeople are employed and at which pay grades , levels , or rates of pay .

the results ofthis study shall be submitted to the committees on appropriations no later thanseptember 30 , 2004 .

 ( 84 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the senate passed the same appropriations as the president requested .

the salaries and expensesappropriation would be allocated in the same manner as the house committeerecommended .

of the amount recommended for transfer from the trust funds , $36.7million would remain available until expended for the cost of automating theretirement recordkeeping systems .

in its report accompanying s. 1589 ,the committee addressed opm's ongoing program to modernize its retirementsystem which began in 1997 .

according to the report: two years ago , the committee recommended that opm reach out to gao for guidance and support because opmcould benefit from the experiences that gao has documented with other federalagency modernization projects .

opm did not act on the committee's suggestion,therefore , last year , the committee directed opm to conduct quarterly meetings withgao on the progress of the it modernization project .

these meetings did not occurquarterly .

instead only one meeting occurred in 2002 and none in 2003 .

thecommittee is now aware that this multi - year effort has been plagued with problems .

the committee is disappointed by this lack of cooperation and therefore directs gaoto do a comprehensive audit on the problems and any mismanagement of themodernization project .

 ( 85 ) the law provides an appropriation of $119.498 million for salaries and expenses ( the house - passed amount and allocated in the same way ) and the same amounts asthe president requested for the other accounts .

the conferees direct opm to considerimplementing the federal salary council's recommendation to include franklin,hampshire , and hampden counties in massachusetts in the hartford , ct pay area .

during consideration of the appropriations bill , the senate agreed by voice vote to an amendment ( no .

1949 ) offered by senator charles grassley that would prohibitany funds appropriated or made available under the act from being used toimplement regulations proposed by opm on september 9 , 2003 , ( 86 ) relating to thedetail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch .

senator grassleyexplained the need for the amendment as follows .

the regulation proposed by the office of personnel management ... seeks to reduce to 6 months [from typically 1 to 2 years]the time that a detailee can spend in congress .

this is too short a time for even themost industrious of detailees to understand the intricacies of the legislative processand contribute to that process .

moreover , this regulation attempts to limit theactivities in which executive branch employees can engage while under the directsupervision of a congressional office in an effort to micro - manage from afar .

thisis unacceptable .

 ( 87 ) human capital performance fund .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $500 million for thisnew fund which is designed to create performance - driven pay systems for employees and reinforce the value of employee performancemanagement systems .

the administration proposes providing additional pay overand above any annual , across - the - board pay raise to certain civilian employees basedon individual or organizational performance and / or other critical agency humancapital needs .

ninety percent of funds appropriated would be distributed to agencieson a pro rata basis , upon opm approval of an agency's plan .

the remainder , and anyamount withheld from agencies due to inadequate plans , would be allocated at thediscretion of opm .

 ( 88 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $2.5 million , $497.5 million less than the president's request .

obligation of the funding is contingent upon legislation authorizing the creation ofthe fund within opm .

 ( 89 ) no funds would beavailable until the opm director notifiesthe relevant subcommittees of jurisdiction of the committees on appropriations ofthe approval of a performance pay plan for an agency and the prior approval of thesubcommittees has been attained .

the committee directs opm "to report annuallyto the committees on appropriations on the performance pay plans that have beenapproved , and the amounts that have been obligated or transferred. .

 ( 90 ) the senate committee on appropriations did not recommend and the senate did not pass an appropriation for the fund .

"the committee believes that an initiativeof this type should be budgeted and administered within each individual agency,"according to the report accompanying s. 1589 .

 ( 91 ) the law provides an appropriation of $1 million .

the money shall not be obligated or transferred until legislation is enacted to establish the fund within opm .

funds also shall not be obligated or transferred to any federal agency until the opmdirector notifies and receives prior approval from the relevant subcommittees ofjurisdiction of the committees on appropriations of opm approval of an agency'sperformance pay plan .

such amounts as determined by the opm director may betransferred to federal agencies to carry out the purposes of the fund .

office of special counsel ( osc ) .

the agency investigates federal employee allegations of prohibited personnelpractices and , when appropriate , prosecutes matters before the merit systemsprotection board ; provides a channel for whistle blowing by federal employees ; andenforces the hatch act .

in carrying out the latter activity , the osc issues bothwritten and oral advisory opinions .

the osc may require an agency to investigatewhistle blower allegations and report to the congress and the president asappropriate .

the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $13.5 million for the osc , an increase of 9.2% over the $12.4 million appropriated in fy2003 .

according to the budget , the funding "will enable osc to continue its efforts toreduce its long - standing case processing backlogs ... .

this request provides fundingfor seven additional full time staff in [the hatch act and disclosure units] to addressgrowing backlog concerns. .

 ( 92 ) the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same appropriation as the presidentrequested .

this section of the report discusses , briefly , general provisions such asgovernment - wide guidance on basic infrastructure - like policies .

examples are provisions related to the buy america act , drug - free federal workplaces , andauthorizing agencies to pay gsa bills for space renovation and other services whichare annually incorporated into the treasury and general government appropriationslegislation .

quite frequently , additionally , there have been provisions which relateto specific agencies or programs .

for both transportation / treasury - related generalprovisions and government - wide general provisions , with noted exceptions , thesections discussed here will be those which are new or contain modified policies .

theconsolidated appropriations act , 2004 , contain these provisions .

it should be notedthat there are also general provisions which relate only to agencies and accountswithin the bill .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions can be found in the appendix .

 ( 93 ) most of the general provisions continuedlanguage which has appeared under that title for several years .

for an array ofreasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language is preferable toplacing the provisions in permanent law .

the administration was recommending dropping several such provisions .

the provisions are shown in table 11 .

table 11 .

government - wide general provision .

arc: amtrak reform council aip: airport improvement program ( faa ) air21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation araa: the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-134 ) , the current amtrak authorizing legislation atsa: the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l .

107-71 ) , legislation which created the transportation security administration within the dot brr: bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( fhwa ) bts: bureau of transportation statistics cg: coast guard cmaq: congestion mitigation and air quality program ( fhwa ) dot: department of transportation eas: essential air service ( faa ) f&e: facilities and equipment program ( faa ) faa: federal aviation administration fahp: federal - aid highway program ( fhwa ) fair21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation fhwa: federal highway administration fra: federal railroad administration fta: federal transit administration hazmat: hazardous materials ( safety program in rspa ) hpp: high priority projects ( fhwa ) htf: highway trust fund im: interstate maintenance program ( fhwa ) its: intelligent transportation systems ( fhwa ) mcsap: motor carrier safety assistance program ( fmcsa ) new starts: part of the fta's capital grants and loans program which funds new fixed - guideway systems or extensions to existing systems nhs: national highway system ; also a program within fhwa nhtsa: national highway traffic safety administration nmcsa: national motor carrier safety administration o&m: operations and maintenance program ( faa ) oig: office of the inspector general of the dot ost: office of the secretary of transportation raba: revenue - aligned budget authority rd&t: research , development and technology program ( fhwa ) re&d: research , engineering and development program ( faa ) rspa: research and special projects administration scasd: small community air service development program ( faa ) stb: surface transportation board stp: surface transportation program ( fhwa ) tcsp: transportation and community and system preservation program ( fhwa ) tea - 21: transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) , the current highway and transit authorizing legislation tifia: transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( fhwa ) tsa: transportation security administratio .

transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget .

it isalso considered part of the discretionary budget .

funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources .

the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds .

the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds .

the transportation trust funds include: the highway trust fund , whichcontains two accounts , the highway trust account and the transit account ; the airportand airway trust fund ; and the inland waterways trust fund .

all of these accountsderive their respective funding from specific excise and other taxes .

in fy2002 trust funds accounted for well over two - thirds of total federal transportation spending .

together , highway and transit funding constitute the largestcomponent of dot appropriations .

most highway and transit programs are fundedwith contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund .

this is verysignificant from a budgeting standpoint .

contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate .

under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation ; although appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the oppositesituation .

that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under their controlalready exists , and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs also is inplace .

transportation budgeting uses a confusing lexicon ( for those unfamiliar with theprocess ) of budget authority and contract authority - - the latter , a form ofbudgetauthority .

contract authority provides obligational authority for the funding of trustfund - financed programs , such as the federal - aid highway program .

prior to tea - 21,changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had beenachieved in the appropriations process by combining changes in budget / contractauthority and placing limitations on obligations .

the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds tocongressional budget agreements .

contract authority is tantamount to , but does not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some future date .

under this arrangement , specifiedin title 23 u.s.c. , which tea - 21 amended , authorized funds are automatically madeavailable to the states at the beginning of each fiscal year and may be obligatedwithout appropriations legislation .

appropriations are required to make outlays atsome future date to cover these obligations .

tea - 21 greatly limited the role of theappropriations process in core highway and transit programs because the actenumerated the limitation on obligations level for the period fy1999 throughfy2003 in the statute .

highway and transit grant programs work on a reimbursable basis : states pay for projects up front and federal payments are made to them only when work iscompleted and vouchers are presented , months or even years after the project hasbegun .

work in progress is represented in the trust fund as obligated funds andalthough they are considered "used" and remain as commitments against the trustfund balances , they are not subtracted from balances .

trust fund balances,therefore , appear high in part because funds sufficient to cover actual and expectedfuture commitments must remain available .

both the highway and transit accounts have substantial short - and long - term commitments .

these include payments that will be made in the current fiscal yearas projects are completed and , to a much greater extent , outstanding obligations tobe made at some unspecified future date .

additionally , there are unobligatedamounts that are still dedicated to highway and transit projects , but have not beencommitted to specific projects .

two terms are associated with the distribution of contract authority funds to the states and to particular programs .

the first of these , apportionments , refers to fundsdistributed to the states for formula driven programs .

for example , all nationalhighway system ( nhs ) funds are apportioned to the states .

allocated funds , arefunds distributed on an administrative basis , typically to programs under directfederal control .

for example , federal lands highway program monies are allocated ; the allocation can be to another federal agency , to a state , to an indian tribe , or tosome other governmental entity .

these terms do not refer to the federal budgetprocess , but often provide a frame of reference for highway program recipients , whomay assume , albeit incorrectly , that a state apportionment is part of the federal budgetper se .

