russian president vladimir putin appears to have made a strategic decision to reorient russiannational security policy from a posture of antagonism , if not hostility , toward the united states andits allies , to a policy of more cooperation with the united states and the west .

indications of thisshift were discernible even before the terrorist attacks of september 11 .

but putin seized uponseptember 11 as an opportunity to transform dramatically the bilateral relationship along cooperativelines , making that date appear to be a real turning point in u.s. - russian relations .

among the more notable results of this shift in russian national security policy were: russia's political and military cooperation with the u.s. campaign against the taliban regime in afghanistan,including u.s. military deployments in former soviet states in central asia ; moscow's decision toclose its electronic intelligence base in cuba ; and the softening ( nearly to the point of abandonmentin some cases ) of russia's previously tough positions on nato enlargement , the abm treaty,missile defense , and strategic nuclear force reductions .

this report will examine the implications of the shift in russian national security policy for near - term u.s. - russian relations and for broader u.s. security interests .

it will seek to show themotives behind putin's decision to reorient russian policy and assess the prospects for the newpolicy's endurance .

this report will also examine the bush administration's response ( s ) to the newrussian policy , congressional interests and congressional levers to influence u.s. policy towardrussia , as well as competing opinions on what u.s. policy toward russia should be .

president putin is the unchallenged - and seemingly unchallengeable - master of the russianpolitical scene today .

he has no credible political rivals and has enjoyed consistently high standingin russian public opinion polls ( over 70% approval rating ) for more than two years .

yet fewforesaw these developments in august 1999 , when a physically and politically exhausted presidentyeltsin plucked putin from political obscurity to become russia's fifth premier in two years .

priorto the premiership , putin had headed the fsb , russia's internal security agency for a year ( july1998-august 1999 ) , and before that had been a nearly invisible , though increasingly influential , bureaucrat in the presidential administration ( 1996-1998 ) .

many in russia and the west initiallyviewed putin as a political lap dog for yeltsin .

 ( 1 ) within days of becoming premier , putin confronteda crisis involving the breakaway republic of chechnya and terrorist bomb attacks in russia .

putinadopted a very tough policy toward chechnya , which he rode to popularity and power .

yeltsinabruptly resigned as president on december 31 , 1999 ( six months before the expiration of his term ) ,naming putin acting president .

three months later ( march 26 , 2000 ) , putin was elected presidentin his own right .

the national security policy that putin inherited from yeltsin , and that he continued to pursue for a year or more after succeeding yeltsin , was shaped by yevgeny primakov , who served asforeign minister and then premier in the late 1990s .

 ( 2 ) primakov was loath to relinquish moscow'srole and status as a great power .

he saw the united states as russia's natural , inevitable foe .

inview of russia's diminished economic , political , and military means , primakov sought to build anundeclared coalition of states , with russia at its head , to oppose what he saw as u.s. globaldomination .

he called this a policy of "multi - polarity. .

primakov viewed china , india , and iran askey partners and sought support among other states that opposed u.s. policy and / or resented u.s.power .

in december 1998 , as u.s. and british planes bombed iraq in a dispute over u.n. armsinspections , primakov called for a russia - china - india alliance to oppose u.s. "global hegemonism. .

this was the essence of primakov's vision of russian national security policy - a eurasian - basedstrategy of coalition politics , led by russia , aimed at diminishing u.s. influence and thwarting ( most ) u.s. goals , worldwide .

 ( 3 ) .

during putin's first year in power , while dealing with the initial military phase of the conflictin chechnya and consolidating his domestic political position , the new russian leader showed somesigns of flexibility on national security policy but seemed mainly to continue along the path laid outby primakov .

 ( 4 ) but after a year or so - by mid - 2001at the latest , i.e. , before september 11 - putinappeared to be moving away from the primakov vision .

after september 11 , it became clear thatputin was moving russia in a different direction .

in its first year - and - a - half , the bush administration , with missile defense as a high priority , tooka harder line toward russia than its immediate predecessors .

before september 11 , theadministration saw russia on most issues as "part of the problem. .

after september 11 and the waron terrorism , the administration has tended to see russia generally as "part of the solution. .

some would argue that this generalization is too glib and glosses over the fact that reportedly there are significant splits within the administration on russia policy .

the conventional wisdomholds that vice president cheney and defense secretary rumsfeld take a harder , less conciliatoryline toward moscow .

secretary of state powell is reportedly more willing to compromise .

nationalsecurity advisor rice's position is less clear - cut , but reportedly more often leans toward cheney andrumsfeld .

 ( 45 ) secretary powell has been knownto quip that he sometimes has an easier timediscussing u.s. - russian relations with foreign minister ivanov than with defense secretaryrumsfeld .

putin's willingness to acquiesce on many issues - even some that moscow had long heldto be core interests that it would defend tenaciously - is seen by some as validating the lessconciliatory approach reportedly favored by the vice president and defense secretary .

the bush administration made the most of russian cooperation in afghanistan .

pentagon spokesmen praised russia's contributions , but it is primarily a u.s. operation , the outcome of whichmay serve russia's security needs as much as america's .

other aspects of america's war againstterrorism are less pleasing to moscow .

some russian officials have publicly fretted over the duration of the u.s. military presence in central asia .

the central asian governments , however , appear to view longer term u.s. militarypresence as powerful assistance in their struggles against radical islam and also as a healthycounterweight to the previously predominant influence of russia and china .

russians who are waryof china's ambitions in the region may also welcome the united states as a helpful counterweight .

 ( 46 ) many russians criticized the georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) , announced by the bush administration in march 2002 , of sending a u.s. military contingent to georgia to assessgeorgian military , security , and border forces to help them combat chechen , arab , afghani,al - qaeda , and other terrorists who allegedly have infiltrated georgia .

 ( 47 ) in view of the tensionbetween moscow and tbilisi over alleged russian support for the abkhazian separatist movementin georgia , and russia's continued occupation of military bases in georgia against the wishes ofthe georgian government , and russian claims that georgia is harboring chechen terrorists , somerussians have expressed concern that u.s. training and equipment might be turned against russianinterests .

some russians also worry that the small ( 150 men ) u.s. military contingent in georgiamight grow and become more permanent .

u.s. officials reply that gtep is a temporary missionwhich also serves russian interests , in that it will enhance georgia's ability to deal with securitythreats arising from the presence of chechen refugees and fighters in the pankisi gorge area ofgeorgia , adjacent to chechnya .

 ( 48 ) after september 11 , the bush administration substantially reduced , although it did not entirely stop , its criticism of russian human rights abuses in chechnya .

the bush administration pushed ahead with plans for nato enlargement , likely to include the former soviet republics of estonia , latvia , and lithuania .

at the same time , the administrationreached out to moscow , agreeing to a new nato - russia council in which moscow will have anequal voice , and vote , on certain issues ( see below , p. 24-25 ) , but not on core alliance collectivesecurity issues or on admitting new members .

after the inconclusive november 2001 washington / crawford , texas summit , the bush administration went ahead with withdrawal from the abm treaty and stuck to its guns on strategicnuclear force reductions , eventually yielding only on designating the resulting agreement aninternational treaty , subject to legislative approval , as the russians - and the u.s. senate - haddemanded .

 ( 49 ) between the two summit meetings,news of the bush administration's nuclear posturereview ruffled russian feathers .

the new npr continued to list russia as a potentially hostile stateagainst which nuclear contingencies might have to be planned , despite u.s. claims that it no longersees a russian "threat" as the basis for sizing and structuring u.s. nuclear forces .

 ( 50 ) the bush administration has been more forthcoming in addressing what putin says is his top priority , russian economic interests .

on june 4 , 2002 , the u.s. department of commerce madegood on a pledge the president made the previous year , officially certifying russia as a "marketeconomy. .

this will facilitate bilateral trade , ease the burden that russian exporters face inanti - dumping and countervailing duty procedures , and bring russia a step closer to wtomembership .

the russian government hailed this as an important step .

some critics of bushadministration policy toward russia fault the length of time the commerce department took to act,arguing that certification should have been completed before the november 2001 bush - putinsummit , and certainly before the may 2002 summit .

but certification came two weeks after the maysummit .

this could be interpreted as an insult , a sign that russia's most urgent interests are not sourgent in washington .

on the other hand , others could argue that the deliberate pace of commercedepartment action was a positive sign that russia was finally being treated like a "normal country,"the issue handled in a businesslike way , decided on its merits because real commercial issues wereat stake , not pushed through as a political case requiring special handling .

moscow complains about still being subject to the "freedom - of - emigration " requirements ofthe jackson - vanik amendment ( title iv of the trade act of 1974 ) , which is linked to grantingrussia "permanent normal trade relations" ( pntr ) status .

at their november 2001 summitmeeting , bush promised putin that he would work with the congress to grant russia pntr status.two bills have been introduced in the 107th congress ( h.r .

3553 and s. 1861 ) to grant pntr status to russia .

some critics of u.s. policy toward russia argue that the bushadministration has not made the lifting of the jackson - vanik amendment's application to russia ahigh enough priority .

 ( 51 ) in the past year , president bush has repeatedly stated his wish to see u.s. trade with and investment in russia increase .

many russian officials are disappointed with the level of u.s. tradeand investment .

 ( 52 ) having grown up in acommand - economy environment , many russians may notfully appreciate that trade and investment flows are mainly responsive to market forces rather thanto political pronouncements .

under putin's leadership , the russian government has madeadministrative changes and the legislature has enacted laws aimed at creating a more market - friendlyclimate for trade and investment .

most western specialists agree , however , that although a good starthas been made , the task is far from complete and that foreign business interests want to see moreimplementation of market reforms , especially in such areas as contract enforcement , protection ofshareholders' rights , reform of the banking sector , and clarification of tax authority among federal,regional , and local governing structures .

 ( 53 ) .

the shift in russian national security policy and the bush administration's responses to thatshift have important implications for future relations between two nations .

below is a briefdiscussion of possible effects of the new dynamic in u.s. - russian relations on selected issues , withan eye toward issues of congressional interest and congressional means of exercising influence onthose issues .

in the decade of the 1990s , u.s. - russian relations lurched from declarations of the end of the cold war , to pledges of "strategic partnership" and "alliance," to disillusionment , recrimination , andneo - cold war antagonism .

the new leadership in both washington and moscow seem intent onavoiding such dramatic swings .

at the bush - putin summit in may 2002 , the two leaders issued ajoint declaration on the new strategic relationship , couched in relatively realistic terms , listingspecific , concrete areas of planned cooperation and identifying issues on which their interestsdiverged .

the two pledged that their countries would , "...continue an intensive dialogue on pressinginternational and regional problems," noting candidly that , "where we have differences , we willwork to resolve them in a spirit of mutual respect. .

to help keep bilateral relations on an even keel,bush and putin established the consultative group for strategic security , which includes the u.s.and russian foreign and defense ministers .

implicit in the presidents' joint declaration , and in thestrategic offensive reductions treaty signed the same day , is russia's recognition of current u.s.geostrategic dominance .

this statement in the joint declaration , affirmed by both leaders butreflecting putin's priorities , is the key: "...[t]he security , prosperity , and future hopes of our peoplesrest on a benign security environment , the advancement of political and economic freedoms , andinternational cooperation. .

 ( 54 ) an importantelement of u.s. - russian economic partnership iscooperation in key sectors such as energy and finance and in improving russian corporategovernance .

russia could gain a great deal from an economic partnership with the united states .

the united states is the world's largest market , generates the most investment capital , and has aleading role in the policies of international financial and economic institutions such as the imf,world bank , ebrd , oecd , and wto .

 ( 55 ) if putin continues to believe that russia's economic recovery and future prosperity require "a benign security environment"and economic cooperation with the united states , russia may be agood deal more cooperative on security issues in the next few years than in 1996-2000 .

somerussian foreign policy specialists suggest that the united states should come to regard russia inmuch the same way it regards france: as an important country , an ally with shared strategic interests,but a "thorny ally" with which it also has significant policy differences .

as noted above , putin began promoting the idea of u.s. - russian cooperation against terrorism well before september 11 .

this remains a key element in both countries' security agendas , althoughwith the taliban regime gone , their emphases and priorities differ somewhat .

both countriesexcoriate al qaeda and like - minded radical islamic movements .

cooperation in central asia maycontinue on that basis as long as russia does not feel threatened by the u.s. presence there .

at theirmay 2002 summit , presidents bush and putin announced that the u.s. - russia working group onafghanistan would be given a broader mandate and renamed the u.s. - russia working group oncounter terrorism , which would , among other issues , address the threats posed by nuclear,biological , and chemical terrorism .

but whereas moscow characterizes chechen rebels almostexclusively as terrorists , washington has doubts about the accuracy of that picture .

similarly , thebush administration's denunciation of yasser arafat's leadership as irremediably tainted by its linksto terrorism , is not shared by moscow , among others - although the russian government flatlycondemns palestinian suicide bombings .

 ( 56 ) in the1990s , russian support for iraq was a sore spot inu.s. - russian relations , particularly during primakov's stewardship of russian policy .

some russianofficials , scholars , and think - tank analysts recently hinted that moscow might not object too stronglyto u.s. military action against iraq , provided that: a ) washington does not act unilaterally and , b ) russian economic interests in iraq are respected .

 ( 57 ) .

u.s. - russian activities in the area of preventing wmd proliferation have two distinctly different aspects .

the first involves cooperative efforts to safeguard dangerous nuclear , chemical,and biological materials and related weapons technologies inside russia and other soviet successorstates .

this has been addressed in the past through high - level initiatives such as the nunn - lugarcomprehensive threat reduction ( ctr ) program , in which congress has taken a leading role .

 ( 58 ) intoday's atmosphere of u.s. - russian strategic cooperation , such programs are believed likely tocontinue , and perhaps increase .

for example , the russian federation debt reduction fornonproliferation act of 2001 ( s. 1803 ) , would authorize the president to engage indebt - for - nonproliferation exchanges to reduce the amount of soviet - era debt owed by russia to theunited states .

 ( 59 ) another example is the so - called"10 plus 10 over 10" plan , backed by the unitedstates and adopted at the g - 8 summit in canada in june 2002 .

this plan , if implemented , would addup to $10 billion from the other six ( non - u.s. ) g - 7 countries to the $10 billion pledged by the unitedstates , over the next ten years , to finance wmd nonproliferation programs in russia and othersoviet successor states .

the other key aspect of the russian wmd proliferation issue concerns russian transfers of nuclear reactors and ballistic missile technology to certain states , particularly iran .

 ( 60 ) this has beena vexing issue in u.s. - russian relations since the mid - 1990s .

the clinton and bush administrationsand the congress have treated these as very high priority issues , but have had little success inconvincing russia to halt either its nuclear reactor construction program at bushehr , iran , or thecovert transfers of missile technology from russian institutes and enterprises to iran .

 ( 61 ) moscowargues that the bushehr reactor project is legal , proper , and safe .

washington replies that while theprogram may be legal - in that it violates no treaties or international obligations to which russia isa party - it will be used by iran to advance a clandestine nuclear weapons program which will be agrave security threat to the united states , its allies and friends , and to russia as well .

 ( 62 ) the question of missile technology transfer is less clear cut .

different russian authorities have claimed at various times that: a ) there were no such transfers ; b ) there were some unauthorizedtransfers , but they have been stopped ; c ) the transfers were / are being done illegally by shadowyentities that elude russia's best efforts at export control ; d ) the alleged illicit transfers are oflegitimate dual - use technology not covered by the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) .

 ( 63 ) one of the results of recent bush - putin summitry was a decision to address questions of russian nuclear reactor and missile technology transfers to iran more systematically .

a standing bilateralworking - level group was established for this purpose .

there had been some speculation that anunderstanding might be reached in which russia would complete the single bushehr reactor , withenhanced safeguards , but would provide no additional nuclear cooperation to iran .

in late july,however , the russian press reported that the ministry of atomic energy ( minatom ) had adopteda plan to build five new nuclear reactors in iran over a ten - year period , three more at bushehr andtwo at another site .

according to a senior bush administration official , "... the white house wasinfuriated by that and extremely surprised.... what we were told was: it's a draft and it's not done. .

a high - level u.s. delegation made a previously planned visit to moscow to urge russia to cancelthis deal .

recent reports quote the head of minatom as saying that the ten - year plan was"theoretical" and might be reevaluated in light of "political factors. .

 ( 64 ) while the outcome of the russia - iran agreement remained unclear , reports of new russian ties with iraq and north korea drew attention .

on august 16 , 2002 , iraq's ambassador in moscowannounced that the two countries would soon sign an economic cooperation agreement worth $40billion .

a senior russian official confirmed that a five - year agreement with iraq , encompassing theoil , electrical , chemical , agricultural , and transport sectors , under consideration for several years , hasbeen approved by the relevant ministries and is being readied for signing .

he also said the contractswould not violate u.n. sanctions against iraq .

the official u.s. response downplayed the reporteddeal .

a white house spokesman said that putin remained a strong supporter of the war againstterrorism and that washington expected moscow to continue honoring the sanctions regime againstiraq .

 ( 65 ) also in mid - august , moscow announcedthat north korean leader kim jong - il would soonvisit the russian far east .

putin is expected to meet with him there .

continued russian nuclear reactor and missile technology transfers to iran could become a critical test of putin's policy of cooperation with the united states .

on the one hand , moscow seesteheran as a stable , friendly regional power and a vitally important market for its cash - strappednuclear power and defense industries .

on the other hand , the united states sees iran as a leadingstate sponsor of international terrorism and is absolutely committed to trying to prevent iran fromacquiring nuclear weapons and long - range missiles .

some observers question whether putin's claimof being america's chief ally in the fight against terrorism can be considered credible in the face ofcontinued - and expanded - russian nuclear cooperation with iran .

congressional support for therussian debt for nonproliferation act ( s. 1803 ) , inter alia , might be adversely affectedby such a russian policy .

 ( 66 ) it may be that the russian reactor construction program in iran was drafted by enthusiasts at the ministry of atomic energy or elsewhere , without prior kremlin approval , and that it will ultimatelybe buried .

alternatively , the ten - year , five - reactor plan might be a negotiating ploy aimed at gettingwashington to agree to a more limited expansion of russian nuclear cooperation with iran .

a morecynical interpretation might be that the reported plan is a ruse , meant to be floated and thenwithdrawn as a "concession," to ease u.s. pressure on the original bushehr project .

similarly , the russia - iraq economic cooperation agreement can be interpreted in different ways .

baghdad is eager to muster as much international support as possible in the face of a possible u.s.military attack , and may have offered moscow an especially rich plum in order to bolster russia'ssupport .

moscow may have been motivated primarily by financial gain .

on the other hand , russia'sdeal with iraq , together with the iranian reactor plan and the invitation to kim jong - il - encompassing all three elements of bush's "axis of evil" - may be a signal that moscow isdispleased with current u.s. policy .

during the cold war , arms control often dominated the u.s. - soviet agenda .

moscow has sought to maintain that arrangement , which inherently treats the two parties as equals and providesopportunities for moscow to try to restrain washington from further tilting the military balance inamerica's favor .

the bush administration takes the position that the cold war is over and thatfriendly states do not need arms control treaties to protect them from one another .

some in theadministration and congress also maintain that russia is too weak economically , politically , andmilitarily to prevent the united states from acting unilaterally in its best interests on vital questionsof nuclear forces and missile defense .

many others , critical of the unilateral approach , argue thatrussia remains a nuclear superpower and that u.s. security and nonproliferation are best served bymaintaining the arms control process with russia .

there is general agreement that in the strategic offensive reductions treaty , moscow acceded to the u.s. position on virtually every substantive issue .

 ( 67 ) most observers think that the treaty willwin approval easily in the senate .

it is also widely believed that putin's political power and prestigeensure parliamentary approval of the treaty in moscow .

both sides officially agree ( russiareluctantly ) that the abm treaty and the ( unratified 1993 ) start ii treaty are both dead letters .

that leaves missile defense as the principal item remaining from the old strategic arms controlagenda .

russia still seeks to slow or shape u.s. missile defense activities as much as possible , arguing that missile defense will be destabilizing bilaterally and globally , and will accelerate nuclearweapons proliferation among non - weapon states .

 ( 68 ) russian authorities appear to understand,however , that acting alone , they lack the leverage to prevent the bush administration from goingforward as rapidly as possible with missile defense , a strategic initiative to which it is deeplycommitted .

although washington and moscow continue to disagree on missile defense , the jointdeclaration at the may 2002 summit suggests that washington has the upper hand .

in it the unitedstates and russia: ... acknowledge that today's security environment is fundamentally different than during the cold war .

... agreed to implement a number of steps aimed at strengthening confidence and increasingtransparency in the area of missile defense , including the exchange of information , ... reciprocalvisits to observe missile defense tests , and observation aimed at familiarization with missile defensesystems.... ... agreed to study possible areas for missile defense cooperation , including the expansion ofjoint exercises... and the exploration of ... programs for joint research and development of missiledefense technologies.... ... will , within the framework of the nato - russia council , explore opportunities forintensified practical cooperation on missile defense for europe .

 ( 69 ) it would seem that russia's main hopes for altering or slowing u.s. missile plans defense lie outside the realm of bilateral relations .

moscow will probably continue trying to rally internationalopposition to missile defense , including opposition from u.s. allies in europe and asia .

congress,through the budget process and other means , has a critical role in the future of missile defense .

inview of the sharp divisions within the congress over missile defense in general and the bushadministration approach in particular , this is bound to remain a contentious issue .

russia , having given up trying to block nato enlargement , including accession of former soviet republics estonia , latvia , and lithuania , has removed some of the drama from the issue .

under these circumstances , nato states , and congress , can consider which candidates to invite tojoin the alliance on the basis of their merits , without being overly concerned about possible negativeresponses from or repercussions with russia .

the creation of the nato - russia council in may 2002 opens a new chapter in relations between russia and the alliance formed 53 years earlier to resist soviet encroachments in europe .

the new council , which will bring russia together with the 19 ( at present ) alliance members todiscuss security issues , is similar in many respects to its predecessor , the nato - russia permanentjoint council ( pjc ) , created in may 1997 .

the new council , however , is both more ambitious andmore limited than its predecessor in important ways .

it is more ambitious in that it will give russiaan equal voice and an equal vote in its deliberations and decisions .

it is more limited in that the pjcset out to address a very broad but vaguely defined range of issues , global in scope , numberingfifty - six in all .

the new council begins with a more narrowly and clearly defined work plan: counterterrorism , nonproliferation , arms control and confidence - building measures , theater missile defense,peace keeping and crisis management , search and rescue at sea , civil emergency preparedness , andmilitary - to - military cooperation and military reform .

 ( 70 ) in the old pjc , characterized initially as 19+1 , the russian representative took an antagonistic , obstructionist position .

in response , alliance members adopted the practice of arriving at a commonnato policy before a pjc meeting and presenting russia with a fait accompli , which moscowderisively characterized as 19 vs.1 .

 ( 71 ) the newcouncil , characterized as nato - at - 20 , begins witha higher level of trust on both sides , but also with built - in safeguards .

the council will operate onthe basis of consensus , but if it fails to reach consensus on an issue , that issue can be withdrawn andreferred to the north atlantic council , nato's main decision - making body .

also , any memberstate can request that an issue be withdrawn from the nato - russia council .

it remains to be seenwhat kind of role russia will play in the new nato - at - 20 council .

optimists hope that russia willbehave like an ally , if at times a "thorny ally. .

skeptics worry that russia will try to use the newcouncil to weaken and divide the alliance .

some critics also worry that certain alliance members,particularly small states near russia , may feel intimidated by russia's presence in the council andmight not speak or act as they would otherwise .

in an indication of increased congressional interest in nato , senators daschle and lott reestablished a bipartisan senate nato observer group ( snog ) of senators that will monitordevelopments in nato in light of the new relationship with russia and the run up to the praguesummit ( november 2002 ) , when invitations to join nato will be extended to candidate members .

adding new members to the alliance , of course , would require senate approval .

the high priority that putin gives to domestic economic development , and the linkage between that and his reorientation of russian national security policy , increase the importance of economicissues in u.s. - russian relations .

during the cold war , bilateral economic relations usually weresubordinated to political considerations by both sides .

that attitude still lingers in both countries .

bilateral trade and u.s. investment in russia to date have been minuscule by global standards .

afunctioning market economy in russia , however , could provide a major market for u.s. goods,services , and investments .

such a development could be mutually profitable and further anchorrussia in the capitalist west .

 ( 72 ) putin and bush both say they want the relationship between their two countries to be more "businesslike. .

the u.s. commerce department's certification of russia as a market economy isa step in that direction .

as congress and the administration consider another step in that direction - "graduating" russia from jackson - vanik amendment restrictions - several trade issues mayreceive prominent attention .

chief among these are steel , chicken , and oil .

a trade dispute over russian steel exports to the united states arose in the late 1990s as u.s. steel imports surged .

analysts attributed the sudden growth in steel imports to a rapid increase inu.s .

demand , insufficient domestic capacity , and the appreciation of the dollar .

the u.s. steelindustry filed a number of anti - dumping complaints with the department of commerce and the u.s.international trade commission against foreign steel exporters , including russian steel , claimingthat the steel was being sold in the united states at less than fair value .

in lieu of completing thecommerce and itc antidumping investigations , russia agreed in 1999 to two pacts that imposequotas and set minimum prices on russian steel exports to the united states .

russian steel exportersand political leaders were not pleased with this outcome , but could have faced costlier restrictionsif the antidumping investigations had run their course and high dumping tariff margins were imposedon russian steel .

 ( 73 ) on march 5 , 2002 , the bushadministration imposed tariffs on steel imports,including russian steel , to protect domestic producers .

u.s. policy on steel remains a source ofaggravation with moscow , among others .

at about the same time that the bush administration imposed steel tariffs , a dispute arose over u.s. poultry exports to russia .

poultry is the largest single u.s. export product to russia .

russiais the largest single foreign market for u.s. poultry exports .

 ( 74 ) russia's domestic poultry industrysuffered in the 1990s as the overvalued ruble made imports highly competitive and u.s. imports wona large market share .

on march 1 , 2002 , the russian veterinary service suspended the issue oflicenses for imports of poultry from the united states , citing health concerns over bacterialcontamination and growth hormones .

a complete ban was imposed on march 10 .

many in theunited states saw this as retaliation for the u.s. steel tariff .

 ( 75 ) high - level u.s. remonstration resultedin russian authorities announcing an end to the import ban on april 15 ; but that did not end theproblem .

the russian veterinary service allowed the resumption of some u.s. poultry shipments,but continued to block most imports , pending agreement on a new , more stringent veterinarycertificate .

negotiations over the new certificate dragged on for months while most u.s. poultryremained shut out of the russian market .

on july 24 , u.s. trade officials said that they were closeto agreement with their russian counterparts on a new certificate that would again allow u.s. poultryto enter russia .

 ( 76 ) the third major trade issue , oil , highlights the potential for cooperation rather than friction .

russia currently is the world's second largest oil producer and exporter , behind saudi arabia , whichleads in both categories .

russia's proven oil reserves are twice as large as those of the united states .

although russia's reserves are much smaller than saudi arabia's , its production has beencomparable to saudi arabia's .

according to a prominent recent assessment , russia is now engagedin a contest with saudi arabia for dominance in the world energy market .

 ( 77 ) as the global economyslowed in 2001-2002 , saudi arabia and its opec partners cut their oil production to shore up prices .

in both 2000 and 2001 , russia increased its oil output .

 ( 78 ) russia's political and corporate leadersare portraying russian oil companies as reliable sources of supply , willing and able to add outputto the market to keep prices reasonable and thus help revive the global economy .

this has economicas well as political significance .

economically , it helps russia integrate itself into the industrializedwest .

politically , russia's energy policy increases its leverage in its prospective partnership withthe united states .

 ( 79 ) russia is not expected to replace saudi arabia as the oil price setter - as saudi arabia replaced texas decades ago .

what russian export policy might do , however , is increase competition , keepingoil prices at stable , moderate levels .

this would help avoid inflationary pressure in the united statesand other developed countries .

on august 6 , 2002 , opec secretary - general alvaro calderonarrived in moscow to discuss disagreements over the volume of russia's oil exports and targetprices .

calderon told journalists that while opec believes that oil should cost $22-$28 a barrel,russia prefers a lower range of $20-$25 .

 ( 80 ) at the bush - putin summit in may 2002 , the two leaders emphasized the importance of russia's role as a reliable oil supplier in partnership with the united states .

their joint statement on the newu.s. - russian energy dialogue pledged bilateral cooperation aimed at reducing volatility andenhancing predictability of global energy markets and supplies .

they foresaw enhanced interactionbetween u.s. and russian energy companies in exploration , production , refining , transportation , andmarketing .

in the joint declaration , bush pledged to encourage u.s. investment to further developand modernize russia's fuel energy and sector and expand its oil and gas production .

 ( 81 ) he alsopledged cooperation with russia's energy transportation infrastructure .

in august 1999 , the paris club of official government creditors ( of which the united states is an influential member ) , provided a "framework agreement" reducing russian interest payments onits soviet - era debt ( of over $50 billion ) and deferring payment of principal until after 2001 .

infebruary 2000 , russia reached an agreement with the london club of commercial creditors , writingoff 36.5% of russia's $32.8 billion soviet - era commercial debt outright , with the remainder to beconverted into 30-year eurobonds with lower interest rates and an 8-year grace period .

this amountsto a total of 52% debt forgiveness in current net value terms .

"comprehensive" paris clubnegotiations have begun , to determine whether western government creditors will grant russia morelarge - scale debt forgiveness , or offer debt rescheduling without forgiveness .

germany , which holds48% of that debt , is calling for full repayment .

some of moscow's critics contend that russia'srecent economic upturn and its substantial increases in defense spending should be taken intoaccount by western governments considering further debt forgiveness for russia .

the united states holds about 5% of russia's paris club debt , about $3 billion .

some members of congress have expressed interest in helping russia reduce its paris club debt as a way ofaccelerating economic recovery , or for more targeted aims , such as funneling more money intorussian nonproliferation activities .

in december 2001 , the senate unanimously passed the russianfederation debt reduction for nonproliferation act of 2001 ( s. 1803 ) , sponsored bysen .

biden , and sent it to the house , where it is being considered as part of the state departmentauthorization bill ( h.r .

1646 ) .

this bill would link u.s. debt forgiveness for russiato russian efforts in wmd nonproliferation .

the bush administration is believed to have beenleaning toward supporting russia's quest for debt forgiveness .

the house international relationscommittee held hearings on this bill july 25 , 2002 .

political support for this idea , however , mightbe adversely affected by russia's reported plan to build more nuclear reactors in iran .

as noted above , implicit in putin's strategic decision to seek integration of russia with the west is a rejection of the primakov vision of a russian - chinese axis of cooperation against theunited states as the core of russia's national security strategy .

beijing and moscow continue toproclaim good will and harmonious relations between them .

indeed , both countries want and needcalm , friendly , stable bilateral relations .

and the cold war - era , triangular , zero - sum game ofu.s. - soviet - chinese relations no longer holds sway .

nevertheless , putin's turn toward the west does have significant implications for russian - chinese and u.s. - chinese relations .

there is stillsome triangularity in these relationships .

putin's western orientation works to the advantage of theunited states vis - a - vis china by reducing russian support for china vis - a - vis the united states .

an analysis carried by reuters after the may 2002 bush - putin and nato - russia summits , entitled , "russia ends cold war with nato , china shivers," calls attention to chinese concernsthat russia's geostrategic shift could bring u.s. - led forces right up to china's western borders .

"itis probably something that is very ... worrying," said one western diplomat in beijing , "because thereis a risk of isolation of china. .

 ( 82 ) if russia turnedtoward strategic cooperation with the unitedstates while the antagonism in u.s. - chinese relations remained , that could leave beijing in theposition of being , or appearing to be , the leading anti - american power .

that could be a costly andrisky position for china , at a time when it is still struggling to accelerate and complete its economicmodernization .

the antagonism in u.s. - chinese relations noted above ( p. 11 ) , however , has not remained unchanged .

in the past year there has been a warming , or at least an easing of tension , between thetwo .

at the outset , the new bush administration promised a tougher approach to china than eitherthe clinton or the earlier bush administration , describing china as a "strategic competitor" of theunited states .

in the aftermath of the collision ( april 1 , 2001 ) of u.s. and chinese military aircraftnear hainan island , the antagonism on both sides deepened .

after this rocky start , however , theevents of september 11 appeared to alter the policies in both washington and beijing .

the bushadministration appeared to see the potential for sino - u.s. cooperation against global terrorism asa priority , and u.s. officials down - played differences and problems in the relationship as they soughtchinese support with asian states and in u.n. initiatives .

for their part , after september 11 chineseleaders have taken steps to improve sino - u.s. relations , soften u.s. criticism of their policies , anddemonstrate that china can be a responsible global player .

 ( 83 ) the apparent softening of chinese policy ( or rhetoric ) toward the united states is probably driven by many factors .

one of these is likely to be domestic political struggle in the run up to the16th communist party congress ( fall 2002 ) , at which key leadership changes are expected , includingthe succession to president jiang zemin .

many analysts have described part of the internal politicaldynamic as a conflict between proponents and opponents of western - style economic reforms .

relations with the united states gets caught up in this because those who favor moremarket - oriented reform of the economy also tend to favor closer economic and political cooperationwith the advanced industrial democracies , including the united states .

many opponents of furthermarket reform also oppose more opening to the west .

thus , disagreement and political conflict overforeign policy among chinese political elites can become a subset of - and sometimes even asurrogate for - struggle over fundamental domestic issues .

it is also possible that concern grew among chinese leaders in 2001 , after the crisis surrounding the april 1 collision of the u.s. ep - 3 aircraft and the chinese jet fighter , and especially afterseptember 11 , that relations with the united states were deteriorating to a dangerous level .

witha new and unpredictable administration in washington that seemed inherently unfriendly to china,beijing may have decided independently to ease some of the tension as a precautionary measure,regardless of russian policy .

at some point in 2001 , putin's policy shift toward the west probably entered into chinese calculations and debates about relations with the united states .

those in the chinese leadership whoopposed the hard - line confrontational approach to the united states could use the russian shift asan argument against a dangerous chinese course that risked conflict with america , without theprospect of russian support .

those in beijing who advocated a tougher line toward washingtonmust have been encouraged by primakov's policy of partnership with china against the globalhegemon - and discomfited by putin's abandonment of that policy .

in the internal chinese debateover policy toward the united states , putin's westward tilt may not have been the most importantconsideration .

but it most likely was one of the factors that shaped , and is shaping , chinese policy .

thus , it seems likely that russia's turn toward the west influenced china to move in the samedirection - although not to the same degree nor for the same reasons .

there is an active debate about the appropriate u.s. response to putin's policy of integrating russia with the west .

american , european , and russian critics of bush administration policytoward russia make many of the same arguments .

the essence of their criticism is that the unitedstates should do more to reciprocate putin's cooperativeness and ensure that russia stays on thiscourse .

some argue that putin's shift toward the west lacks strong domestic political support and therefore is fragile .

some compare putin to gorbachev , warning that putin's pro - western policycould meet a similar fate - arousing domestic opposition like that which led to the august 1991 coupthat almost toppled , and fatally undermined , gorbachev's leadership .

others , who see putin'spolitical position as relatively secure , warn that putin himself might conclude that his cooperationwith the united states is not yielding the desired reciprocity from washington , leading him to moveaway from a "failed" policy .

another line of criticism is based on a longer - term view .

i.e. , russia'scurrent weakness may be such that it has no choice but to accede to heavy - handed u.s. dominance - however , russia is likely to recover and once again be a great power , and when it does , it willharbor resentment and animosity toward the united states because of arrogant and short - sighted u.s.policies that ignored russian vital interests and offended russian national dignity .

all three versionsof this criticism cite the same list of u.s. actions that allegedly are offensive to moscow , such aswithdrawal from the abm treaty , missile defense , nato enlargement , and u.s. militarydeployments in georgia and central asia .

on the other hand , many observers believe that the administration's approach to russia is fundamentally sound .

some supporters of administration policy argue that russia simply does notmatter very much any more - that with a population smaller than brazil , a gdp smaller than thenetherlands , and armed forces that have little ability to project power beyond its borders , russiashould not be treated deferentially , as a great power , by the united states .

some who hold this vieware dismissive of russia - whether russia succeeds in becoming a modern state with a functioningmarket economy is their business , not ours .

others view the relationship in terms of "tough love,"helping russia adjust to its proper status as a regional , rather than a global , power .

still others,focused on the cold war rivalry , are happy to see russia as a weak , defeated foe and want to keepit that way .

some supporters of u.s. policy toward russia contend that putin's repeated concessions to u.s. positions and acceptance of faits accomplis , acknowledging u.s. force majeure , confirmthecorrectness of that policy - that there was , and is , no need to make undue concessions to moscow,because russia has no choice but to go along with the united states , due to russia's weaknessvis - a - vis the united states and because of russia's objective need to join the western world , on thewest's terms .

some of those who oppose being deferential to moscow say that many of putin's domestic policies are undemocratic , and that the united states should not hesitate to criticize such tendenciesand press the kremlin to do better .

they argue that u.s. silence in the face of russian governmentabuses such as restrictions on freedom of the press and religion , control over the formation ofpolitical parties , persecution and imprisonment on false charges of political dissidents , and massivehuman rights violations in chechnya , are a betrayal of u.s. values and a signal to russian authoritiesthat the united states is not really serious about democracy in russia as long as moscow cooperateson security issues .

those who question the wisdom of administration policy warn that at some point , if washington is not more forthcoming to moscow , russian policy may swing back in the directionthat primakov favored , and that this would be a tremendous lost opportunity for the united states .

others reply that to the extent that there is a danger of putin's pro - western policies being reversed , it will hinge not on whether the united states and the west reward russia , but on whetherputin's domestic economic policies succeed .

after all , these observers contend , putin's fundamentalrationale is that russia must integrate with the west in order to reconstruct its economy and achievea decent living standard for its people .

if that goal , or appreciable progress in that direction , is notachieved in a reasonable period of time , the pro - western policy will be difficult to sustain .

if this istrue , then the united states has not only a humanitarian interest but also a strong self interest inrussia's economic recovery .

