recent estimates that the unauthorized ( illegally present ) alien population in the united states exceeds 11 million has focused renewed attention on this population .

the 107 th and 108 th congresses considered legislation to address one segment of the unauthorized population — aliens who , as children , were brought to live in the united states by their parents or other adults .

in a 1982 case , the supreme court struck down a state law that prohibited unauthorized alien children from receiving a free public education , making it difficult , if not impossible , for states to deny an elementary or secondary education to such students. .

unauthorized aliens who graduate from high school and want to attend college , however , face various obstacles .

among them , a provision enacted in 1996 as part of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) discourages states and localities from granting unauthorized aliens certain "postsecondary education benefits. .

this provision ( iirira §505 ) directs that an unauthorized alien — shall not be eligible on the basis of residence within a state ( or a political subdivision ) for any postsecondary education benefit unless a citizen or national of the united states is eligible for such a benefit ( in no less an amount , duration , and scope ) without regard to whether the citizen or national is such a resident .

although iirira §505 does not refer explicitly to the granting of "in - state" residency status for tuition purposes and some question whether it even covers in - state tuition , the debate surrounding §505 has focused on the provision of in - state tuition rates to unauthorized aliens .

the higher education act of 1965 , as amended , also makes unauthorized alien students ineligible for federal student financial aid .

in most instances , they are likewise ineligible for state financial aid .

moreover , as unauthorized aliens , they are unable to work legally and are subject to removal from the country regardless of the number of years they have lived in the united states .

in the 107 th and 108 th congresses , legislation was introduced — but not enacted — to provide relief to unauthorized alien students .

these bills sought to repeal iirira §505 and , thereby , provide unauthorized students greater access to postsecondary education .

these bills also would have enabled certain unauthorized students to adjust to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status .

legal permanent residents , sometimes referred to as "green card holders," are able to live and work indefinitely in the united states .

in most cases , they are able to apply for u.s. citizenship after five years .

the unauthorized student bills introduced in the 107 th and 108 th congresses were h.r .

1563 , preserving educational opportunities for immigrant children act , introduced in the 107 th congress and reintroduced as h.r .

84 in the 108 th congress by representative sheila jackson - lee ; h.r .

1582 , immigrant children's educational advancement and dropout prevention act , introduced in the 107 th congress by representative luis gutierrez ; h.r .

1918 , student adjustment act , introduced in the 107 th congress and reintroduced as h.r .

1684 in the 108 th congress by representative chris cannon ; s. 1291 , development , relief , and education for alien minors act ( dream act ) , introduced in the 107 th congress and reintroduced ( in modified form ) as s. 1545 in the 108 th congress by senator orrin hatch ; s. 1265 , children's adjustment , relief , and education act ( care act ) , introduced in the 107 th congress by senator richard durbin ; and title iii , subtitle d of s. 8 , educational excellence for all learners act of 2003 , introduced in the 108 th congress by then - senate minority leader thomas daschle .

in the 107 th congress , the senate judiciary committee reported an amended version of s. 1291 , known as the dream act .

this amended measure represented a compromise between s. 1291 , as introduced , and s. 1265 .

none of the other pending bills saw any action beyond committee referral .

 ( appendix a contains a table comparing four unauthorized alien student bills introduced in the 107 th congress. ) .

in the 108 th congress , s. 1291 , as reported by the senate judiciary committee in the 107 th congress , was included as part of s. 8 , an education measure introduced by then - senate minority leader daschle .

in addition , a new version of the dream act ( s. 1545 ) was introduced by senator hatch .

on november 25 , 2003 , the senate judiciary committee reported s. 1545 with an amendment .

the other unauthorized alien student bills did not see any action beyond committee referrals .

four bills ( h.r .

84 , h.r .

1684 , s. 8 , and s. 1545 , as reported ) would have enabled eligible unauthorized students to obtain lpr status through an immigration procedure known as cancellation of removal .

 ( the major features of the bills are compared in appendix b . ) .

cancellation of removal is a discretionary form of relief authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended , that an alien can apply for while in removal proceedings before an immigration judge .

if cancellation of removal is granted , the alien's status is adjusted to that of an lpr .

h.r .

84 and h.r .

1684 would have permanently amended the ina to make unauthorized alien students who meet certain requirements eligible for cancellation of removal / adjustment of status , whereas s. 8 and s. 1545 would have established temporary cancellation of removal / adjustment of status authorities separate from the ina .

h.r .

1684 , s. 8 , and s. 1545 would have allowed aliens to affirmatively apply for relief without being placed in removal proceedings .

other bills , h.r .

3271 and h.r .

1830 , also would have enabled eligible unauthorized alien students to obtain lpr status , but they would not have done so through a cancellation of removal mechanism .

instead , they would have established a temporary adjustment of status authority .

the ina limits the number of aliens who can be granted cancellation of removal / adjustment of status in a fiscal year to 4,000 .

it , however , contains exceptions for certain groups of aliens .

h.r .

1684 would have amended the ina to add an exception to the numerical limitation for aliens granted cancellation of removal / adjustment of status under its terms .

no numerical limit would have applied under h.r .

3271 , s. 8 , or s. 1545 .

s. 1545 differed from the other bills in that it would have established a two - stage process by which aliens could obtain lpr status .

aliens granted cancellation of removal under the bill would have been adjusted initially to conditional permanent resident status .

such conditional status would have been valid for six years and would have been subject to termination .

to have the condition removed and become full - fledged lprs , the aliens would have had to submit an application during a specified period and meet additional requirements .

the other bills would have adjusted all eligible aliens directly to full - fledged lpr status .

as detailed in appendix b , h.r .

84 , h.r .

1684 , h.r .

3271 , s. 8 , and s. 1545 varied in their eligibility criteria .

among these criteria , all five would have required continuous physical presence in the united states for a specified number of years .

in the case of s. 8 and s. 1545 , the continuous presence requirement would have had to be satisfied prior to the date of enactment .

under h.r .

84 , h.r .

1684 , and h.r .

3271 , the continuous presence requirement would have needed to be met prior to the date of application for relief .

all of the bills except h.r .

84 would have limited relief to aliens meeting specified age requirements .

all five bills would have required a showing of good moral character .

with respect to educational status , h.r .

1684 and h.r .

3271 would have required prospective beneficiaries to be enrolled at or above the 7 th grade level , or enrolled in , or actively pursuing admission to , an institution of higher education in the united states .

s. 8 would have granted lpr status only to individuals with a high school diploma or equivalent credential .

under s. 1545 , in order to obtain conditional lpr status , aliens would have needed to gain admission to an institution of higher education or possess a high school diploma or equivalent credential .

h.r .

84 contained no educational requirements .

on october 16 and october 23 , 2003 , the senate judiciary committee marked up s. 1545 .

at the october 16 session , the committee voted in favor of an amendment in the nature of a substitute proposed by senator hatch for himself and senator durbin .

the substitute amended various provisions of s. 1545 , as introduced .

among the substantive amendments were changes to the confidentiality of information section .

for example , the bill , as introduced , stated that information furnished by applicants could not be used for any purpose other than to make a determination on the application .

the substitute amended this provision to state that information furnished by applicants could not be used to initiate removal proceedings against individuals identified in the application .

at the october 23 meeting , the judiciary committee considered a set of amendments to s. 1545 offered by senator charles grassley .

two of these amendments were the subject of debate at the markup .

the first proposed to amend a provision in the bill allowing aliens who , prior to the date of enactment , met the requirements for both conditional resident status and removal of the condition , to petition for lpr status without first becoming conditional residents .

the amendment would have made these aliens subject to the same period of conditional residence as other aliens eligible for relief under the bill .

the second amendment proposed to place restrictions on the availability of federal student financial aid to aliens eligible for adjustment to lpr status under the bill .

under the amendment , these aliens would have been eligible only for specified student loan and work - study programs .

among the other amendments in the grassley package was one that would have required beneficiaries of the bill to be registered in the student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) , the monitoring system for foreign students .

the committee voted , 18-1 , to approve the grassley amendments , and voted , 16-3 , to report the bill , as amended .

the committee acted , however , with the understanding that the bill would be subject to further discussion and modification prior to being reported .

in s. 1545 , as reported , the grassley amendment language on federal financial assistance was modified , as described in the next section .

the rest of the grassley amendments were unchanged .

under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended , lprs and certain other eligible noncitizens may receive federal student financial aid .

pell grants and stafford loans authorized under title iv comprise 85% of postsecondary student aid .

s. 1545 , as reported , would have placed restrictions on eligibility for higher education assistance for beneficiaries of the bill's adjustment provisions .

with respect to assistance provided under title iv , it would have made aliens who adjust to lpr status under the bill eligible only for student loans , federal work - study programs , and services ( such as counseling , tutorial services , and mentoring ) , subject to the applicable requirements .

thus , aliens adjusting status under s. 1545 would not have been eligible for pell grants .

h.r .

84 , h.r .

1684 , h.r .

3271 , and s. 8 , as introduced , did not contain restrictions on eligibility for federal student financial aid .

an alien who adjusted to lpr status under any of these bills would have been eligible , as an lpr , for federal financial aid under title iv .

h.r .

84 and h.r .

1684 additionally would have extended this eligibility to unauthorized students who had applied for , but not yet been granted , cancellation of removal / adjustment of status .

appendix a .

comparison of major provisions of bills in the 107 th congress on unauthorized alien students appendix b .

comparison of major provisions of bills in the 108 th congress on unauthorized alien student .

