during the final year of the clinton administration , proposals by the national park service to enforce long - standing policies that regulated the use of snowmobiles in national parks raised a number of questions regarding the potential regulation of such vehicles .

these questions continue to be debated , as the national park service ( nps ) explores optional winter use plans for yellowstone and other units of the national park system , and as various parties challenge the actions of the nps in court .

national park system units account for only about 3% of the land mass of the united states and possess few trails and roads suitable for snowmobiles , compared to areas available on other federal lands ; but — for both proponents and opponents — the question of snowmobile access to the parks has taken on a far greater importance .

to the snowmobile industry and to many in communities neighboring national parks , "snowmobiling is an important part of the economic engine that supports northern communities , winter tourism. .

to environmental groups , snowmobiling "is one of the most environmentally devastating recreational activities permitted by the park service .... resulting in adverse impacts to park wildlife , air and water quality , vegetation , park ecology , and park users. .

underlying the debate are broader questions concerning regulation of emissions and noise from the vehicles and the degree to which restrictions may serve as a precedent or stigma affecting snowmobile and motorized recreation use more generally .

in the 1990s , snowmobiles were allowed access to 43 units of the national park system , including such major parks as yellowstone , grand teton , rocky mountain , acadia , zion , mount rainier , and sequoia .

while numerous park units allowed such access , recreational use of snowmobiles has not been widespread in the park system as a whole .

the national park service administers 391 units ( parks , seashores , monuments , etc. ) .

of these , 348 ( 89% ) have not been open to snowmobiles .

many units are located in climates unsuitable for them or are too small to be used for such recreation .

others ( eg , glacier national park and yosemite ) have banned snowmobiles since the 1970s .

according to the national parks conservation association , use of snowmobiles outside of alaska has mostly been concentrated in five units of the park system: yellowstone national park , voyageurs national park , rocky mountain national park , pictured rocks national lakeshore , and the john d. rockefeller memorial parkway .

yellowstone accounted for about 40% of the snowmobile visitors at these five parks , with a total of 76,571 in the 1999-2000 winter season .

comparative data for all five of these units are not available for years after 1999-2000 .

one of the five , rocky mountain national park , has closed all but one snowmobile route since 2004 — the one route remaining being a 2-mile trail that provides access to national forest land heavily used by snowmobiles .

snowmobile visits to yellowstone increased during the 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 winter seasons , peaking at 87,206 in the latter winter .

in subsequent years , snowmobile visitors to yellowstone plummeted , to a low of 24,049 in 2004-2005 .

changes in access policy ( described later in this report ) as well as drought and low snow pack in recent years contributed to the decline .

two other yellowstone area park units , grand teton national park and the rockefeller memorial parkway , experienced an even more steep decline , from a combined 35,000 snowmobile visits in 2000-2001 to about 7,500 in 2004-2005 .

snowmobile visits have rebounded somewhat since 2004-2005 , but in 2007-2008 they remained at only about 35% of visits in the peak years .

although recreational access by snowmobiles has been permitted in units of the national park system , the park service , in the late 1990s , concluded that such use has generally been in violation of executive orders 11644 and 11989 , issued by presidents nixon and carter respectively .

the nixon order directed that use of off - road vehicles on public lands "be controlled and directed so as to protect the resources of those lands , to promote the safety of all users of those lands , and to minimize conflicts among the various uses of those lands. .

it specified that off - road vehicle "areas and trails shall be located in areas of the national park system ... only if the respective agency head determines that off - road vehicle use in such locations will not adversely affect their natural , aesthetic , or scenic values," and it directed the park service to "monitor the effects of the use of off - road vehicles" and to rescind or limit this use "as necessary to further the policy of this order. .

in january 1999 , the park service received a rulemaking petition from the bluewater network and 60 other environmental organizations seeking a ban on snowmobiles from all units of the national park service .

in response , the service surveyed units of the system to assess the extent to which they were complying with the executive orders .

according to interior department testimony: "the results graphically demonstrated that the national park service was not complying with its statutory and regulatory mandates.... consequently , maintaining the status quo with regard to snowmobiling was simply not an option. .

on april 27 , 2000 , the department of the interior and the national park service announced that "snowmobiling for general recreational purposes will be prohibited throughout the park system , with a limited number of narrow exceptions. .

by july 2000 , the department had backed away from its strict enforcement stance with a clarification: there would be no snowmobile ban in park units pending a formal rulemaking and public comment period , and snowmobile practices prior to the april 2000 announcement ( i.e. , access to more than 40 parks ) would continue through the 2000-2001 winter season .

nps has taken no further action to enunciate a general policy .

since the summer of 2000 , the focus has been on denali national park in alaska and the yellowstone / grand teton area .

both of these areas had been considered exceptions subject to special consideration even under the april 2000 policy announced by the park service .

whether snowmobile access to these parks will be allowed to continue has generated substantial public interest .

in reversing the clinton administration rules on yellowstone access , the national park service set limits on emissions and noise from the snowmobiles that would be allowed in the three yellowstone area park units .

simultaneously , the environmental protection agency developed emission limits applicable to new snowmobiles offered for sale anywhere in the united states beginning in 2006 and 2007 .

the following sections of this report describe the epa regulations and look at the broader issue of snowmobile emissions .

the clean air act gives epa authority to regulate emissions from mobile sources of pollution , including off - road sources such as snowmobiles ; but until 2006 , snowmobiles ( with the exception of those entering the yellowstone area national parks ) were not subject to any federal or state emission regulations .

nor , with the exception of those allowed in yellowstone since 2004 , have they ever been subject to noise regulations .

epa has authority under section 6 of the noise control act of 1972 to regulate noise from "transportation equipment ( including recreational vehicles and related equipment ) . .

but the agency's office of noise abatement and control was disbanded in 1982 , and epa has not issued any regulations under the statute in the 26 years since then .

members of congress , both from western and other states , have expressed an interest in whether there will be continued snowmobile access to national parks .

at least five hearings have been held on these issues since the 106 th congress , and congress has on three occasions approved language in appropriations bills to require that nps temporary winter use rules permitting snowmobiles in yellowstone and grand teton national parks and on the rockefeller memorial parkway remain in effect for the year covered by the appropriations bill .

the fy2008 interior appropriations bill ( s. 1696 , §116 ) , as reported by the senate appropriations committee ( s.rept .

110-91 ) , would have continued this temporary solution , stipulating that yellowstone's interim winter management rule remain in effect during the 2007-2008 winter season , but the final consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) did not include such language .

lawsuits challenging the nps final winter use plan did not request preliminary injunctions , however , allowing local operations to continue under the same temporary rules that had been in effect for the previous three years .

in the 108 th congress , representative holt twice attempted to amend interior department appropriation bills to prohibit spending to manage recreational snowmobile use in the three yellowstone area park units except in accordance with the clinton administration rule phasing out snowmobiles .

the first such amendment ( h.amdt .

266 to h.r .

2691 ) was defeated on a tie vote , 210-210 , july 17 , 2003 .

the second attempt ( h.amdt .

563 to h.r .

4568 ) was defeated on june 17 , 2004 , by a vote of 224-198 .

other legislation to prohibit snowmobile access to national parks and to grant continued access was introduced , but not acted on , in the 107 th and 108 th congresses .

snowmobile issues remain far from resolved , despite actions by congress , epa , the national park service , and the courts .

congress and the nps have provided a temporary resolution of the yellowstone access issue since 2004 , but the issue is now returning to the limelight , as a federal district court has vacated final regulations for yellowstone access for a third time .

the development of these rules showed that public interest in snowmobile issues remains significant , and that the national park service's preferred alternatives for snowmobile access to yellowstone remain overwhelmingly unpopular .

the draft yellowstone area winter use plan that was open for comment from march through june 2007 generated 122,190 public comments , of which only 193 ( 0.1% ) supported the nps preference .

among those opposed , environmental groups and individuals that want snowmobiles banned from the park form a solid majority .

they are joined by 7 of the 8 living former directors of the national park service itself .

the environmental protection agency was also critical of the spring 2007 preferred alternative , noting that it would result in five times more carbon monoxide emissions and 17 times more hydrocarbon emissions than the exclusive use of multi - passenger snowcoaches .

epa concluded that "either the preferred alternative should be modified or a different alternative should be selected that meets the resource protections identified by the national park service. .

this level of opposition would seem to guarantee that members of congress will retain an interest in the resolution of these issues .

continued action is also likely in the courts , as the national park service responds to the latest court decision .

