the united states has historically led the international community in establishing regimes intended to limit the spread of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons and missiles .

the regimes and their member countries use cooperative and coercive measures to achieve nonproliferation and counterproliferation objectives .

multilateral agreements and organizations are supplemented by strong bilateral cooperation among key allies , unilateral political and economic actions , and recourse to military operations should they become necessary .

congress supports the nonproliferation regimes primarily by providing statutory authority and funding for u.s. participation , establishing policy , and mandating punitive actions to help enforce the international standards set by the regimes .

the term "regime" often refers to the entire array of international agreements , multilateral organizations , national laws , regulations , and policies to prevent the spread of dangerous weapons and technologies .

the nuclear nonproliferation regime is presently the most extensive , followed by those dealing with chemical and biological weapons , and then by the missile regime .

the difficulty of producing nuclear weapons material ( highly enriched uranium or plutonium ) and the great awareness of nuclear weapons' destructiveness together have been conducive to creating a complex regime with widespread agreement on the priority of nuclear nonproliferation .

chemical weapons are easier to make and rely on readily available precursors , and they are far less destructive .

biological weapons also rely on dual - use technology , and as technology has spread , efforts to build a more extensive control regime have intensified .

finally , there is no international consensus on the danger of missile proliferation to support a nonproliferation treaty or a binding regime with enforcement mechanisms .

a key aspect of all the regimes is their attempt to control exports of sensitive goods and technologies through supplier agreements .

these are the nuclear suppliers group and the zangger committee for nuclear technology , the australia group for chemical and biological weapons technology , and the missile technology control regime .

in the last decade , these export control regimes have expanded their membership , expanded and refined their control lists , and increased coordination among member states .

at the same time , however , the non - binding nature of some of the regimes and growing resistance to them by certain countries , including some regime members , limits their effectiveness .

a major dilemma is whether to include new members , that may not be u.s. allies and may not have reliable export controls , or to limit membership to countries with excellent nonproliferation credentials .

regime members may be afforded special access to controlled technology by the other members , so this issue also affects decisions on whether to include non - allies .

table 1 lists the proliferation control regimes , their components and statutory authority .

there are many arms control treaties and other activities that address aspects of wmd and conventional weapons beyond the regimes covered in this report .

the nuclear nonproliferation regime encompasses several treaties , extensive multilateral and bilateral diplomatic agreements , multilateral organizations and domestic agencies , and the domestic laws of participating countries .

since the dawn of the nuclear age , u.s. leadership has been crucial in developing the regime .

while there is almost universal international agreement opposing the further spread of nuclear weapons , several challenges have arisen in recent years: india and pakistan tested nuclear weapons in 1998 ; north korea withdrew from the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) in 2003 and tested a nuclear device in 2006 and 2009 ; libya gave up a clandestine nuclear weapons program in 2004 , and iran was found to be in non - compliance with its treaty obligations in 2005 .

the discovery of the nuclear black market network run by a.q .

khan has spurred new thinking about how to strengthen the regime , including enhanced export controls and greater restrictions on sensitive technology .

however , the extension of civil nuclear cooperation by the united states and other countries to india , a non - party to the npt , has raised questions about what benefits still exist for non - nuclear - weapons states that remain within the treaty regime .

in 2011 , there were five declared nuclear weapons states ( united states , russia , great britain , france , china ) , three de facto nuclear weapons states ( india , israel , pakistan ) , and one country — north korea — that has probably produced enough plutonium for at least half a dozen nuclear bombs and has tested two nuclear devices .

this is considerably less than predicted 40 years ago , when president kennedy warned of the possibility that , by the 1970s , the united states could "face a world in which fifteen or twenty or twenty - five nations may have these weapons. .

the nonproliferation regime has not stopped all proliferation , but it has helped restrain nuclear ambitions and solidified an international norm of behavior strongly condemning proliferation .

many countries that could make nuclear weapons have not , but some have at one time or another taken significant steps towards acquiring a nuclear weapons capability .

argentina , brazil , south africa , iran , iraq , north korea , taiwan , sweden , and south korea all have had nuclear weapons development programs .

both japan and germany had nuclear weapons programs during the second world war , but did not succeed in making nuclear weapons before their programs were halted at the end of the war .

argentina , brazil , south korea , sweden , taiwan , and south africa abandoned their nuclear weapons programs and joined the npt as non - nuclear - weapons states .

south africa was the only country in this group to have built and abandoned actual warheads .

ukraine , kazakhstan , and belarus inherited nuclear weapons on their soil when the soviet union collapsed , but opted to join the npt as non - nuclear - weapons states ( the warheads were returned to russia ) .

despite its membership as a non - nuclear - weapons state in the npt , libya gave up a clandestine nuclear weapons program in december 2003 .

while only a few countries maintain an interest in developing nuclear weapons , it is difficult to predict how many countries or terrorist groups may in the future want a nuclear weapons capability .

some of the major challenges in preventing nuclear proliferation will include the following: controlling access to sensitive nuclear fuel cycle technologies , such as uranium enrichment and spent fuel reprocessing , via multilateral ownership or some other mechanism ; strengthening physical protection of all source and special nuclear materials globally , with continued emphasis on controlling nuclear materials smuggling from the former soviet union and other countries with weak controls ; strengthening the international atomic energy agency's safeguards system ; strengthening national export control laws and regulations , per u.n. security council resolution 1540 ; negotiating with north korea to verify and dismantle its nuclear weapons program ; restraining nuclear proliferation in india and pakistan ; restraining nuclear programs in the middle east , including those of israel and iran ; preventing u.s. technology from aiding the development of wmd and delivery systems in foreign countries ; strengthening international verification and enforcement of nonproliferation agreements .

prohibitions against the use of chemical weapons date back to the international peace conferences that met at the hague in 1899 and 1907 ; these pre - world war i prohibitions were reaffirmed in the 1919 versailles treaty and further expanded in the 1925 geneva protocol .

in some ways , it is more difficult to prevent the proliferation of these weapons than nuclear weapons because they require a smaller infrastructure and the production technologies are much more widely disseminated .

furthermore , it is more difficult to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate chemical and biological activities .

the regimes that have grown up around these weapons include treaties , supplier agreements , and domestic laws .

in the early 1980s , the united states and its allies heightened their concern over the spread of missiles as the advanced industrial nations' monopoly on missile technology gave way to a diffusion of missiles and missile technology throughout much of the world .

in april 1987 , the united states , canada , france , west germany , italy , japan , and the united kingdom created the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) to prevent the proliferation of missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles capable of delivering nuclear weapons .

today , 34 countries are formal partners in the mtcr .

although there is no permanent secretariat or headquarters , the french foreign ministry acts as a central point of contact .

in addition , china , israel , romania , and the slovak republic have agreed to observe mtcr guidelines as "unilateral adherents. .

china's application for mtcr membership , submitted in 2004 , remains under review by the mtcr member states .

china officially reiterated its commitment to mtcr goals in february 2008 and has adopted its own internal legislation and organizational structures .

israel completed a memorandum of understanding with the united states affirming its commitment to abide by mtcr guidelines .

under the u.s. - india nuclear agreement ( u.s. - india 123 agreement of october 2008 ) , india will be required to adhere to mtcr guidelines .

india remains interested in joining the mtcr , and talks continue .

and in april 2009 , kazakhstan said it would consider joining the mtcr a foreign policy priority .

the regime is based on the premise that foreign acquisition and development of missiles can be delayed , made more difficult and expensive , and even prevented if major producers agree to control exports of missiles and the equipment and technology used in missile production .

the mtcr is similar in this regard to the nuclear suppliers group , the australia group , and the wassenaar arrangement .

it differs from the nuclear and chemical non - proliferation regimes in that the mtcr is not supported by a treaty and has no international organization to verify or enforce compliance .

rather , the mtcr is a set of common export control guidelines adopted and administered independently by each of the partner nations through consensus .

the specific missile equipment and technology subject to the guidelines is described in an annex to the mtcr guidelines and divided into two categories .

each of the member countries is to exercise particular restraint in considering transfers of items in category i , which include complete rocket systems and unmanned air vehicle ( uav ) systems capable of delivering a 500-kilogram ( 1,100-pound ) payload to a range of 300 kilometers ( 186 miles ) or more , and complete subsystems of such missiles and vehicles .

there is a strong presumption by the mtcr to deny transfers of these systems and components .

the guidelines further state that the transfer of category i production facilities will not be authorized .

in addition , export restraints are to be applied to category ii items , which consist of other components , equipment , material , and technology that would be usable in the production of missiles and uavs .

category ii also includes , at item number 19 , complete rocket systems and uavs with a 300-km range but not capable of delivering a 500-kg payload to that range ( as covered by category i ) , and in item number 20 , individual rocket stages and rocket engines and production equipment usable for systems with a range of 300 km with less than a 500-kg payload .

in january 1993 , mtcr partners revised the guidelines to limit the risks of proliferation of missile delivery systems for all weapons of mass destruction: chemical and biological weapons as well as nuclear weapons .

the guidelines now call for particular restraint and the presumption to deny transfers of any missiles ( whether or not they are included in the annex ) and of any items in the annex if the government judges that they are intended to be used for the delivery of weapons of mass destruction .

this addition is commonly referred to as a "catch - all" clause .

the mtcr has undergone a transformation from a small group of western industrial countries to a more inclusive formal and informal group of countries .

argentina , with its condor ii missile program , was originally one of the primary targets of the regime , but that country terminated development of condor ii and is now a full partner in the mtcr .

south africa and brazil had active missile programs but are now partners .

brazil currently chairs the mtcr .

whereas the soviet union was the primary source for missiles to the third world in the 1970s and 1980s , russia has become a partner in the mtcr .

even so , the united states has sanctioned some russian organizations for improper exports to iran .

china has been , and still is , another significant supplier of missiles and missile technology to developing countries , but has committed to observing the mtcr guidelines and pledged not to transfer surface - to - surface missiles that meet the mtcr thresholds .

in spite of these commitments , some russian and chinese organizations and individuals apparently continue to supply components and technical assistance for missile production .

north korea reportedly has become a primary supplier of missiles and missile technology to some developing countries .

iran , syria , india , and pakistan are the other countries of major concern regarding the development and acquisition of missiles .

missile programs in china , egypt , and south korea have also caused concern in washington .

cruise missiles have always been included with ballistic missiles and space - launch vehicles in the mtcr but are now receiving greater attention as advanced propulsion and guidance technology is becoming more widely available .

the united states long ago stated its support for expanding membership of the mtcr "to include additional countries that subscribe to international non - proliferation standards , enforce effective export controls , and abandon offensive ballistic missile programs. .

the united states will not support space launch programs in non - mtcr countries , but will consider exports of mtcr items for use in space - launch programs by mtcr countries on a case - by - case basis .

the united states and other mtcr countries are promoting regional efforts to reduce the demand for missiles and persuade countries to forgo the acquisition of missiles .

in october 2012 , the united states announced it had agreed to modify its agreement with south korea regarding south korea's commitment to the mtcr .

now south korea will be able to increase the maximum range of its ballistic missiles to 800 km , while maintaining its mtcr commitment not to export such missiles .

because of its own commitments to the mtcr and the inf treaty , the united states will not assist south korea technically with the development and deployment of these short - range ballistic missiles .

this change , however , could further stress relations with north korea , challenge relations with china and japan ( now within range of these new missile range limits ) , and serve as precedent for other mtcr members to modify their own commitments to the mtcr as they see fit .

some nations have not joined the mtcr , affirming their sovereign right to acquire , develop , deploy , and export missiles .

it has been particularly difficult to control dual - use technologies that may be used for civilian space launch vehicles , civil aviation , general industry , and tactical weapons .

mtcr member states have been working since about 1999 on a supplementary effort that has become known as the international code of conduct ( icoc ) against ballistic missile proliferation .

on november 25 , 2002 , the icoc entered into force and the united states was an initial subscribing member .

the code includes broad principles , general commitments and modest confidence - building measures .

the bush administration saw the icoc as "an important addition to the wide range of tools available to countries to impede and roll back this proliferation threat. .

the code attempts to fill the gap of demand - side incentives by offering "cooperation" with respect to civilian space - launch vehicle technology in exchange for significant nonproliferation commitments .

however , such cooperation is to be worked out between states and is not specified in the draft document , making incentives for cooperation appear a bit elusive .

although the mtcr has no international organization , partner countries hold monthly meetings in paris among embassy representatives ( called "points of contact" meetings ) , hold technical experts' meetings ( including information exchanges ) and convene a plenary once each year .

in this manner , partners revise the guidelines and the equipment annex and admit new partners .

at the madrid 2005 plenary , partners emphasized that the threat of proliferation of wmd delivery systems constitutes a threat to international peace and security and stressed the need to reduce the risks associated with terrorism in this regard .

this theme has been reiterated each year since .

the directorate of defense trade controls of the state department administers the regulations governing the export of items on the munitions list — those items that are subject to controls under the aeca and the itar .

the bureau of industry and security in the u.s. department of commerce administers the regulations governing the export of items on the commerce control list — those items that are primarily for civilian use but have applications for the development , testing , or production of missiles .

the missile technology export control ( mtec ) working group is chaired by a state department official that reviews controversial missile export license cases .

the missile trade analysis group ( mtag ) , another interagency group chaired by a state department representative , reviews intelligence reports on diversions of missile technology from legitimate recipients to others .

officials in the state department's bureau of international security and nonproliferation ( isn ) and regional bureaus also undertake diplomatic initiatives to dissuade additional nations from developing missiles , to persuade other countries to adopt export controls on missile technology , and to reduce the perceived need for missiles .

department of defense officials have established a counter - proliferation policy that addresses export controls , security relationships with friendly and hostile countries , defensive and offensive military operational concepts , and equipment .

many organizations within the department implement the various aspects of the counter - proliferation policy , but the assistant secretary for international security policy ( asd ( isp ) ) has the primary responsibility for counter - proliferation policy formulation .

the department of the treasury also oversees u.s. embargoes through its office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) , and helps enforce export controls through the u.s. customs service .

the united states has maintained stringent controls on missiles and missile technology under the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c .

2751 ) and the international traffic in arms regulations ( 22 c.f.r .

part 121 , hereafter the itar ) .

in the early 1980s , the united states also unilaterally adopted tighter export controls on dual - use equipment and technology that could benefit foreign missile programs .

dual - use controls have been placed in the export administration regulations ( 15 c.f.r .

730-799 ) pursuant to the authority of the export administration act of 1979 ( 50 u.s.c .

app .

2401 et seq. ) .

and the international emergency economic powers act ( 50 u.s.c .

1701 et seq. ) .

successive administrations have updated regulations to reflect changes adopted by the mtcr , changes in u.s. law , and the changing international political environment .

the export administration act of 1979 has expired several times , but the president has invoked his authority to continue in effect the system of controls that had been maintained under the act .

members of congress became concerned about missile proliferation in the mid - 1980s because growing evidence of missile proliferation in developing world was an additional consideration in funding president reagan's ballistic missile defense programs .

libya had purchased soviet scud missiles and iran and iraq were firing missiles at each other .

congress had little or no involvement in shaping the mtcr , because it was neither a treaty nor an executive agreement .

soon after the regime was announced in april 1987 , it became apparent that companies and individuals from a number of mtcr member countries ( such as west germany , italy , britain , and france ) had transferred goods and technical assistance to missile development teams in argentina , brazil , iraq , egypt , and elsewhere .

in 1987 , the united states also learned that china had transferred intermediate range missiles to saudi arabia .

many members of congress thought the mtcr needed enforcement mechanisms , additional members , and stricter compliance .

several bills were introduced at the time with the intention of strengthening the u.s. position on missile nonproliferation .

those bills that included sanctions against nations , companies , and individuals who violate the mtcr guidelines gained widespread bipartisan congressional support .

at the time , bush administration officials maintained that the president already had sufficient authority to reprimand or sanction foreign governments , companies , and individuals for inappropriate missile transfers and objected to the imposition of mandatory statutory sanctions .

president george h.w .

bush pocket - vetoed the export administration act of 1990 , which included a missile nonproliferation provision , as well as the chemical and biological weapons control act .

however , he signed the defense authorization bill that contained a nearly identical section on missile nonproliferation policy .

the act became law in the 101 st congress ( h.r .

4739 , title xvii of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1991 , p.l .

101-510 ) .

it added chapter 7 to the arms export control act , sections 6 ( l ) and 11b to the export administration act of 1979 , and established an annual reporting requirement .

chapter 7 of the aeca has been amended several times .

 ( 22 u.s.c .

2751 et seq. ) .

chapter 7 of the aeca requires the president to impose sanctions on u.s. and foreign individuals who improperly conduct trade in controlled missile technology .

if someone inappropriately transfers mtcr category ii goods or technology , they will be denied , for two years , any u.s. government contracts relating to missile equipment or technology , and u.s. export licenses for missile equipment and technology .

the aeca requires sanctions for at least two years if a person inappropriately transfers category i items ; these include denial of all u.s. government contracts and export licenses for any item on the u.s .

munitions list .

if the president determines that a foreign person has substantially contributed to the design , development , or production of missiles by a non - mtcr country , he shall prohibit for at least two years u.s. imports of items produced by that person .

the act includes presidential waivers , exclusions , determination requirements , and definitions that allow the administration to take no action in certain circumstances .

these sanctions may be waived by the president , and they generally do not apply to transfers of missile goods or technology to an mtcr adherent or from an mtcr adherent .

the united states has imposed missile sanctions against entities in several countries including china , pakistan , south africa , north korea , iran , russia , india , syria , and egypt .

 ( sections 6 ( l ) and 11b , 50 u.s.c .

app .

2405 and app .

2410b ) .

similarly , the eaa requires controls on u.s. missile - related exports and sanctions against u.s. and foreign persons who improperly transfer dual - use goods or technology listed in the mtcr annex .

if a person improperly transfers category ii goods or technology , he will be denied export licenses for two years for missile equipment and technology controlled under the eaa .

if a person improperly exports category i goods or technology , he will be denied export licenses for at least two years for all items controlled under the eaa .

if a foreign person exports goods or technology that substantially contribute to the design , development , or production of missiles in a non - mtcr country , he will be denied license to import his products into the united states for at least two years .

actions that trigger sanctions under the provisions of either the aeca or the eaa , require commensurate sanctions under the other act .

over the years , congress has called for additional sanctions , expressed views to strengthen nonproliferation policies related to missiles or advanced conventional weapons , and expressed views on improving the organization of the u.s. government to implement those policies in several other laws .

there are provisions related to missile proliferation in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , the iran , north korea and syria nonproliferation act , the iran - iraq arms nonproliferation act of 1992 , the freedom support act , and the cooperative threat reduction act .

these and other laws are listed in appendix b .

a perennial issue of varying interest is whether the mtcr and the associated u.s. sanctions are effective enough to warrant the economic and political costs to the united states , and whether additional or alternative feasible measures would increase effectiveness .

many analysts consider the mtcr a successful vehicle for quiet diplomacy .

the mtcr has been credited with slowing missile development in brazil and india , and blocking a collaborative program of argentina , egypt , and iraq to build the condor missile .

this missile would have been a significant improvement over the scud - based missiles used by iraq in the gulf war .

russia and china have probably stopped exporting entire missiles that fall under the parameters of the mtcr , even though some entities within those countries may continue to transfer components and technology .

most european countries and asian allies have tightened their export control laws and some have prosecuted individuals who have smuggled missile technology as well as nuclear and chemical production technology .

long - range ballistic missiles are expensive and extraordinarily difficult to develop and produce .

because most countries cannot produce and integrate all of the sophisticated components required , many observers argue the mtcr and complementary export controls will probably continue to impede development of the most advanced missiles .

the major ongoing challenge , however , is that much of the international commerce in missiles and missile technology occurs between nations that do not adhere to mtcr guidelines .

china and north korea are not members , although china promised to observe the guidelines after the united states had twice imposed economic sanctions on chinese companies for transferring missile items to pakistan , on the condition that the united states would lift those sanctions .

north korea's missile development , production , deployment , and export of missiles has continued largely outside the reach of the mtcr .

reported north korean exports of missile production technology to iran , pakistan , syria , and egypt seriously undercut the international standards and goals of the regime .

in the view of some analysts , the activities of north korea demonstrate the failure of the mtcr and the necessity of other measures .

other analysts argue north korea demonstrates the need to expand the regime in order to make it even more difficult for such missile proliferation to occur .

some difficulties associated with the nuclear , chemical , and biological nonproliferation regimes may be even more acute with respect to missile technology .

the notion of a suppliers' regime dividing the world into "haves" and have - nots" is even more exacerbated in the case of missiles , because there is no treaty and no quid pro quo for the have - nots .

the international code of conduct is an attempt to address this "carrot" side of the carrot - stick equation , but the lack of specificity on incentives is viewed by some as too limited and by others as too potentially expansive .

also , there is a common perception that technology is shared among mtcr members , although the guidelines call for the strong presumption of denial of category i - class missiles and technology to anyone .

the u.s. decision in 2002 to elaborate what constitutes "rare occasions" ( wherein category i presumption of denials could be overruled ) lends credence to this view .

further , although many of the materials associated with nuclear weapons can be identified and controlled , the materials and components used in missiles are commonly used in a wide range of commercial manufacturing processes .

ballistic missile programs can be nearly indistinguishable from civilian space launch programs , and some missile production equipment , technology , and materials are difficult to distinguish from civilian items .

this is particularly acute in the case of uavs .

as some developing nations become increasingly capable of producing missiles indigenously , the effectiveness of supplier controls may gradually erode .

some analysts see attempts to control missile technology exports as futile and argue for the fewest export restrictions possible , emphasizing the importance to the u.s. economy of exports .

others say the u.s. government should not allow the export of any goods that are likely to harm u.s. national security , despite the potential positive effect on some american business interests .

in addition to the promotion of exports , other foreign policy and national security goals may also compete with missile nonproliferation for government attention and action .

for instance , u.s. leaders hope to encourage russia and china to become stable and responsible actors in their regions and in the international community , to pursue economic and political reforms , and to respect internationally recognized human rights .

the united states has sought the cooperation of those two countries and many others in efforts to block nuclear proliferation , terrorism , drug trafficking , and organized crime .

although missile nonproliferation will remain an issue of utmost importance , other goals may occasionally be given greater emphasis .

however , when political leaders suspend missile nonproliferation policies in favor of other goals , the credibility of the u.s. policy and that of the mtcr can be damaged , according to many observers .

it can become more difficult to persuade other countries to comply with a set of standards when the united states appears to enforce the standards on a selective basis .

the priority to be given to missile nonproliferation was occasionally a point of contention between congress and the bush administration .

congress has established economic sanctions that must be imposed on companies that trade in missile technology contrary to the mtcr guidelines .

the imposition , lifting , and waiving of these sanctions frequently cause controversy .

some analysts suggest these negative actions should be coupled with positive incentives to induce countries to refrain from proliferation .

positive incentives could include trade credits , development assistance , military assistance , technology transfers , access to space launch and satellite capabilities , or security guaranties .

but other analysts contend the security benefits derived from adhering to the mtcr should be sufficient and that the united states should not try to buy compliance .

according to many foreign policy specialists , the underlying political and security problems that drive proliferation must be resolved before meaningful curbs can be applied to the spread of weapons of mass destruction and missiles .

the united states and its partners in the mtcr have helped countries , particularly neighbors in regions of ongoing conflict , adopt confidence - building measures such as those that have contributed to security and cooperation in europe .

many of these same countries also try to help correct regional imbalances of military forces and to facilitate peace negotiations and arms control talks .

security alliances and military assistance also can play a role in restraining missile development .

the u.s. security umbrella over western europe and parts of asia and the transfer of large quantities of advanced conventional weapons helped dissuade a number of u.s. allies from developing weapons of mass destruction and helped deter aggression .

some analysts contend that the security of some allies was enhanced by the deterrent power of u.s. nuclear - armed missiles previously deployed in their territory or , possibly in the case of israel , by indigenous weapons .

the u.s. government has also decided that it is appropriate to sell missiles ( u.s. army tactical missile systems ) with a potential range of 250 km to countries such as turkey , greece , south korea , britain , france , and germany , though it forbids sales of missiles with a range of more than 300 km .

however , the superiority of u.s. military technology may actually persuade some adversary countries to develop weapons of mass destruction and missiles as their best means of deterring u.s. intervention .

some analysts see missile defense systems as a proper alternative to export controls , though most see them as supplementing other military , political , and long - range economic measures ( including export controls and sanctions ) .

the united states will likely continue to deploy theater and long - range missile defense systems and has provided such defensive missiles and capabilities to friends and allies in europe , east asia , and the middle east .

as the united states seeks to increase defense cooperation in the area of missile defenses , a few have raised issues over the applicability of mtcr guidelines .

additionally , as longer range ballistic missile defense systems are developed , some might question the transfer of such systems or technologies to other countries in the context of the mtcr .

for instance , would chinese development of intermediate - range ballistic missile defense systems be widely viewed as a permitted mtcr export to countries such as pakistan ? .

air defense missiles and anti - theater ballistic missiles probably enhance the security of u.s. allies , but none are expected to be 100% effective .

in some cases , such as taiwan , deployments might increase tensions .

the obama administration and congress will likely continue to review defense and missile nonproliferation policy objectives in this area .

appendix a .

proliferation control regime membership appendix b .

select executive orders executive order 13382 ( june 28 , 2005 , 70 fr 38567 ) blocking property of weapons of mass destruction proliferators and their supporters .

executive order 13222 ( august 17 , 2001 , 66 fr 44025 , august 22 , 2001 ) continuation of export control regulations , upon the expiration of the export administration act of 1979 .

continued on august 15 , 2002 by notice published in federal register on august 16 , 2002 .

executive order 13128 ( june 25 , 1999 , 99fr 16634 ) implementation of the chemical weapons convention and the chemical weapons convention implementation act .

executive order 13049 ( june 11 , 1997 , 62 fr 32471 ) organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons .

executive order 13030 ( december 12 , 1996 , 61 fr 66187 ) administration of foreign assistance and arms exports .

executive order 12938 ( november 14 , 1994 , 59 f.r .

59-9 , 50 u.s.c .

1701 note ) declares the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery as an unusual and extraordinary threat and declares a national emergency to deal with that threat .

amended by eo 13094 ( july 28 , 1998 , 63 fr40803 and by eo 13128 ( june 25 , 1999 , 64 fr 34703 ) .

executive order 12946 ( january 20 , 1995 , 60 f.r .

4829 , 22 u.s.c .

2551 note ) establishes the president's advisory board on arms proliferation policy .

executive order 12851 ( june 11 , 1993 , 58 f.r .

33181 , 22 u.s.c .

2797 note ) delegates president's authority under the export administration act , arms control export act , and the chemical and biological weapons control , warfare elimination act , national defense authorization act for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 , national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1993 , and foreign relations authorizations act for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 , to the secretaries of state , commerce , defense , and treasury , and director of acda .

executive order 11850 ( april 8 , 1975 , 40 f.r .

16187 , 50 u.s.c .

1511 note ) renunciation of certain uses in war of chemical herbicides and riot control agents .

