the electromagnetic spectrum is the arena in which information operations take place .

aspects of the electromagnetic spectrum can be used by adversaries to conduct kinetic attacts , disrupt access , influence targets , and steal data .

a review of the types of activity currently being conducted by adversaries illustrates the overlap between the various pillars of information operations .

the following are examples of current threats to the united states .

these incidents indicate a trend towards cyberattacks as a form of political manipulation .

if cyberspace is a new battlefield on which war may be waged , then the international community will be challenged to come together to determine its conduct .

the attack on estonia , a member of nato , raised questions of whether the actions taken could be defined as an "armed attack" under article 5 of the washington treaty .

internationally , article 51 of the charter of the united nations is the guidance for response .

for now , nato and other states consider network protection to be a national responsibility .

however , questions of sovereignty , attribution , and response thresholds remain .

it has been presumed that the rules of engagement for information operations will follow the law of armed conflict , meaning a response taken after receiving an electronic or cyber attack will be scaled in proportion to the attack received , and distinctions will be maintained between combatants and civilians .

however , protection against attack through cyberspace is a new task for the military , and the offensive tools and other capabilities used by dod to stage retaliatory strikes against enemy systems are highly classified .

experience has shown that a reactive defense is not very effective against increasingly powerful and rapid malicious cyber attacks , or against other malicious activity using the electromagnetic spectrum .

a more effective defense against these attacks is to incorporate predictive , active , and pre - emptive measures that allow dod defenders to prevent , deflect , or minimize the efforts of the attacker .

accurate attribution is important when considering whether to retaliate using military force or police action .

some dod officials have indicated that the majority of cyber attacks against dod and u.s. civilian agency systems are suspected to originate in china , and these attacks are consistently more numerous and sophisticated than cyberattacks from other malicious actors .

the motives appear to be primarily cyberespionage against civilian agencies , dod contractors , and dod systems .

the espionage involves unauthorized access to files containing sensitive industrial technology , and unauthorized research into dod operations .

some attacks included attempts to implant malicious code into computer systems for future use by intruders .

the air force is not laying claim to the cyber domain , but their new mission statement issued in august 2008 indicates they are building a force to operate in that domain .

former secretary of the air force michael w. wynne recently stated that the new mission of the u.s. air force is to "fly and fight in air , space , and cyberspace. .

for the air force , this means that military action in cyberspace now includes defending against malicious activity on the internet , and anywhere across the entire electromagnetic spectrum ( including the energy spectrum bands for radio , microwaves , infrared , x - ray , and all other options for directed energy ) , where national security is threatened .

secretary wynne stated that cyberwarfare flows naturally from the air force's traditional missions , such as downloading data from platforms in space , and that u.s. capabilities should be expanded to also enable the shut down of enemy electronic networks.. air force officials , led by the air force chief of staff gen. michael mosley , met at the pentagon in a "cyberwarfare - themed summit" during november 2006 , to make plans for a new air force cyber command .

general elder stated that the planning session would include an assessment of cyberwarfare requirements to defend the nation .

homeland security reportedly would also be a large part of the cyber command's new responsibility , including protection of telecommunications systems , utilities , and transportation .

several issues to be considered may include ( 1 ) what kind of educational skills , technical skills , and training are needed for staff at the cyber command and ( 2 ) , what kind of career path can be offered to those in the air force who want to participate in defending the new cyber domain .

a provisional team led by afcyber commander maj. gen. william t. lord was starting to look at these issues .

then , air force chief of staff , gen. norton schwartz , announced october 8 , 2008 , that there would no longer be a new major command developed for cyberspace operations .

instead the air force would continue with standing up a component - numbered air force , which will focus on cyberspace warfighting operations .

the 24 th air force will be led by a 2-star general , and will operate in support of northcom and stratcom missions , which could include anything from hurricane relief to homeland defense .

all other administrative , policy and organize - train - equip oversight now falls under air force space command .

the afcyber ( p ) team will stay formed so they can assist in developing a roadmap to outline the actions needed to transition the work done this past year over to the space command .

the provisional team will also assist with other tasks as needed until the new organizational construct is formalized .

the new organization will operate on an equal footing with other numbered air force headquarters .

eventually , there may be a new major command for cyberspace that will stand alongside the air force space command and the air combat command .

some speculate that there may be a stand - alone combatant command for cyberspace .

precise future command relationships are still being decided in the ongoing planning effort , and more details will be forthcoming .

currently , the u.s. strategic command ( usstratcom ) , which is a unified combatant command for u.s. strategic forces , controls military information operations , space command , strategic warning and intelligence assessments , global strategic operations planning under the unified command plan , and also has overall responsibility for computer network operations ( cno ) .

usstratcom gives most of the daily defense and operational activity to the national security agency .

beneath usstratcom are several joint functional component commands ( jfccs ) : ( 1 ) space and global strike integration ; ( 2 ) intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ; ( 3 ) network warfare ; ( 4 ) integrated missile defense ; and ( 5 ) combating weapons of mass destruction .

the jfcc - network warfare ( jfcc - nw ) , and the jfcc - space & global strike ( jfcc - sgs ) have responsibility for overall dod cyber security , while the joint task force - global network operations ( jtf - gno ) and the joint information operations warfare center ( jiowc ) both have direct responsibility for defense against cyber attack .

the jtf - gno defends the dod global information grid , while the jiowc assists combatant commands with an integrated approach to information operations .

these include operations security , psychological operations , military deception , and electronic warfare .

the jiowc also coordinates network operations and network warfare with the jtf - gno and with jfcc - nw .

the president's comprehensive national cyber - security initiative has identified cyber education and training as one of its critical areas of focus .

as more u.s. military systems become computerized and linked to networks , some argue there is a growing need for qualified electronic warfare operators .

in a recent speech , deputy secretary of defense gordan england said that "in the u.s. , the number of scientists and engineers is declining at a time when numbers in many other countries are increasing .

this decline in science and technology poses the greatest long - term threat to our country ... including our cyber networks. .

each year , dod conducts a cyber defense exercise , where teams of students from the nation's military academies advance their cyber skills in practice competition where they deliberately hack into test networks , and also protect these test networks against intrusions by other teams .

the officer professional military education policy ( opmep ) offers guidance on information operations ( io ) and areas related to both io and command and control ( c2 ) , and efforts are underway towards integrating cyber warfare into joint professional military education curriculum .

an impediment to the program is the heavily classified nature of cyberspace doctrine and the international students who comprise some of the student body at the schools .

however , dod has stated a need to attract , train , and retain skilled information technology professionals beyond those enrolled in the military academies .

in an attempt to solve this problem , the air force research laboratory ( afrl ) cyber operations branch offers a 10-week summer program each year for university students , consisting of intensive studies in cyber security .

the advanced course in engineering ( ace ) cyber security boot camp has been held at rome , ny , for the past four years , and involves between 40 and 60 student applicants from air force and army pre - commissioning programs , some national science foundation cyber corps fellows , and some civilian college students .

for 2006 , the theme was "cybercraft," described as a non - kinetic weapon platform that seeks dominance in cyberspace , corresponding to the new mission of the air force to "fly and fight in air , space , and cyberspace," according to program director dr. kamal jabbour .

students study legal and policy issues , cryptography , computer network defense and attack , steganography , and analysis of malicious code .

ace students also spend an average of three days per week in internships at the air force research laboratory , or with local industry partners , and participate in officer development activities .

the faculty for ace is drawn from syracuse university , west point , and norwich university .

dhs and the national science foundation ( nsf ) have recognized the ace program as an official internship program for federal cyber service scholarship for service ( sfs ) program .

the sfs program seeks to increase the number of skilled students entering the fields of information assurance and cyber security by funding universities to award two - year scholarships in cyber security .

graduates are then required to work for a federal agency for two years .

recent ace graduates are now working at the air force office of special investigations , the afrl , and the nsa .

also , as a result of ace summer program success with college students , in september 2006 , syracuse university developed a special cyber security course to be offered in 12 high schools in new your state .

currently , syracuse university offers 29 introductory cyber security courses in 148 high schools throughout new york , new jersey , maine , massachusetts , and michigan .

high school students who successfully complete the cyber security courses can receive syracuse college credits in computer science and engineering .

dod officials have noted that because 80% of u.s. commerce goes through the internet , dod systems must develop a capability to adequately protect it .

currently , to assist commercially owned telecommunications networks , communications satellite systems , and other civilian critical infrastructure systems , dod contracts with carnegie mellon's software engineering institute to operate the computer emergency response team ( cert - cc ) , while dhs , in partnership with private industry , operates a parallel organization called us - cert .

both organizations monitor trends in malicious code and cyber crime , send out alerts about threats to computer systems , and provide guidance for recovery after an attack .

the defense information systems agency oversees the military's global information grid ( gig ) , and provides support for net - centric operations through the jtf - gno .

the gig is an interconnected set of capabilities that includes any dod system , equipment , software , or service that transmits , stores , or processes dod information .

the joint staff j - 6 is working on an initiative called "gig 2.0," which may take advantage of cloud computing applications and social networking tools .

few details are known about the program at this point , but briefings suggest that the goal is to reconcile the inconsistent security postures and interoperability problems among the multiple service infrastructures by creating a joint dod enterprise .

the federal government has taken steps to improve its own computer security and to encourage the private sector to also adopt stronger computer security policies and practices to reduce infrastructure vulnerabilities .

in 2002 , the federal information security management act ( fisma ) was enacted , giving the office of management and budget ( omb ) responsibility for coordinating information security standards and guidelines developed by federal agencies .

in 2003 , the national strategy to secure cyberspace was published by the bush administration to encourage the private sector to improve computer security for the u.s. critical infrastructure through having federal agencies set an example for best security practices .

the omb has mandated that all u.s. government enable their networks to handle traffic from ipv6 , a next generation set of internet protocols .

ipv6 was developed in response to the imminent exhaustion of ip addresses ; the new system will allow more flexibility in address assignment , and simplifies the translating mechanism used to route traffic to particular sites .

network security is also a built - in feature of ipv6 architecture , and government systems running it are anticipated to be more secure .

federal agencies now support the ipv6 protocol and its interoperability , but are not necessarily using it on a day - to - day basis .

full operational transition to ipv6 remains a future goal .

the national cyber security division ( ncsd ) , within the national protection and programs directorate of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) oversees a cyber security tracking , analysis and response center ( cstarc ) , tasked with conducting analysis of cyberspace threats and vulnerabilities , issuing alerts and warnings for cyberthreats , improving information sharing , responding to major cybersecurity incidents , and aiding in national - level recovery efforts .

in addition , a new cyber warning and information network ( cwin ) has begun operation in 50 locations , and serves as an early warning system for cyberattacks .

the cwin is engineered to be reliable and survivable , has no dependency on the internet or the public switched network ( psn ) , and reportedly will not be affected if either the internet or psn suffer disruptions .

in january 2004 , the ncsd also created the national cyber alert system ( ncas ) , a coordinated national cybersecurity system that distributes information to subscribers to help identify , analyze , and prioritize emerging vulnerabilities and cyberthreats .

ncas is managed by the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) , a partnership between ncsd and the private sector , and subscribers can sign up to receive notices from this new service by visiting the us - cert website .

to observers , the most pervasive question regarding cyberattack and response is , "who's in charge ? .

in an attempt to clarify roles and responsibilities and to develop an all - encompassing strategy , then president george w. bush launched a $30 billion dollar comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative ( cnci ) in 2008 to prioritize and coordinate cyber defense across government .

the initiative was prompted by the director of national intelligence's urging , and was led by odni's joint interagency cyber task force .

the obama administration is continuing this effort by conducting a 60-day cybersecurity review , led by melissa hathaway , who was the coordinator of the odni task force .

 ( for more on the cnci , see crs report r40427 , comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative: legal authorities and policy considerations , by john rollins and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

dhs is lead agency for the federal government's cybersecurity ; it coordinates government and private - sector efforts through its national cyber security center ( ncsc ) .

however , there are high - ranking officials who assert that nsa should run the government's cybersecurity efforts as it does for the military .

the resident technological talent within nsa and the benefits of having both defensive and offensive capabilities co - located make the idea attractive to some .

critics point towards allegations of nsa's civil liberties violations with internet monitoring programs , and say that having this one agency in charge of all things cyber will erode the public trust .

also , the private sector may be less inclined to work cooperatively with the nsa — which they maintain would present a big problem , as 80% of the united states infrastructure is privately owned .

there have also been criticisms that dhs's cyber programs are inadequately funded , and that the leadership lacks the authority necessary to push forward its initiatives .

to illustrate this point , rob beckstrom , the director of the ncsc resigned on march 6 , 2009 over concerns that the nsa was "dominating" cybersecurity efforts .

at a hearing on march 10 , 2009 , several experts testifying before the house subcommittee on emerging threats , cybersecurity and science and technology echoed this sentiment .

 ( for a thorough discussion of reforming the national security structure to meet today's challenges , see crs report rl34455 , organizing the u.s. government for national security: overview of the interagency reform debates , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

several areas for possible congressional consideration are: help to determine appropriate responses by dod to a cyberattack ; examine the incentives for achieving the goals of the national strategy to secure cyberspace and the cnci , or for developing a new national strategy ; search for ways to improve the security of commercial software products ; explore ways to increase security education and awareness for businesses and home pc users ; and find ways for private industry and government to coordinate to protect against cyberattack .

reconsider classification levels to allow for increased information sharing oversight for dod execution of cyberdefense appropriations congress may also wish to consider ways to harmonize existing federal and state laws that require notice to persons when their personal information has been affected by a computer security breach , and that impose obligations on businesses and owners of that restricted information .

h.r .

1525 — the internet spyware ( i - spy ) prevention act of 2007 , proposed penalties for unauthorized access to computers , or the use of computers to commit crimes .

the bill passed the house on may 22 , 2007 .

on may 23 , 2007 , this bill was received in the senate and referred to the committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

1684 — the department of homeland security authorization act for fiscal year 2008 established within the department of homeland security an office of cybersecurity and communications , headed by the assistant secretary for cybersecurity and communications , with responsibility for overseeing preparation , response , and reconstitution for cybersecurity and to protect communications from terrorist attacks , major disasters , and other emergencies , including large - scale disruptions .

the bill directed the assistant secretary to do the following: establish and maintain a capability within the department for ongoing activities to identify threats to critical information infrastructure to aid in detection of vulnerabilities and warning of potential acts of terrorism and other attacks .

conduct risk assessments on critical information infrastructure with respect to acts of terrorism .

develop a plan for the continuation of critical information operations in the event of a cyber attack .

define what qualifies as a cyber incident of national significance for purposes of the national response plan .

develop a national cybersecurity awareness , training , and education program that promotes cybersecurity awareness within the federal government and throughout the nation .

consult and coordinate with the under secretary for science and technology on cybersecurity research and development to strengthen critical information infrastructure against acts of terrorism .

this bill passed the house on may 9 , 2007 .

on may 11 , 2007 , this bill was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.r .

3237 — the smart grid facilitation act of 2007 proposed to modernize the nation's electricity transmission and distribution system to incorporate digital information and controls technology .

"smart grid" technology functions would include the ability to detect , prevent , respond to , or recover from cyber - security threats and terrorism .

the new grid modernization commission would be directed to undertake , and update on a biannual basis , an assessment of the progress toward modernizing the electric system including cybersecurity protection for extended grid systems .

on august 24 , 2007 , the bill was referred to house subcommittee on energy and environment .

h.r .

3221 — the new direction for energy independence , national security , and consumer protection act proposed establishment of the grid modernization commission to facilitate the adoption of smart grid standards , technologies , and practices across the nation's electricity grid .

this bill became p.l .

110-289 on july 30 , 2008 .

h.r .

1585 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , required the secretary of defense to conduct a quadrennial roles and missions review for the department of defense , which will also include cyber operations .

this bill became p.l .

110-181 on january 28 , 2008 .

h.rept .

110-146 , on h.r .

1585 , by the committee on armed services .

this report stated that within 180 days after enactment of the national defense authorization act for 2008 , the secretary of defense must submit a report to congressional defense committees , with the following requirements: 1. review legal authorities to ensure effective cyberspace operations .

2. review dod's policies for information sharing and risk management for cyberspace operations .

3 .

provide an overview of dod's cyberspace organization , strategy , and programs .

4 .

assess operational challenges , including the impact of the military's reliance on commercial communications infrastructure .

5 .

recommend ways to improve dod's ability to coordinate cyberspace operations with law enforcement , intelligence communities , the commercial sector , and with international allies .

the recommendations shall include consideration of the establishment of a single joint organization for cyberspace operations .

6 .

provide an overview of training and educational requirements .

7 .

provide an overview of funding for cyberspace operations .

the dod roles and missions review report , issued in january 2009 , placed cyberspace high on the list of focus areas , and asserted that this domain will be one in which major combat operations may take place .

could provocative actions , for example , intelligence gathering by the u.s. military that involves using intrusive cyber or electronic warfare tools to monitor enemy system activity , or copy important data files , be challenged by other nations as a violation of the law of armed conflict ? .

exploratory intrusions by u.s. military computers to gather intelligence may provoke other strong or unexpected responses from some countries or extremist groups that are targeted for monitoring by dod .

several questions also may arise when considering a retaliatory cyber or electronic warfare counterstrike: ( 1 ) if the attacker is a civilian , should the attack be considered a law enforcement problem rather than a military matter ? .

 ; ( 2 ) if a u.s. military cyberattack against a foreign government also disables civilian infrastructure , can it be legally justified ? .

 ; or ( 3 ) how can the military be certain that a targeted foreign computer system has not been innocently set up to appear as an attacker by another third party attacker ? .

some observers have stated that success in future conflicts will depend less on the will of governments , and more on the perceptions of populations , and that perception control will be achieved and opinions shaped by the warring group that best exploits the global media .

as a result of the increasingly sophisticated use of networks by terrorist groups and the potentially strong influence of messages carried by the global media , does dod now view the internet and the mainstream media as a possible threat to the success of u.s. military missions ? .

how strongly will u.s. military psyop be used to manipulate public opinion , or reduce opposition to unpopular decisions in the future ? .

another emerging issue may be whether dod is legislatively authorized to engage in psyop that may also affect domestic audiences .

dod joint publication 3-13 , released february 2006 , provides current doctrine for u.s. military information operations , and explains the importance of achieving information superiority .

however , the dod information operations roadmap , published october 2003 , states that psyop messages intended for foreign audiences increasingly are consumed by the u.s. domestic audience , usually because they can be re - broadcast through the global media .

the roadmap document states that , " ... the distinction between foreign and domestic audiences becomes more a question of usg ( u.s. government ) intent rather than information dissemination practices ( by dod ) . .

this may be interpreted to mean that dod has no control over who consumes psyop messages once they are re - transmitted by commercial media .

appendix a. definitions information information is a resource created from two things: phenomena ( data ) that are observed , plus the instructions ( systems ) required to analyze and interpret the data to give it meaning .

the value of information is enhanced by technology , such as networks and computer databases , which enables the military to ( 1 ) create a higher level of shared awareness , ( 2 ) better synchronize command , control , and intelligence , and ( 3 ) translate information superiority into combat power .

dod information operations the current dod term for military information warfare is "information operations" ( io ) .

dod information operations are actions taken during time of crisis or conflict to affect adversary information , while defending one's own information systems , to achieve or promote specific objectives .

the focus of io is on disrupting or influencing an adversary's decision - making processes .

an io attack may take many forms , for example: ( 1 ) to slow adversary computers , the software may be disrupted by transmitting a virus or other malicious code ; ( 2 ) to disable sophisticated adversary weapons , the computer circuitry may be overheated with directed high energy pulses ; and ( 3 ) to misdirect enemy sensors , powerful signals may be broadcast to create false images .

other methods for io attack may include psychological operations such as initiating tv and radio broadcasts to influence the opinions and actions of a target audience , or seizing control of network communications to disrupt an adversary's unity of command .

computer network defense ( cnd ) is the term used to describe activities that are designed to protect u.s. forces against io attack from adversaries .

part of cnd is information assurance ( ia ) , which requires close attention to procedures for what is traditionally called computer and information security .

dod places new emphasis on the importance of dominating the entire electromagnetic spectrum with methods for computer network attack and electronic warfare .

dod also emphasizes that because networks are increasingly the operational center of gravity for warfighting , the u.s. military must be prepared to "fight the net. .

because the recently declassified source document containing this phrase has some lines blacked out , it is not clear if "... net" means the internet .

if so , then this phrase may be a recognition by dod that psychological operations , including public affairs work and public diplomacy , must be employed in new ways to counter the skillful use of the internet , social networking tools , and the global news media by u.s. adversaries .

appendix b. dod information operations core capabilities in joint publication 3-13 , dod identifies five core capabilities , or "pillars," for conduct of information operations: ( 1 ) psychological operations , ( 2 ) military deception , ( 3 ) operations security , ( 4 ) computer network operations , and ( 5 ) electronic warfare .

these capabilities are interdependent , and increasingly are integrated to achieve desired effects .

psychological operations ( psyop ) dod defines psyop as planned operations to convey selected information to targeted foreign audiences to influence their emotions , motives , objective reasoning , and ultimately the behavior of foreign governments , organizations , groups , and individuals .

for example , during the operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) , broadcast messages were sent from air force ec - 130e aircraft , and from navy ships operating in the persian gulf , along with a barrage of e - mail , faxes , and cell phone calls to numerous iraqi leaders encouraging them to abandon support for saddam hussein .

the civilian al jazeera news network , based in qatar , beams its messages to well over 35 million viewers in the middle east , and is considered by many to be a "market competitor" for u.s. psyop .

terrorist groups can also use the internet to quickly place their own messages before an international audience .

some observers have stated that the u.s. will continue to lose ground in the global media wars until it develops a coordinated strategic communications strategy to counter competitive civilian news media , such as al jazeera .

partly in response to this observation , dod now emphasizes that psyop must be improved and focused against potential adversary decision making , sometimes well in advance of times of conflict .

products created for psyop must be based on in - depth knowledge of the audience's decision - making processes .

using this knowledge , the psyops products then must be produced rapidly , and disseminated directly to targeted audiences throughout the area of operations .

following the smith - mundt act , dod policy prohibits the use of psyop for targeting american audiences .

however , while military psyop products are intended for foreign targeted audiences , dod also acknowledges that the global media may pick up some of these targeted messages , and replay them back to the u.s. domestic audience .

therefore , a sharp distinction between foreign and domestic audiences cannot be maintained .

military deception ( mildec ) deception guides an enemy into making mistakes by presenting false information , images , or statements .

mildec is defined as actions executed to deliberately mislead adversary military decision makers with regard to friendly military capabilities , thereby causing the adversary to take ( or fail to take ) specific actions that will contribute to the success of the friendly military operation .

as an example of deception during operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) , the u.s. navy deployed the tactical air launched decoy system to divert iraqi air defenses away from real combat aircraft .

operational security ( opsec ) opsec is defined as a process of identifying information that is critical to friendly operations and which could enable adversaries to attack operational vulnerabilities .

for example , during oif , u.s. forces were warned to remove certain information from dod public websites , so that iraqi forces could not exploit sensitive but unclassified information .

computer network operations ( cno ) cno includes the capability to: ( 1 ) attack and disrupt enemy computer networks ; ( 2 ) defend our own military information systems ; and ( 3 ) exploit enemy computer networks through intelligence collection , usually done through use of computer code and computer applications .

the joint information operations warfare command ( jiowc ) and the joint functional component command for network warfare ( jfccnw ) are responsible for the evolving mission of computer network attack .

the exact capabilities of the jiowc and jfccnw are highly classified , and dod officials have reportedly never admitted to launching a cyber attack against an enemy , however many computer security officials believe the organization can destroy networks and penetrate enemy computers to steal or manipulate data , and take down enemy command - and - control systems .

they also believe that the organization consists of personnel from the cia , national security agency , fbi , the four military branches , and civilians and military representatives from allied nations .

the joint task force for global network operations ( jtf - gno ) , currently residing within the defense information security agency ( disa ) , is an operational arm of the services .

a recent decision to move the jtf - gno under the auspices of the national security agency will put defensive and operational capabilities within the same organization .

cnd is defined as defensive measures to protect information , computers , and networks from disruption or destruction .

cnd includes actions taken to monitor , detect , and respond to unauthorized computer activity .

responses to io attack against u.s. forces may include use of passive information assurance tools , such as firewalls or data encryption , or may include more intrusive actions , such as monitoring adversary computers to determine their capabilities before they can attempt an io attack against u.s. forces .

some dod officials believes that cnd may lack sufficient policy and legal analysis for guiding appropriate responses to intrusions or attacks on dod networks .

therefore , dod has recommended that a legal review be conducted to determine what level of intrusion or data manipulation constitutes an attack .

the distinction is necessary in order to clarify whether an action should be called an attack or an intelligence collection operation , and which aggressive actions can be appropriately taken in self - defense .

this legal review should also determine if appropriate authorities permit u.s. forces to retaliate through manipulation of unwitting third party computer hosts .

and finally , dod has recommended structuring a legal regime that applies separately to domestic and to foreign sources of computer attack against dod or the u.s. critical .

infrastructure .

cne is an area of io that is not yet clearly defined within dod .

before a crisis develops , dod seeks to prepare the io battlespace through intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance , and through extensive planning activities .

this involves intelligence collection , that in the case of io , is usually performed through network tools that penetrate adversary systems to gain information about system vulnerabilities , or to make unauthorized copies of important files .

tools used for cne are similar to those used for computer attack , but configured for intelligence collection rather than system disruption .

although cne is an activity designed for data exfiltration , it is unknown whether the methods used to penetrate networks could also be used for an attack by an adversary .

cna is defined as effects intended to disrupt or destroy information resident in computers and computer networks .

as a distinguishing feature , cna normally relies on a data stream used as a weapon to execute an attack .

for example , sending a digital signal stream through a network to instruct a controller to shut off the power flow is cna , while sending a high voltage surge through the electrical power cable to short out the power supply is considered electronic warfare ( however , a digital stream of computer code or a pulse of electromagnetic power can both be used to also create false images in adversary computers ) .

during operation iraqi freedom , u.s. and coalition forces reportedly did not execute any computer network attacks against iraqi systems .

even though comprehensive io plans were prepared in advance , dod officials stated that top - level approval for several cna missions was not granted until it was too late to carry them out to achieve war objectives .

u.s. officials may have rejected launching a planned cyber attack against iraqi financial computers because iraq's banking network is connected to a financial communications network also located in europe .

consequently , according to pentagon sources , an information operations attack directed at iraq might also have brought down banks and atm machines located in parts of europe as well .

such global network interconnections , plus close network links between iraqi military computer systems and the civilian infrastructure , reportedly frustrated attempts by u.s. forces to design a cyber attack that would be limited to military targets only in iraq .

in a meeting held in january 2003 , at the massachusetts institute of technology , white house officials sought input from experts outside government on guidelines for use of cyber - warfare .

officials have stated they are proceeding cautiously , since a cyberattack could have serious cascading effects , perhaps causing major disruption to networked civilian systems .

in february 2003 , the bush administration announced national - level guidance for determining when and how the united states would launch computer network attacks against foreign adversary computer systems .

the classified guidance , known as national security presidential directive 16 , is intended to clarify circumstances under which a disabling computer attack would be justified , and who has authority to launch such an attack .

electronic warfare ( ew ) ew is defined by dod as any military action involving the direction or control of electromagnetic spectrum energy to deceive or attack the enemy .

high power electromagnetic energy can be used as a tool to overload or disrupt the electrical circuitry of almost any equipment that uses transistors , micro - circuits , or metal wiring .

directed energy weapons amplify , or disrupt , the power of an electromagnetic field by projecting enough energy to overheat and permanently damage circuitry , or jam , overpower , and misdirect the processing in computerized systems .

the electronic warfare division of the army asymmetric warfare office has responsibility for creating electronic warfare policy , and for supporting development of new electromagnetic spectrum concepts that can be translated into equipment and weapons .

dod now emphasizes maximum control of the entire electromagnetic spectrum , including the capability to disrupt all current and future communication systems , sensors , and weapons systems .

this may include ( 1 ) navigation warfare , including methods for offensive space operations where global positioning satellites may be disrupted ; or , ( 2 ) methods to control adversary radio systems ; and , ( 3 ) methods to place false images onto radar systems , block directed energy weapons , and misdirect unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) or robots operated by adversaries .

for example , military io testing examined the capability to secretly enter an enemy computer network and monitor what their radar systems could detect .

further experiments tested the capability to take over enemy computers and manipulate their radar to show false images .

non - kinetic weapons emit directed electromagnetic energy that , in short pulses , may permanently disable enemy computer circuitry .

for example , an electromagnetic non - kinetic weapon mounted in an aircraft , or on the ground , might disable an approaching enemy missile by directing a high power microwave ( hpm ) beam that burns out the circuitry , or that sends a false telemetry signal to misdirect the targeting computer .

also , at reduced power , electromagnetic non - kinetic weapons can also be used as a non - lethal method for crowd control .

the active denial system ( ads ) , developed by the air force , is a vehicle - mounted nonlethal , counter - personnel directed energy weapon .

currently , most non - lethal weapons for crowd control , such as bean - bag rounds , utilize kinetic energy .

however , the ads projects a focused beam of millimeter energy waves to induce an intolerable burning sensation on an adversary's skin , repelling the individual without causing injury .

proponents say the ads is safe and effective at ranges between 50 and 1,600 feet .

the nonlethal capabilities of the ads are designed to protect the innocent , minimize fatalities , and limit collateral damage .

approximately $40 million has been spent on this technology over the past ten years .

military officials requested that ads devices be deployed to iraq to assist marines in guarding posts , countering insurgent snipers and protecting convoys .

in july 2005 , it was reported that the active denial system would be deployed to iraq before the end of the year .

under an initiative called project sheriff , troops would receive a total of 15 vehicles .

concerns of political fallout have delayed these plans ; as of early 2007 , initial deployment was slated no sooner than 2010 .

the ads system would be the first operationally deployed directed - energy weapon for counter - personnel missions .

