racial profiling is the practice of targeting individuals for police or security detention based on their race or ethnicity in the belief that certain minority groups are more likely to engage in unlawful behavior .

examples of racial profiling by federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies are illustrated in recent legal settlements and data collected by governmental agencies and private groups , suggesting that minorities are disproportionately the subject of routine traffic stops .

the terrorist attacks by the arab muslim hijackers on september 11 , and the resultant focus on persons of middle eastern and south asian descent , further underscore the tension between demands of national security and the need for even - handed law enforcement .

some argue that racial profiling is a rational and efficient method of allocating investigatory resources to safeguard the security of all .

others counter , however , that the practice is not a legitimate security measure , but diverts investigatory scrutiny from real sources of potential threat , and that where discrimination is concerned , liberty and security do not conflict .

the issue has periodically attracted congressional interest , particularly with regard to existing and proposed legislative safeguards , which include the proposed end racial profiling act of 2011 ( h.r .

3618 / s. 1670 ) in the 112 th congress .

several courts have also considered constitutional ramifications of the practice as an "unreasonable search and seizure" under the fourth amendment and , more recently , as a denial of the fourteenth amendment's equal protection guarantee .

furthermore , many states have laws that address racial profiling , and several major state and county law enforcement agencies , like the new jersey state police , have resolved charges of racial profiling by its officers by agreeing to extensive reform efforts and reporting requirements .

racial profiling , or consideration of race by police and law enforcement , is a subject that the courts have reviewed on several constitutional grounds , including whether such profiling constitutes a violation of the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable search and seizure or the equal protection guarantee of the fourteenth amendment .

both of these grounds are discussed in greater detail below .

in addition to the u.s. constitution , several federal statutes provide a basis for racial profiling lawsuits .

in february 2001 — notably , before the events of september 11 — president bush directed the attorney general to review the use of race by federal enforcement agencies and "to develop specific recommendations to end racial profiling. .

subsequently , doj undertook a study of policies and practices of federal law enforcement agencies to determine the nature and extent of racial profiling .

two years later , the bush administration issued a ban on the practice by federal law enforcement agencies — including the federal bureau of investigation , the secret service , the dea , and the department of homeland security — but permitted exceptions for the use of race and ethnicity to combat potential terrorist threats .

the policy prohibits the use of "generalized stereotypes" based on race or ethnicity , and allows officers to consider racial factors in "traditional law enforcement" activities only as part of a specific description or tip from an informant .

however , the guidance "do[es] not affect current federal policy with respect to law enforcement activities and other efforts to defend and safeguard against threats to national security or the integrity of the nation's borders. .

when federal law enforcement officers are "investigating or preventing threats to national security or other catastrophic events ( including the performance of duties related to air transportation security ) , or enforcing laws protecting the integrity of the nation's borders," they may consider both race and ethnicity "to the extent permitted by the constitution and laws of the united states. .

the impact of the guidance may be limited by several factors .

first , it applies only to federal agents , whereas the bulk of national law enforcement remains a state and local matter .

in addition , the guidance is largely advisory , since it imposes no penalties and otherwise appears to lack legal force .

second , its numerous exceptions , particularly for national security investigations , invite broad circumvention , such as where individuals of middle eastern appearance are concerned .

similarly , profiling of latinos to preserve "border integrity" with mexico would arguably be permitted by the current policy .

