shoulder - fired surface - to - air missiles ( sams ) , also known as manpads ( man - portable airdefense systems ) , developed in the late 1950s to provide military ground forces protection fromenemy aircraft , are receiving a great deal of attention as potential terrorist weapons that might beused against commercial airliners .

these missiles , affordable and widely available through a varietyof sources , have been used successfully over the past three decades both in military conflicts ( 1 ) as well as by terroristorganizations .

the missiles are about 5 to 6 feet in length , weigh about 35 to 40 pounds , and,depending on the model , can be purchased on the black market anywhere from a few hundred dollarsfor older models to upwards of almost a quarter million dollars for newer , more capable models.seventeen countries , including the united states , produce man - portable air defense systems .

 ( 2 ) shoulder - fired samsgenerally have a target detection range of about 6 miles and an engagement range of about 4 milesso aircraft flying at 20,000 feet ( 3.8 miles ) or higher are relatively safe .

 ( 3 ) most experts consider aircraftdepartures and landings as the times when it is most vulnerable to shoulder - fired sam engagement .

there are a number of different types of shoulder - fired sams , primarily classified by theirseekers .

 ( 4 ) .

approximately 20 countries have manufactured manpads or their components , and it isestimated that a total of over 1 million of these systems have been manufactured worldwide .

 ( 10 ) unclassified estimates ofthe worldwide shoulder - fired sams inventory are widely varied .

published estimates on the numberof missiles presently being held in international military arsenals range from 350,000 ( 11 ) to 500,000 ( 12 ) but disparities among nations in accountability , inventory control , and reporting procedures could make these figuresinaccurate .

tracking proliferation to non - state actors is considered even more difficult by manyanalysts .

there are a variety of means that terrorist organizations use to obtain missiles , includingtheft , black market , international organized crime , arms dealers , and transfers from states willing tosupply missiles to terrorists .

often times , the only verification that a non - state actor has ashoulder - fired sam is when a launcher or fragments from an expended missile are recovered afteran attack .

 ( 13 ) as in thecase of military arsenals , estimates of shoulder - fired sams in terrorist hands vary considerably.estimates range from 5,000 ( 14 ) to 150,000 ( 15 ) of various missile types , but most experts agree that thevastmajority of them are ir guided and are likely sa - 7 derivatives , versions of which are reportedlypossessed by at least 56 countries .

 ( 16 ) some examples attest to the large numbers of these missiles in circulation .

as of december2002 , coalition forces in afghanistan had reportedly captured 5,592 shoulder - fired sams from thetaliban and al qaeda .

 ( 17 ) some of these included u.s. stinger and british blowpipemissiles believed to have been left over from the afghan - soviet war .

shoulder - fired missilescontinue to be seized routinely during coalition raids , suggesting that taliban and al qaeda forcesoperating in and around afghanistan still have access to an undetermined number of these systems .

in iraq , recent press reports indicate that 4,000 to 5,000 shoulder - fired sams may be available toiraqi insurgent forces .

 ( 18 ) africa , the region where most terrorist attacks with these missiles have occurred , reportedly also hasa large quantity of shoulder - fired sams left over from cold war sponsorships and the numerouscivil wars of that era .

 ( 19 ) .

unclassified estimates suggest that between 25 and 30 non - state groups possessshoulder - fired sams .

table 1 depicts non - state groups believed to possess shoulder - fired samsthrough the 1996-2001 time period .

additional groups may have obtained missiles since 2001 butdetails at the unclassified level are not known .

actual or estimated quantities of these weaponsattributed to non - state groups at the unclassified level are also unknown .

table 1 .

non - state groups with shoulder - fired sams:1996-2001 ( 20 ) note: ( c ) is possession confirmed through intelligence sources or actual events ; ( r ) is reported butnot confirmed .

recent u.s. military encounters with shoulder - fired missiles in iraq and afghanistan canprovide some useful operational insights which could be benefit government , industry , and civilaviation officials involved in the protection of civil aviation .

in december 2003 an unidentifiedshoulder - fired sam struck an engine of a u.s. air force c - 17 globemaster iii cargo aircraft thathad just departed baghdad international airport .

 ( 21 ) the aircraft , which was outfitted with missile defenses , made anemergency landing at baghdad international airport .

 ( 22 ) in january 2004 , a c - 5 galaxy transport aircraft - also havingan antimissile system - was hit by a shoulder - fired sam and the aircraft was able to andsuccessfully .

 ( 23 ) one senior air force official reportedly stated that "for whatever reason , the [defensive] systems on theairplanes didn't counter [the attacks] .

we don't have any indications that it was a systemmalfunction. .

 ( 24 ) theofficial speculated that sensor placement , and aircraft altitude and maneuvering played a role in thesesystems not functioning as they were intended .

 ( 25 ) according to one report , from october 25 , 2003 to january 2004 , nine military helicopterswere shot down or crashed landed in iraq after having been hit by hostile ground fire , resulting inthe deaths of 39 service members .

 ( 26 ) an army study , commissioned after these incidents , reportedlyrevealed a number of findings .

the study team reportedly concluded that rpgs , ( 27 ) and sa - 7 , sa - 14 , andsa - 16 shoulder - fired sams were used in the attacks against the helicopters .

 ( 28 ) another study findingrevealed that the iraqis had studied the helicopter flight patterns and had developed effectivetechniques to engage the aircraft .

 ( 29 ) according to the chief of the u.s. transportation command ( ustranscom ) , u.s.military cargo aircraft take ground fire in afghanistan and iraq from shoulder - fired sams,anti - aircraft artillery and small arms on almost a daily basis .

 ( 30 ) uscentcom officialswere unable to provide an unclassified update on shoulder - fired missiles attacks against u.s. militaryaircraft in afghanistan and iraq as of september 2004 , although classified data of this nature isbeing tracked by uscentcom and dod .

 ( 31 ) some analysts believe that the u.s. has significantly improvedaircraft countermeasures and defenses and modified aircraft operating procedures , resulting in fewersuccessful attacks , but others suggest that attacks with shoulder - fired sams have become socommonplace that they no longer garner the attention that they once did .

estimates vary , but the most widely reported statistics on civilian aircraft experience withshoulder - fired missiles indicate that , over the past 26 years , 35 aircraft have come under attack fromthese weapons .

 ( 32 ) ofthose 35 , 24 were shot down resulting in more than 500 deaths .

 ( 33 ) while these statistics havebeen frequently cited , at least one report has suggested that these figures may significantly overstatethe actual numbers of civilian - use aircraft that have been attacked by shoulder - fired missiles .

 ( 34 ) that report insteadconcluded that only about a dozen civil - registered airplanes have been shot down during this timeperiod and further notes that some of these aircraft were operating as military transports when theywere shot down .

on the contrary , available statistics may underestimate the total number of civilianencounters with shoulder - fired missiles .

it is possible that some aircraft shootings may have beenattributed to other causes for various reasons and are not included in these statistics .

also , it ispossible that some failed attempts to shoot down civilian airliners have either gone undetected orunreported .

for many incidents considered to be a shoulder - fired missile attack against a civilian aircraft,there is scant information to make a conclusive determination if that was , in fact , the case .

in someinstances , while it is widely recognized that the incident was a shooting , there is no conclusivedetermination regarding the weapon used .

for example , in some instances of aircraft shootings thereare discrepancies among accounts of the event , with some reporting that the aircraft was broughtdown by a shoulder - fired missile while others claim that anti - aircraft artillery was used .

also , inmany instances there are questions as to whether the flight operation was strictly for a civilian useor may have been for military or dual use ( civilian / military ) purposes .

therefore , there is nouniversal agreement as to which incidents should be included in the tally of civilian aviationencounters with shoulder - fired missiles .

based on our review of available reports and databases on the subject , the statistic of 24catastrophic losses out of 36 aircraft appears to be a reasonable estimate , but not a definitive count,of the total worldwide civil aviation shootings with shoulder - fired missiles or similar weapons .

however , since most of these incidents took place in conflict zones , they are not typically consideredto be politically motivated because the targeted aircraft may have been perceived as being used formilitary purposes .

 ( 35 ) while most of these historical examples do not provide any particular insight into the politicalmotivation behind shootings of civilian aircraft in the current context of the global war on terrorism,they do provide some indication of the possible outcomes of such an attack .

based on the commonlycited statistic of 24 aircraft destroyed out of 36 attacks over the past 26 years , the odds of survivingan attack are not particularly encouraging .

using these numbers , the odds of surviving an attack maybe estimated to be only about 33% .

however , it is important to note that these incidents include awide variety of aircraft types including small piston - engine propeller airplanes , turboprop airplanes,helicopters , and business jets , as well as large jet airliners .

since the current legislative proposalsand administration efforts to date have been aimed at addressing ways to protect large commercialjet airliners from shoulder - fired missiles , it is useful to examine past incidents involving these typesof aircraft in order to gain further insight regarding the threat .

crs reviewed various sources and found only six incidents where large turbojet airlinerswere reported to have been attacked by shoulder - fired missiles .

these incidents are listed in table2 .

 ( 36 ) whether all ofthese incidents were in fact attacks using shoulder - fired missiles is still a matter of considerabledebate as conclusive evidence supporting such a finding is lacking for most of these incidents .

ofthese six encounters identified , there was a wide range of outcomes .

only two of the six shootingsresulted in catastrophic losses of the airplanes - - killing all on board .

in three other incidents , theairplanes received significant damage - - but no one was killed .

finally , in the widely reportednovember 2002 attempt to shoot down an israeli charter jet in mombasa , kenya , the aircraft wasfired upon by two missiles but was not hit .

table 2 .

suspected shoulder - fired missile attacks againstlarge civilian turbojet aircraft ( 1978-present ) in the first instance , the official findings by angolan authorities attributed thenovember 8 , 1983 , crash of a taag angolan airlines boeing 737 to a technical problemwith the airplane , but unita rebels in the area claimed to have shot down the aircraft witha surface to air missile .

 ( 37 ) all 130 people on board were killed , potentially makingthis the deadliest single incident involving a shoulder - fired missile attack against a civilianaircraft .

however , investigation of the incident failed to produce any conclusive evidenceof missile or gunfire damage on any of the aircraft wreckage .

in the february 9 , 1984 , attack of a taag angolan airlines boeing 737 , the airplanewas struck at an altitude of 8,000 feet during climb out .

the crew reportedly attempted anemergency landing at huambo , angola , but were unable to extend the flaps because ofdamage to the airplane's hydraulic systems .

consequently , the crew was unable to slow theairplane sufficiently before landing and overran the runway by almost 600 feet .

the airplanewas a total loss but no one was killed .

 ( 38 ) investigators found evidence leading them to suspect thata bomb detonation in the forward hold , rather than a missile , was responsible for the damageobserved .

however , press accounts reporting that the aircraft was struck by an sa - 7 firedby unita guerillas have led some to conclude that this incident was , in fact , a shoulder - firedmissile attack .

 ( 39 ) in the september 21 , 1984 , incident , an ariana afghan airlines dc - 10 was struckcausing damage to two of the airplane's three hydraulic systems .

while some sources ( 40 ) defined thisincident as a shoulder - fired missile attack , another account indicated that the dc - 10 was hitby "explosive bullets. .

 ( 41 ) the most recent catastrophic loss of a civilian aircraft from a suspected manpadsattack was the october 10 , 1998 , downing of a congo airlines boeing 727 near kindu,democratic republic of congo .

the aircraft was reportedly shot down by a missile , possiblyan sa - 7 , that struck one of the airplane's engines .

tutsi rebels admitted to the shooting,claiming that they believed the airplane to be carrying military supplies .

the final call fromthe captain indicated that the aircraft had been hit by a missile and had an engine fire .

it wasreported that a missile struck the airplane's rear engine .

the ensuing crash killed all 41persons on board .

 ( 42 ) the most recent attempted shooting of a passenger jet was the november 28 , 2002,incident involving an israeli - registered boeing 757 aircraft operated by arkia israeli airlines .

two sa - 7 missiles were fired at the airplane on departure from mombasa , kenya but missed .

while the threat of shoulder - fired missiles has long been recognized by aviation securityexperts , this incident focused the attention of many in congress and the bush administrationon this threat and options to mitigate it .

unlike the prior attacks on jet airliners that occurredin war torn areas , the mombasa attack was clearly a politically motivated attack , believedto have been carried out by terrorists with links to al qaeda .

 ( 43 ) that fact , coupledwith already heightened concerns over aviation security in the aftermath of the september11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , has made the shoulder - fired missile threat a key issue forhomeland security .

amid this heightened concern over the threat of shoulder - fired missiles to commercialaircraft , a dhl cargo airplane was struck by a missile on november 22 , 2004 , whiledeparting baghdad international airport in iraq .

the aircraft's left wing was struck outboardfrom the engine .

damage from the missile severed the airplane's hydraulic lines .

however,the flight crew was able to return to the airport applying differential thrust on the two enginesto maneuver and operating manual cranks to lower the landing gear .

the aircraft , an airbusa300-b4 , departed the runway on landing causing additional damage , including extensiveengine damage from ingesting sand and debris .

 ( 44 ) while no one was killed or injured , the airplane wasdetermined to be a total loss .

most observers believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate the samthreat to airliners .

instead , a menu of options may be considered , including improvementsor modifications to commercial aircraft , changes to pilot training and air traffic controlprocedures , and improvements to airport and local security .

many in congress have expressed concern about the threat manpads could poseto civil aircraft .

specific concerns include protecting civilians and mitigating the potentialfinancial burden for an already besieged airline industry .

legislation has been proposed , andcongressional committees have received classified briefings on the subject in closed doorhearings .

 ( 77 ) during the 108th congress , representative steve israel and senator barbara boxerintroduced legislation ( h.r .

580 , s. 311 ) directing the secretaryof transportation to issue regulations requiring airliners to be equipped with missile defensesystems .

 ( 78 ) language in the conference report accompanying the emergency wartimesupplemental appropriations act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-11 ; h.rept .

108-76 ) directed thedepartment of homeland security ( dhs ) under secretary for science and technology toprepare a program plan for developing such missile protection systems for commercialaircraft .

this program was subsequently funded in appropriations legislation and isprogressing .

the program is described in detail below in the section of this report addressingadministrative plans and programs .

the national intelligence reform act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) directs the presidentto urgently pursue international treaties to limit the availability , transfer , and proliferation ofman - portable air defense systems ( manpadss ) , such as shoulder - fired missiles , worldwide .

the act further directs the president to continue to pursue internationalarrangements for the destruction of excess , obsolete , and illicit manpads stockpilesworldwide .

the act requires the president to report on diplomatic efforts to addressmanpads non - proliferation and requires the secretary of state to provide the congresswith annual briefings on the status of these efforts .

the act also requires the faa toestablish a process for expedited certification of airworthiness and safety for missile defensesystems that can be mounted on commercial aircraft .

the act also requires the dhs toprovide a report within one year assessing the vulnerability of aircraft to manpads attacksand plans for securing airports and aircraft from this threat .

at least three other bills introduced during the 108th congress addressed methods formitigating the threat of shoulder - fired missiles to commercial aviation .

h.r .

4056 , h.r .

5121 section 23 , and h.r .

10 section 4103 all calledfor the pursuit of further diplomatic and cooperative efforts ( including bilateral andmultilateral treaties ) to limit availability , transfer , and proliferation of manpads.additionally , they call for a continuation of current efforts to assure the destruction of excess,obsolete , and illicit stocks of manpads worldwide .

these bills also called for theestablishment of agreements with foreign countries requiring manpads export licenses andprohibiting re - export or retransfer of manpads and associated components to a third party,organization , or foreign government without written consent of the government that approvedthe original transfer .

section 2241 of the state department authorization bill ( s. 2144 ) mirrored the provisions of the three bills described above .

section 2125 of the bill provided$10 million in the "nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs"account for multilateral and bilateral efforts to reduce the threat of manpads .

 ( p.l.108-447 . ) .

in fy2006 , several committees considered legislation pertaining tocounter - manpads programs .

dod requested $13.3 million in research and developmentfunds for a "manpads defense program" ( p.e .

# 0604618d8z ) .

this is to investigate thedevelopment of a ground - based , electro - optical sensor grid that is hoped to provide launchdetection and warning of shoulder - fired missiles .

key aspects of this program are to leveragecommercially available technologies to lower cost , and to ensure that system is suitable foruse in urban environments .

defense authorization conferees ( h.rept .

109-360 , p. 600 ) matched the administration's funding request .

appropriations conferees ( h. rept .

109-359 ,p.444 ) provided $5.5 more than requested .

in response to p.l .

108-11 / h.rept.108-76 , dhs submitted a plan to congress on may22 , 2003 .

 ( 79 ) theplan specifies a two year time frame for development , design , testing , and evaluation of ananti - missile device on a single aircraft type .

the plan anticipates that a parallel faacertification effort will coincide with this system development and demonstration leading toan faa - certified system that can be operationally deployed on commercial aircraft at the endof the two year project or soon thereafter .

the program plan submitted by dhs estimated that the costs to carry out this projectwould consist of $2 million in fy2003 for administrative costs , $60 million in fy2004 forsystem development and initial testing , and an unspecified amount , not to exceed $60million , in fy2005 to complete development and demonstration of the system and obtainfaa certification .

the department of homeland security appropriations act for 2004 ( p.l.108-90 ) fully funded the requested $60 million in fy2004 for this effort and an additional$61 million was appropriated in fy2005 ( h.r .

4567 / p.l 108-334 ) .

forfy2006 , the requested amount of $110 million was fully appropriated for carrying theprogram into the next phase of more detailed system refinement , testing , and certification fordeployment on a wide variety of commercial passenger jets .

this effort is expected toconclude in fy2007 .

the dhs established the system development program in a manner that would applyexisting technologies from the military environment to the commercial airline environmentrather than developing new technologies .

in this manner , the dhs hopes to leverage militaryinvestment in counter - manpads technology in order to identify a technical solution thatcan be deployed in the civil aviation environment in a much faster time frame assuming thatsuch a system can be tailored to meet the operational needs and requirements of civilianflight operations .

the dhs established a counter - manpads special program office ( spo ) tomanage the program which the dhs envisions will consist of three phases .

phase i , whichwas completed in july 2004 , consisted of an intensive six - month effort to assess proposedsolutions based on threat mitigation capabilities , system costs , airframe and avionicsintegration , and faa certification issues .

three contractor teams led by northrop - grumman,bae systems , and united airlines were awarded $2 million each to develop detailed systemsdescriptions and analysis of economic , manufacturing , maintenance , systems safety , andoperational effectiveness issues for applying their systems in the commercial aircraftenvironment .

following a dhs - led review of each contractor team's phase i work and theirproposals for phase ii , on august 25 , 2004 , dhs awarded $45 million to bae systems andnorthrop grumman to carry out phase ii of development .

 ( 80 ) phase ii consistedof an 18-month prototype development and evaluation based on existing technology .

bothcontractors received awards of about $45 million each for this effort which is currentlywrapping up with the delivery of two complete countermeasure units per contractor .

bothcontractors developed systems that rely on laser - based directed ir countermeasures ( i.e.,dircm ) to protect commercial aircraft from ir - guided manpads attacks .

the unitedairlines - led team which was not selected for phase ii , had instead proposed a system thatwould have used expendable flare decoys to divert incoming missiles .

 ( 81 ) according to dhsofficials , two primary reasons why the united team was not selected was that there weresafety issues on the flight line for the expendable pyrotechnic decoys and that there wereissues with the system concerning false alarms .

 ( 82 ) the bae systems team , which also includes american airlines and honeywell , andthe northrop grumman team , which includes federal express and northwest airlines , havedeveloped prototypes over an 18 month period that are being tested on commercial aircraft.the northrop grumann prototype system , called guardian , and the bae systems prototype,dubbed jeteye , both underwent airborne testing on widebody airliners to determine theireffectiveness .

final flight testing and completion of phase ii , originally targeted for january2006 , has been delayed until late february or early march 2006 , although representativesfrom both companies stated that initial data indicate both systems have been able to meet testrequirements specified by dhs .

 ( 83 ) both firms , bae systems and northrop grumman , havealso developed directed energy infrared countermeasures systems for the u.s. military .

 ( 84 ) northrop grummanis currently delivering its large aircraft ircm system for installation on u.s. air force c - 17and c - 130 transports while bae is developing and delivering an ircm system for u.s.army aircraft .

 ( 85 ) that next phase of the dhs counter - manpads program for commercial aircraftwas funded in fy2006 appropriations and the intent of this additional funding is to gainfurther experience installing and testing the systems on a broader array of commercial aircrafttypes and improve the robustness of the systems under operational conditions encounteredin the commercial aviation environment .

the fy2006 dhs appropriations act ( p.l.109-90 ) provides $110 million to award contracts for phase iii of the civilian airlinecounter - manpads program .

this phase will include delivery and installation ofpre - production equipment on commercially operated aircraft by u.s. cargo carriers similarto those aircraft dedicated to meet the civil reserve air fleet ( craf ) requirement .

to fostercompetition , the funds are planned to be used to maintain two contractors in phase iii .

 ( 86 ) during the phaseiii effort , both companies will install test systems on a variety of aircraft types and obtaincertification for use on additional aircraft types .

the goals of phase iii include live - firetesting , improving system reliability to meet performance specifications for commercialairline applications , adding ground notification alerting capabilities , and developing securityfeatures to safeguard sensitive military technology in units installed on aircraft that travelinternationally or are exported to foreign countries .

 ( 87 ) a house proposal to designate $10 million of the fy2006 appropriation for the dhscounter - manpads program toward emerging alternative counter - manpads technologywas not included in the final fy2006 appropriation .

that proposal , contained in housereport language , expressed concern that counter - manpads technologies currently beingpursued under the dhs program "will not be sufficiently able to meet the challenges ofcommercial application at a cost that is economically feasible" and recommended that somefunds be directed toward assessing other emerging technologies , principally ground - basedcountermeasures , that "may be simpler and more cost effective , but are far from fullydeveloped. .

 ( 88 ) while annual operating and support ( o&s ) costs - - estimated by the rand corporation tobe a little over $300,000 per airplane ( 89 ) - - has raised significant concerns among both commercialairplane manufacturers and airlines over the use of aircraft - based counter - manpadssystems , policymakers have not directed the dhs to formally examine alternativetechnologies , although the house did recommend doing so .

however , as previously noted,fy2006 dod appropriations included r&d funding for ground - based electro - optical sensorarrays to detect and warn of shoulder - fired missile attacks .

the fy2007 president's budget request includes $4.88 million for thecounter - manpads spo to continue oversight and evaluation of the phase iii contractsexpected to be awarded in fy2006 and carried out in the fy2006-fy2007 time frame .

thefy2007 president's budget does not seek any additional funding for new dhscounter - manpads initiatives beyond or in addition to the phase iii contracts .

no single solution can immediately and completely mitigate the shoulder - fired samthreat .

as congress considers possible legislative and oversight approaches , it is likely thatit may consider implementing various combinations of available mitigation alternatives inwhole or in part .

in addition , congress may consider phasing in mitigation options to bestrespond to available threat assessments or other criteria .

for example , if threat assessmentsindicate that large widebody airplanes are most at risk , congress may consider whetherinitially equipping these airplanes would more effectively deter the threat of missile attacks .

congress may also consider whether it would be more effective to initially equip aircraft usedon overseas flights , particularly those operating in countries or regions where the risk ofmissile attacks is greatest .

congress may also debate whether equipping only a portion ofthe air carrier fleet would be a sufficient deterrent , whether all - cargo jets should be equipped,whether passenger carrying regional jets should be equipped , or whether equipping the entireair carrier fleet is needed to adequately mitigate the threat .

equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems has advantages.countermeasures are fixed to the aircraft , require little or no flight crew intervention , and canprotect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground - based security measures areunavailable or infeasible to implement .

down sides include a high cost , and potentiallyundermining passenger confidence in the safety and security of air travel .

also , becauseimplementation will take time , countermeasures cannot immediately mitigate today's terroristthreat .

procedural improvements such as flight crew training , changes to air trafficmanagement , and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasuresand could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks .

however , these techniquesby themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protectu.s .

airliners flying to and from foreign airports .

congress and the administration have initiated preliminary actions intended toprovide a degree of protection to commercial airliners .

legislation introduced in the 108thcongress ( h.r .

580 / s. 311 ) called for the installation of missiledefense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service .

the departmentof homeland security ( dhs ) appropriations for 2004 ( p.l.108-90 ) designated $60 millionfor development and testing of a prototype missile countermeasure system for commercialaircraft and dhs initially envisioned a two year program totaling about $100 million todevelop , test , and certify a suitable system .

congress provided an additional $61 million tocontinue the program in fy2005 ( p.l.108-280 ) , and for fy2006 , designated $110 millionto conduct a more extensive third phase of the project that is anticipated to be carried outover the next two years .

these actions may constitute a starting point for the considerationof additional protective measures designed to address all aspects of the shoulder - fired samthreat .

