this report provides a brief history and analysis of general revenue sharing ( grs ) .

grs is commonly defined as a program of federal transfers to state and local governments that does not impose specific or categorical spending requirements on the recipient government .

the united states implemented a grs program in 1972 that expired on september 30 , 1986 .

congress looked to the bygone grs program once before as an option designed to address the fiscal year 2003 ( fy2003 ) and fy2004 state budget shortfalls ( $21.5 billion and $72.2 billion , respectively ) .

some observers have suggested that a revenue sharing program that provided states with grants to forestall spending cuts and tax increases in 2009 may deter pro - cyclical actions by states and produce national fiscal stimulus .

the budget gaps for is estimated to be $31.0 billion for the remainder of fy2009 and for fy2010 it is estimated to be $64.7 billion .

an examination of the grs program that existed from 1972 to 1986 could provide some historical perspective if policy makers were to consider a revised grs program in 2009 .

the first section provides a brief overview of grs as authorized by the state and local fiscal assistance act of 1972 ( p.l .

92-512 , the 1972 act ) and the three extensions .

the second section analyzes the economic rationale for grs .

the third section analyzes grs in the context of its possible use for stimulus of the nation's economy in 2009 including estimated distribution to the states based on the original grs formula .

the appendix provides a more detailed legislative history of the grs program created by the 1972 act and its three extensions .

general revenue sharing ( grs ) is typically defined as unconditional federal grants to state and local governments .

these grants are intended to provide state and local governments with spending flexibility .

the total grant amount is fixed annually , sometimes called "closed - ended," and allocated to the recipient governments by formula .

grs has not been explicitly identified as a primary tool to provide counter - cyclical assistance .

the grs program created by the 1972 act exemplifies how a grs program can work .

from the time the active debate surrounding grs began in the 1960s , through eventual passage of the 1972 act and subsequent extensions , general economic conditions and the political environment changed dramatically .

thus , the proponents and opponents of grs modified their political and economic arguments depending on the current political and economic conditions .

because of this turbulence , the rationale behind grs cannot be traced to a single political or economic objective .

this section of the report summarizes three frequently mentioned economic rationales behind grs: to initiate an intergovermental fiscal reallocation , to address state and local government liquidity crises , and to synchronize federal and state - local fiscal policy .

this section analyzes how grs might affect the economy if implemented in 2009 .

the first subsection describes the potential size of grs compared to current state deficits .

the second section analyzes implementation issues that may arise if a new grs program were authorized , including a discussion of how states might use new federal grants .

the principal question is: "will the supposed pro - cyclical state actions in the absence of federal assistance dampen the effect of federal fiscal policy ? .

from a national economic perspective , closing the remaining state fy2009 budget gaps with revenue sharing would likely have little if any effect on the national economy .

the national conference of state legislatures reported that the remaining fy2009 gap for 38 states of $31.0 billion ( as of november 2008 ) is approximately 0.22% of the u.s. gdp of $14.4 trillion , hardly enough to effectuate a stimulative response .

the same nga study , however , notes projected shortfalls of $64.7 billion for fy2010 .

the budget gaps for fy2009 are after closing a $40.3 billion budget shortfall before enacting the fy2009 budget .

a one - time grs type grant to states that closed the estimated fy2009 fiscal imbalance of $31 billion and forestalled anticipated state spending cuts and tax increases for fy2010 of $64.7 billion could provide significant fiscal stimulus .

this assumes other federal spending would not be reduced and the states spent the federal grants immediately .

the degree of stimulus would be tempered by the net spending response of the recipient government .

research has generally shown that for every $1 lump sum transfer , only a portion is translated into new spending .

for example , assume a state has planned spending of $100 to be paid with own source tax revenue of $100 .

under this leakage theory , a $10 transfer from the federal government would not lead to $110 of spending .

instead , the state may lower own - source tax revenue $5 and use half the federal grant to cover the tax reduction .

the result would be an increase in government spending of $5 , not the full $10 transferred .

the above discussion assumed that federal spending would flow seamlessly from the federal government through states to the designated spending program .

two factors may result in a drag on this flow .

first , state government administration may increase the lag time and second , each state would use the grant for budget priorities of varying stimulative effect .

following is a brief analysis of these two important implementation factors .

time lags in implementation are the primary impediment to effective fiscal stimulus .

generally , the objective of fiscal policy during a recession is to boost aggregate demand and generate short term economic stimulus .

however , if the stimulus comes too late , the increased spending may occur when the economy has already begun to revive and is approaching full employment .

in that case , the stimulus becomes pro - cyclical and possibly inflationary .

policy makers should therefore use fiscal stimulus with caution because of the potential for mistimed action .

grs grants may be subject to two time lags , thus increasing the potential for mistimed fiscal policy .

the first occurs at the federal level where policy makers must identify the need for stimulus then agree upon the size of the stimulus .

once the need and size are determined , congress must then agree upon a grant allocation scheme that satisfies the competing goals of equity among jurisdictions and optimal stimulus .

for example , suppose the grant allocation formula includes a component that provides greater assistance to states with greater need .

if so , states that may have been more fiscally responsible would receive less , possibly violating the fairness criterion .

however , from a broader macroeconomic perspective , aid that prevents more layoffs and state government budget cuts would seem to deliver greater short - term stimulus .

determining the structure of the allocation scheme could generate considerable debate , possibly delaying initial implementation efforts .

the second time lag occurs at the state level .

federal grants that arrive before june 30 , 2009 , might avert some of the pro - cyclical state actions ( eg , budget cuts and tax increases ) for many states .

if the grants arrive too late for fy2009 , state budget officials could simply add this revenue to the operating budget for fy2010 and perhaps avoid implementing tax increases and spending cuts that would otherwise begin on july 1 , 2009 .

what could states do with unconditional revenue sharing grants ? .

generally , states have four options for federal grants ( listed in order of stimulative response ) : increase government spending , reduce taxes ( or rescind past tax increases ) , reduce debt ( or not issue more debt ) , and / or contribute to a rainy day fund ( or not draw down a rainy day fund ) .

increased spending would be the most stimulative in the short run , because the grant is immediately injected into the economy .

this option for the states would include retaining state employees who would have been furloughed , maintaining current operations that would have been reduced , and not scaling back social programs such as education and healthcare .

theoretically , this fiscal stimulus works best when government spending is quickly multiplied through the economy .

this means that each dollar of the federal transfer payment stimulates the economy the most if the entire dollar is spent by the recipient and then spent again .

the degree of stimulative effect of avoided state actions , such as not furloughing workers , depends on this "multiplier effect. .

thus , to achieve the greatest stimulus , the most contractionary state actions should be the first avoided .

the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) asked budget officials from all states to categorize their spending strategies to reduce or eliminate budget gaps remaining for fy2009 .

changes in taxes are difficult to implement in the middle of a budget year and are not included .

table 3 below lists the strategies identified by ncsl and the number of states that proposed implementing those strategies for 2009 .

for fy2010 , several state and local governments are likely going to increase taxes to help close budget gaps .

the spending option for states that would produce the most relative stimulus for each dollar of spending would be to avoid net job losse s ( e.g .

 , layoffs , furloughs , and , to a degree , early retirement and hiring freezes ) .

to see why this is true , consider what would happen if net job losses occurred .

first , layoffs reduce aggregate demand because when workers are laid off , their income would fall steeply until they find new jobs , causing their consumption to fall .

 ( even though all of the federal spending is not entirely multiplied through the economy because of employment taxes and income taxes , the stimulative action is relatively effective because the federal government is essentially "paying" the state employees. ) .

second , since government services are included in gdp , measured economic activity would be directly reduced as long as resources ( workers ) lay idle .

in an environment of rising unemployment , it is unlikely that all of these resources would quickly be put back to use through market adjustment .

if grs prevented net job losses , these negative effects on the economy could be avoided .

the saving behavior of potentially separated employees would likely enhance the stimulative effect of avoiding job losses .

 ( however , avoiding induced early retirement may provide less stimulus than avoiding furloughs and lay - offs. ) .

if the employees are early in their careers and / or are in low skill positions — likely candidates for furloughs or lay - offs — it is likely that their incomes are lower than the median for state employees .

research has shown that low income workers save a smaller portion of their income than high income workers .

thus , preventing the employment separation of low income workers should provide more relative stimulus than the alternative of not offering early retirement .

across - the - board cuts would affect a variety of spending programs that do not easily conform to one succinct appraisal .

the stimulative effect of avoiding across - the - board cuts would vary from state to state based on the state's spending pattern .

aid to local governments also falls into an uncertain category because of differing intergovernmental transfers across states .

the stimulative effect of avoiding cuts in local aid would be positive , though the magnitude is uncertain .

generally , tax cuts are less stimulative than direct spending increases , because individuals are likely to save some of their tax cut .

analogously , a rescinded or avoided tax increase would also be less stimulative than spending increases because taxpayers would likely save some portion of the reduced tax payment .

debt reduction and contributing to a rainy day fund would offer little stimulus because such action would be equivalent to an increase in public saving .

in the short run , increased public saving does not stimulate the economy .

if the federal grants were used to avoid tapping into tobacco revenue , the saving effect would be similar to contributing to a rainy day fund .

the combined effect of the various potential responses of state and local governments to federal grants is difficult to quantify a priori .

nevertheless , one could confidently assert that $1 of federal grants would not lead to a corresponding $1 increase in fiscal stimulus .

while some state and local governments may spend all the federal grants and not change pre - grant taxing and spending priorities , some portions of the grs grants would likely be used for non - stimulative purposes such as substituting for previously planned spending or tax increases .

