in the last few decades , the united states has devoted enormous effort and billions of dollars towards restoring some of our most important ecosystems such as the great lakes , florida everglades ( everglades ) , and chesapeake bay .

restoration efforts have originated , in part , from controversies surrounding water supply and quality , federal laws ( i.e. , laws that protect endangered species or regulate water quality , and others ) , sport and commercial fishing , and environmental degradation .

ecosystem restoration initiatives have typically been accompanied with high expectations and publicity .

funding for these initiatives can amount to billions of dollars for each , and the duration of these initiatives can be 25 years or more .

for example , in the san francisco bay - sacramento / san joaquin river deltas ( california bay - delta ) a restoration program known as calfed is expected to cost more than $7.8 billion , with more than $2.4 billion expected from the federal government , just for the first stage ( 7 years ) of a 30-year restoration effort .

issues such as the coordination of multi - agency task forces , public participation , allocation of ecosystem resources ( eg , water supplies ) , and the science behind restoration projects have all been debated in ecosystem restoration efforts .

perhaps the greatest issue in ecosystem restoration efforts is that restoration can create "losers. .

people may lose ( or perceive loss of ) property , income , and potential income among other things , as a result of restoration activities .

in some cases , the threat of stakeholder loss has resulted in controversies or even barriers to restoration work .

after nearly 40 years of individual environmental restoration projects in south florida , the federal government along with state , local , and tribal entities has begun a collaborative effort to restore the entire south florida ecosystem .

the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) , authorized in the water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 ) ; ( p.l .

106-541 ) , was a major step toward coordinated , multi - agency ecosystem restoration .

title vi of wrda 2000 outlines the coordination among various stakeholders involved in the restoration process , identifies funding responsibilities , and authorizes the creation of programmatic regulations , which will detail the implementation process of restoration projects .

title vi of wrda 2000 also contains several policy functions intended to facilitate inter - agency coordination , satisfy stakeholder demands , and ensure the goal of ecosystem restoration .

in some cases these policy functions are complex and have potential drawbacks , yet in other cases , these functions have potential benefits and could be used as policy models for other ecosystem restoration projects .

the restoration of the everglades represents a recent effort to deal with the myriad of issues related to ecosystem restoration .

described as the largest environmental project in american history , the restoration effort in the south florida ecosystem is expected to cost more than $14 billion and last 30 years .

restoration efforts in south florida have several attributes similar to restoration elsewhere: multiple stakeholders are involved , including the federal , state , and local governments ; water supply and distribution is a central issue ; the effort is considered a solution to standing controversies or legal obligations ; and environmental restoration is promoted as the main goal .

experiences in restoration efforts in south florida might be viewed as a "test case" for future restoration projects .

indeed , an examination of what has been effective and what has been less effective in restoration efforts in south florida may give insights on how to proceed in the successful development of other ecosystem restoration projects .

cerp is an example from which lessons on conducting ecosystem restoration can be drawn .

cerp has completed early stages of planning and coordination , and presently has some projects being implemented .

cerp is a widely supported restoration plan for a complex ecosystem and regional economies that contains many stakeholders with differing views and needs .

lastly , cerp is an example of a restoration effort that attempts to be adaptive .

flexibility in the project implementation and operations of cerp have been identified as successful attributes for restoration .

several components and conceptual ideas in cerp may be useful for other large - scale ecosystem restoration projects .

they include coordination of restoration efforts , implementation and operation of restoration projects , monitoring and adaptive management , assurances and allocation of ecosystem services ( eg , water supplies ) , and strategies for funding .

the section below summarizes these components as they are being used in the restoration effort in south florida and lists the potential benefits and disadvantages of each one .

policies that drive ecosystem restoration efforts are complex .

ecosystem restoration efforts generally strive to meet the desires and meet the concerns of multiple stakeholders , as well as address issues of environmental deterioration and regional development .

further , some ecosystem restoration efforts may plan to spend billions of dollars on projects that cross state boundaries and overlap private , state and federal lands .

ecosystem restoration in south florida is considered the largest restoration initiative to date in this country in terms of money and resources .

other ecosystem restoration initiatives may look to the policies and lessons learned in restoring the south florida ecosystem to better their efforts .

although restoration in south florida is relatively new , several lessons can be learned from the structure and experiences of this restoration effort so far: involvement of all stakeholders in restoration planning .

ecosystem restoration represents a long - term commitment of time and resources from several stakeholders .

decisions reached through consensus among stakeholders , as opposed to unilateral decisions , may be more enduring and likely to be implemented .

establishment of guidelines for stakeholder input and disputes .

guidelines for participation in meetings and committees are expected to create equitable stakeholder input into the decision - making process and lower delays .

application of adaptive management to deal with uncertainty in scientific and other factors in the restoration effort .

the use of adaptive management is expected to allow restoration activities to be implemented with fewer delays and provide flexibility for improving activities once they have been implemented .

use of interim goals to set targets for restoration activities .

interim goals are expected to help restoration efforts focus on pre - determined objectives .

further , interim goals can create a basis for evaluating the progress of restoration ( i.e. , whether or not restoration activities meet their goals ) .

use of monitoring and assessment to measure progress in restoration activities .

monitoring and evaluation restoration efforts are expected to answer the basic question of whether restoration is working .

in addition , deficiencies or opportunities for improvement in the restoration effort uncovered by monitoring can be used by adaptive management to improve restoration .

everglades national park authorization act of 1936 ( 16 u.s.c .

410 ) .

set aside 1.3 million acres as wilderness to create everglades national park .

the park was dedicated by president truman in 1947 .

river basin monetary authorization and miscellaneous civil works amendments act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-282 ; §2 ) .

set minimum water flow of 315,000 acre / feet per year from the central and southern florida project to everglades national park .

supplemental appropriations act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-181 , title xi ) .

authorized corps to modify water delivery to everglades national park , thereby increasing water flowing into the park .

the everglades national park protection and expansion act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-229 ; 16 u.s.c .

410 ( r ) ( 8 ) ) .

expanded everglades national park and authorizes restoration projects ( eg , modified water deliveries project ) to increase the natural water deliveries to the park .

water resources development act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-580 ) .

authorized the restoration of the kissimmee river projects ( §101 ( 8 ) ) and creation of the central and southern florida project restudy ( §301 ( l ) ) .

1994 amendment to everglades national park protection and expansion act of 1989 ( p.l .

103-219 ; 16 u.s.c .

410 ) .

authorized federal funds to assist the state of florida to acquire land adjacent to the park to improve water flows for restoration .

water resources development act of 1996 ( wrda 1996 , p.l .

104-303 ; title v , §528 ) .

expanded the task force to include tribal , state and local governments and authorized the task force to address the entire scope of the restoration process .

directed the us army corps of engineers to devise a comprehensive plan for restoration .

water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 , p.l .

106-541 ; title vi , §601 ) .

approved comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) , which outlines 68 infrastructure projects to modify water delivery systems to improve water quality , distribution , quantity and timing to the natural system without sacrificing urban and agricultural needs .

appropriated $686 million in funds to carry out projects , modifications , and monitoring .

