in 1993 , russia formally applied for accession to the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

its application was taken up by the world trade organization ( wto ) in 1995 , the successor organization of the gatt .

russia's application has entered into its most significant phase as russia negotiates with wto members on the conditions for accession .

the process had been moving forward , but , the last few years , differences over some critical issues have made the timing of russian accession to the wto uncertain .

accession to the wto had been critical to russia and its political leadership .

president , now prime minister , vladimir putin had made it a top priority .

however , in the last year , russian leaders have sent mixed signals regarding their commitment to the accession process .

in august 2008 , prime minister putin stated that wto accession may not be beneficial to russia .

russia has also changed some of its trade rules , such as lowering quotas on meat imports and raising tariffs on auto imports , that contradict commitments that it made to the united states , the european union ( eu ) and other wto members as part of the accession process .

however , in december 2008 , russian foreign minister lavrov stated that russia was committed to acceding to the wto .

the united states , the eu and other trading partners , have supported russia's accession to the wto as a way to increase stability and predictability in russia's foreign trade and investment regime .

however recently they have been critical of the trade barriers that russia has imposed .

also , russia's august 2008 military conflict with georgia has caused the united states and other wto members to re - examine their support .

on november 19 , 2006 , u.s. and russian officials signed a bilateral agreement on russia's accession to the wto , thus completing a major step in the accession process .

russia still needs to complete "multilateral" negotiations with the wto working party , that consists of representatives from about 60 wto member countries , including the united states .

that process has been on a virtual hold ; the working group has been conducting only "informal meetings" because georgia , a wto member , has blocked formal meetings .

congressional interest in russia's accession to the wto is multifaceted .

members of congress are concerned that russia enters the wto under terms and conditions in line with u.s. economic interests , especially gaining access to russian markets as well as safeguards to protect u.s. import - sensitive industries .

some members also assert that congress should have a formal role in approving the conditions under which russia accedes to the wto , a role it does not have at this time .

the congress has a direct role in determining whether russia receives permanent normal trade relations ( ntr ) status which has implications for russia's membership in the wto and u.s. - russian trade relations .

without granting pntr to russia , the united states might not benefit from the concessions that russia makes upon accession .

this report examines the issue of russia's accession to the wto , focusing on the implications for russia , the united states , and the wto .

it begins with a short overview of the wto accession process and reviews the history of the soviet union's relationship with the gatt / wto .

it provides a brief discussion of russian economic conditions and the status of economic reforms as they are a major impetus for russia's application to join the wto .

the focus of the report is the status of russia's accession application and the outstanding issues .

the report concludes with an analysis of the implications of russia's accession to the wto for russia , the united states , the other wto members and for the wto itself and with an analysis of the outlook for the russia's application .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

the wto's membership of 153 countries and customs areas spans all levels of economic development , from the least developed to the most highly developed economies .

the wto came into existence in january 1995 as a part of the agreements reached by the signatories to the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) at the end of the uruguay round negotiations .

the wto's primary purpose is to administer the roughly 60 agreements and separate commitments made by its members as part of the gatt ( for trade in goods ) , the general agreement on trade in services ( gats — for trade in services ) , and the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) .

the membership in the gatt / wto has grown exponentially .

the gatt was originally founded in 1947 by 23 countries , and the wto now has 153 members .

ukraine and cape verde are the newest two members , having joined on may 2008 and july 2008 , respectively .

membership in the wto commits its members to fundamental principles in trade with other members , including: most - favored nation treatment ( mfn ) : the imports of goods and services originating from one member country will be treated no less favorably than imports of goods and services from any other member country .

mfn is to be unconditional .

in practical terms , this means that in most cases a country cannot apply a higher import tariff to a good from one member country than it applies to like goods from any other member country .

national treatment : imports of goods and services are treated no less favorably than like goods and services produced domestically .

in practical terms this means that governments cannot discriminate against imports in the application of laws and regulations , such as regulations to protect consumer safety or the environment .

transparency: government laws and regulations that affect foreign trade and investment are to be published and available for anyone to see .

procedures to implement the laws and regulations are to be open .

lowering trade barriers through negotiations: since the gatt's creation , its members have conducted eights rounds of negotiations to lower trade barriers .

at first these negotiations focused on lowering tariffs .

but over time , the rounds have broadened gatt / wto coverage to include nontariff barriers , such as discriminatory government procurement practices , discriminatory standards , and trade - distorting government subsidies .

the last completed round , the uruguay round ( 1986-94 ) , resulted in the most ambitious expansion of rules to cover , for the first time , trade in agricultural products and services and government policies and practices pertaining to intellectual property rights protection and foreign investment regulations that affect trade .

reliance on tariffs: in order to promote predictability and openness in commerce , the wto requires member countries to use tariffs and avoid using quotas or other nontariff measures when restricting imports for legitimate purposes , such as on injurious imports .

as part of its function to administer the rules established under the agreements , the wto provides a mechanism for the settlement of disputes between members where the dispute involves alleged violations of wto agreements .

moreover , each member's trade regime is reviewed by the wto secretariat from time - to - time to ensure that it conforms to wto rules .

trade among wto members accounts for about 90% of total world trade .

the collapse of the soviet union and its east european bloc and the movement of many developing countries toward liberal trade policies have spurred interest in joining the wto .

article xii of the agreement that established the wto sets out the requirements and procedures for countries to "accede. .

"any state or customs territory having full autonomy in the conduct of its trade policies is eligible to accede to the wto on terms agreed between it and wto members. .

the accession process begins with a letter from the applicant to the wto requesting membership .

the wto general council , the governing body of the wto when the ministerial conference is not meeting , forms a working party ( wp ) to consider the application .

membership in the wp is open to any interested member - country .

more than 60 member countries , including the united states , are part of the wp on russia's accession .

the u.s. delegation is led by the assistant u.s. trade representative for wto and multilateral affairs and includes representatives from the u.s .

departments of commerce and agriculture .

the applicant submits a memorandum to the wp that describes in detail its current trade regime .

the applicant and the wp then negotiate to determine what legislative and structural changes the applicant must make to meet wto requirements and to establish the terms and conditions for entry of the applicant into the wto .

the wp's findings are then included in a "report of the working party" and are the basis for drawing up the "protocol of accession. .

while it negotiates with the wp , the applicant must also conduct bilateral negotiations with each interested wto member .

during these negotiations the wto member indicates what concessions and commitments on trade in goods and services it expects the applicant to make in order to gain entry , and the applicant indicates what concessions and commitments it is willing to make until the two agree and set down the terms .

the terms of the bilateral agreements are combined into one document which will apply on an mfn basis to all wto members once the applicant has joined the wto .

the accession package is conveyed to the general council or ministerial conference for approval .

article xii does not establish a deadline for the process .

the length of the process depends on a number of factors: how many legislative and structural changes an applicant must make in its trade regime in order to meet the demands of the wp , how quickly its national and sub - national legislatures can make those changes , and the demands on the applicant made by members in bilateral negotiations and the willingness of the applicant to accept those demands .

because wto accession is a political process as well as a legal process , its success depends on the political will of all sides — the wto member countries and the applicant country .

a formal vote is taken in the wto that requires a 2 / 3 majority for accession , although in practice the wto has sought to gain a consensus on each application .

the process can take a long time: china's application took over 15 years .

the soviet union was not invited to become a contracting - party of the gatt in 1947 after it declined to join the international monetary fund ( imf ) and the world bank — the other two multilateral organizations that resulted from the bretton woods conference immediately following the end of world war ii .

in fact , soviet trade and economic policy conflicted with the principles of the gatt .

the gatt was based on removing barriers to trade and on developing economic interdependence among countries .

soviet foreign economic policy was largely based on the concept of self - sufficiency — the domestic economy would produce as much as possible for itself and import only those products which it could not produce .

exports were used merely to buy necessary imports , not to build markets .

these economic policies helped to bring about the collapse of the soviet union .

the soviet union modified the concept of self - sufficiency to include members of the soviet bloc - the east european countries , some asian communist countries and cuba , confining most of its trade with these countries in a system of limited international division of labor .

only a small amount of trade was conducted outside the bloc .

the soviet union spearheaded the formation of the council for mutual economic assistance ( cmea ) , what could be loosely described as the soviet bloc's version of the gatt .

in august 1986 , the soviet union applied to take part in the uruguay round negotiations of the gatt as an observer with the intention of becoming a full member .

the united states and other western industrialized countries opposed the request because of the soviet union's central planning economic system .

in 1990 , however , the soviet union received observer status to the uruguay round negotiations after gatt signatories , including the united states , concluded that the soviet union was moving toward becoming an open economy under president mikhail gorbachev .

after the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 , russia retained the observer status held by the soviet union and , in june 1993 , it formally applied to accede to the gatt .

on june 16 , 1993 , the gatt established a working party on russia's accession and , in january 1995 , the application was converted to an application to become a member of the wto .

russia's motivation for and progress toward accession to the wto are directly related to efforts to dismantle the soviet economic system of central planning and replace it with a more market - based economy .

russian leaders have made entry into the wto a top priority , as a mechanism for overcoming the political hurdles that have impeded economic restructuring .

the possibility of accession to the wto has been an opportunity to get some significant economic reform legislation through the russian parliament .

many russian and foreign experts have argued that these reforms , and more , are necessary if russia is to achieve long - term economic growth and development .

at the same time , a number of economic interest groups that favor the status - quo , such as agriculture , the auto industry , and raw material producers , have fought against economic reforms and oppose russian accession to the wto .

in early 1995 , russia submitted to the working party ( wp ) the "memorandum on the foreign trade regime" which describes the structure of its foreign trade regime and also the structure , policies , and practices of its economy that would likely affect its conduct of trade .

subsequently , the wp members submitted questions based on the memorandum , to which the russian delegation replied .

the process of submitting the original description of the trade regime , followed by a series of questions and replies established a benchmark on which the negotiations to determine the terms and conditions of russia's accession would be based .

the initial series of questions , replies and follow - up responses indicated strong concerns by the wp members in a broad range of areas including privatization , property rights , price controls , government financial support for business , and the structure and implementation of the tax regime .

the russian accession process is now at a critical stage .

as with most negotiations , however , the last stages are the most difficult because negotiators now face the most contentious issues .

the united states , the european union , and other participants have had strong reservations about russian policies and practices on intellectual property rights , energy pricing , agriculture , sanitary and phytosanitary regulations , trade in services , civil aircraft , and other issues .

russia's accession to the wto will likely hinge on the resolution of these issues , which are examined below in more detail .

the united states has supported russia's accession to the wto since russia first applied to join the gatt in 1993 .

the u.s. government has provided advice to the russian government on how to make its trade and investment regime wto compatible and to educate russian firms on the implications of wto accession .

because the united states is the world's largest economy , its support is critical to the success of russia's application .

however , the united states has also insisted that russia enter the wto on "commercial terms," that is , on terms that do not distort trade , and that russia immediately adhere to wto agreements upon accession .

u.s. support for russian accession is just one part of post - cold war u.s. trade and economic policy that has encouraged russian endeavors to establish a market economy .

and the trade and economic policy is itself part of a larger u.s. foreign policy strategy to anchor russia in the world community and to reshape the u.s. - russian relationship into one of cooperation .

u.s. support to russia in the trade and investment areas has come in the form of technical assistance , trade preferences ( including tariff preferences under the u.s. gsp program ) , and financial assistance to u.s. exporters to and investors in russia through the u.s. export - import bank and the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) .

since 1992 , the united states has granted russia conditional normal trade relations ( ntr ) , or most - favored - nation ( mfn ) , status , which means that lower tariffs are applied to imports from russia than was the case when russia did not have ntr status .

the bush administration has indicated that russia's accession to the wto could be jeopardized because of russia's august 2008 military incursion into georgia and its recognition the independence of south ossetia and abkhazia .

u.s. - russian trade and investment flows have increased in the post - cold war reflecting the changed u.s. - russian relationship , although they remain lower than what many observers consider their potential .

u.s. imports from russia have increased substantially since the end of the cold war from $0.5 billion in 1992 peaking at $19.3 billion in 2007 .

u.s. exports have increased but not as significantly , from $2.1 billion in 1992 peaking at $7.4 billion in 2007 .

since 1994 , the united states has incurred growing trade deficits with russia , peaking at $15.1 billion in 2006 but declining to $11.9 billion in 2007 .

the large increase in u.s. imports may reflect not so much an increase in the volume of trade but the rise in world prices of raw materials , particularly oil , that comprise the bulk of those imports .

despite the increase in bilateral trade , the united states and russia still account for small shares of each others exports and imports .

in 2007 , russia accounted for about 0.6% of u.s. exports and 1.0% of u.s. imports .

the united states accounted for 2.5% of russian exports and 4.9% of russian imports .

major u.s. exports to russia in 2006 consisted of machinery , vehicles , and meat ( mostly chicken ) , and major u.s. imports from russia consisted of oil , steel , and aluminum .

on june 10 , 2007 , the russian airline , aeroflot , signed a contract to purchase 22 long - range boeing 787 aircraft , a deal worth an estimated $3.5 billion .

the united states accounted for $4.6 billion in foreign direct investment in russia in 2006 .

the united states was technically the third largest source of foreign direct investment ; however , the first two , cyprus and luxembourg , are considered to be largely sources of repatriated russian capital rather than of original foreign capital .

u.s. exporters and investors claim that a number of factors make them cautious about entering the russian market: the lack of adherence to international standards of accounting ; weak enforcement of intellectual property rights ; the lack of protection of share - holders rights ; burdensome taxation ; and poor legal protection of contract sanctity .

these concerns are largely mirrored in the demands the united states has made on russia during its negotiations in the wto .

for their part , russian policymakers have asserted that u.s. trade policy has also been slow to adjust to the post - cold war era .

for example , they point out that the united states only recently removed the "nonmarket economy status" that was applied in antidumping duty cases against russian imports .

under u.s. antidumping laws , "fair value" for imports from nonmarket economies is calculated differently than for imports from other economies .

that methodology leads to higher dumping margins and antidumping duties and , therefore , placed imports from russia at a competitive disadvantage vis - a - vis other imports or u.s. domestic production .

in response to requests from russian steel producers , the u.s. department of commerce examined the possibility of no longer treating russia as a nonmarket economy and removed the designation on june 7 , 2002 .

more critical for russia has been the u.s. government's continued application of the jackson - vanik amendment to trade relations with russia .

russia's current conditional ntr status from the united states is governed by title iv of the trade act of 1974 , as amended .

section 401 of title iv requires the president to continue to deny ntr status to any country that was not receiving such treatment at the time of the law's enactment on january 3 , 1975 .

in effect , this meant all communist countries , except poland and yugoslavia .

section 402 of title iv , the jackson - vanik amendment , denies the countries eligibility for ntr status as well as access to u.s. government credit facilities , such as the export - import bank , as long as the country denies its citizens the right of freedom - of - emigration .

these restrictions can be removed if the president determines that the country is in full compliance with the freedom - of - emigration conditions set out under the jackson - vanik amendment .

for a country to retain that status , the president must reconfirm his determination of full compliance in a semiannual report ( by june 30 and december 31 ) to congress .

his determination can be overturned by congress via the enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval at the time of the december 31 report .

the jackson - vanik amendment also permits the president to waive full compliance with the free emigration requirement , if he determines that such a waiver would promote the objectives of the amendment , that is , encourage freedom of emigration .

this waiver authority is subject to an annual renewal by the president and to congressional disapproval via a joint resolution .

before a country can receive ntr treatment under either the presidential determination of full compliance or the presidential waiver , both the united states and the country in question must have concluded and enacted a bilateral agreement that provides for , among other things , reciprocal extension of ntr ( or mfn ) status .

the agreement and a presidential proclamation extending ntr status cannot go into effect until a joint resolution approving the agreement is enacted .

in 1990 , the united states and the soviet union signed a bilateral trade agreement .

the agreement was subsequently applied to each of the former soviet states .

the united states first granted ntr treatment to russia under the presidential waiver authority beginning in june 1992 and , since september 1994 , under the full compliance provision .

presidential extensions of ntr status to russia have met with virtually no congressional opposition .

russian political leaders have continually pressed the united states to "graduate" russia from jackson - vanik coverage entirely .

they see the amendment as a cold war relic that does not reflect russia's new stature as a fledgling democracy and market economy .

moreover , russian leaders argue that russia has implemented freedom - of - emigration policies since the fall of the communist government , making the jackson - vanik conditions inappropriate and unnecessary .

while russia remains subject to the jackson - vanik amendment , some of the other former soviet republics have been granted permanent and unconditional ntr - kyrgyzstan on june 29 , 2000 , and georgia on december 29 , 2000 .

perhaps , what has particularly irked russian leaders is that the united states granted permanent and unconditional ntr status to china , ostensibly still a communist country , january 1 , 2002 , and to ukraine , march 23 , 2006 .

granting russia permanent and unconditional ntr status will have little direct impact on u.s. - russian trade , since russian imports have entered the united states on a ntr basis since 1992 .

the initiative would be a political symbol of russia's treatment as a "normal" country in u.s. trade , further distancing u.s. - russian relations from the cold war .

for investors and other business people , pntr may mean a more stable climate for doing business .

but many observers have concluded that u.s. - russian economic ties will grow only when russia has undertaken sufficient economic reforms to improve the climate for trade and investment .

it has a direct bearing on the wto accession issue since the wto requires its members to extend mutual unconditional mfn status to one another's exports .

if the united states does not extend permanent ntr to russia , the united states would not benefit from the concessions , except tariff reductions , that russia makes upon acceding to the wto .

because the major trade powers — the united states , the eu , and japan — have supported russia's entry into the wto , the pending question is not whether russia will accede but when .

the answer to that question depends on when russia and the more than sixty members of the working party can finish hammering out the conditions of accession .

negotiators have reportedly reached agreement on most issues , but disagreements on difficult issues of energy pricing , agriculture , services , civil aircraft , and intellectual property rights , have slowed down the process .

russian leaders have stated a goal of completing the negotiations by the end of 2009 in order to become a wto member by january 1 , 2010 .

the stakes for russia in joining the wto are high .

in his april 18 , 2002 address to the federal assembly , the bicameral russian legislature , then - president putin underscored his administration's priority to get russia into the wto .

in the speech , putin emphasized the need for the russian government to establish the conditions to improve the economic well - being of the russian people and linked that effort with joining the wto: tight competition is a norm in the international community and in the modern world , competition for markets , investments , economic and political influence .

russia must be strong and competitive in this fight .

the world market is already here and our market has become part of the system.. .

the wto is an instrument .

he who knows how to use it grows stronger ; he who prefers to sit behind a fence of protectionist quotas , and duties — he is doomed , absolutely doomed strategically .

our country is still excluded from the process of making world trade rules .

we are already in the world trade but we have no say in shaping the rules of trade .

this tends to stunt the russian economy and make it less competitive .

in acceding to the wto , russia is making a legally binding commitment to conform to wto rules .

in so doing , it agrees to make its foreign trade and investment regimes open to the scrutiny of the wto and its members .

at the same time , the wto provides a multilateral forum for russia to settle trade disputes with other wto members .

as a wto member , russia will have a voice in how those rules are made and implemented .

it would be a major step in integrating russia within the international trade system .

but before it can accede to the wto , russia must satisfy wto members that it is ready to meet its obligations .

the working party negotiations and the bilateral negotiations to date suggest that those countries are not satisfied and require that russia make major adjustments in policies and regulations .

the adjustments include reviewing and possibly changing more than 100 russian laws and reviewing more than 1,000 international agreements that russia has with various countries .

however , the overall impact of wto accession on russia will depend on the terms and conditions of accession that russian and its trading partners in the wto finally agree on .

in general , russia will likely have to reduce tariffs and other protective measures for import - sensitive industries such as autos and aircraft and will have to open up key financial service industries — banking and insurance — to foreign competition .

in the short run , such adjustments could lead to the loss of jobs in those areas and the need for the russian government to provide unemployment insurance and other adjustment assistance .

however , globally competitive industries , such as the raw material producers , could see markets abroad opening up and an increase in foreign investment as accession forces russia to restructure its economy .

in the long run , mainstream economic theory and the record of economies that have gone through similar transitions suggest that trade liberalization will lead to a more efficient russian economy and to raising the living standard of the average russian citizen .

new industries will probably emerge over time helping to diversify the russian economy .

the russian business community is divided on the issue of accession .

some have expressed skepticism if not out right opposition to accession .

among this group is oleg deripaska , an influential and powerful aluminum and auto business magnate .

he is concerned that wto accession will force russia to eliminate protection and that the domestic auto industry will face competition from u.s. , european , and japanese manufacturers .

he is also concerned that russia would have to charge higher prices for energy , a major input in aluminum production .

similarly , representatives of aviation , furniture , financial services , telecommunications , and agriculture have asserted that russia stands to lose more than it will gain from accession because russia has not matured sufficiently to meet the competition .

views on accession cut across regions with support coming from regional political leaders in the major business centers of moscow and st. petersburg and in regions where raw material production is located .

political leaders in regions where fledgling import - sensitive manufacturers are located have been skeptical or opposed to accession .

for most russians , accession has not attracted much interest .

putin and the current russian political leadership have made economic growth and development their highest priority and they view russia's admission into the wto as an essential part of the strategy to fulfill those goals .

putin appears to view the accession process as a way of forcing the government bureaucracy , the duma , and russian industry to confront the changes that are required if russia is to attain long - term sustainable economic growth and development .

while putin's political future probably does not depend directly on whether russia gets into the wto , it will likely be evaluated on the basis to what degree economic life in russia has improved .

wto accession would be a further sign of russia's acceptance and participation in the major multilateral economic institutions: the world bank , the international monetary fund ; and the g - 8 .

in so doing , russia would distance itself further from its soviet past .

for u.s. exporters and investors , russia's accession to the wto may improve the business climate in russia which has been unpredictable .

the u.s. business community often cites poor intellectual property rights protection , inconsistent and opaque customs regulations , inconsistent enforcement of the regulations , and irrational sps and technical trade barriers as among the impediments to trade and investment .

accession could bring more stability and openness in the business climate since russia would have to adhere to wto rules that promote these conditions .

the volume of u.s. imports from russia has been low primarily because russia's limited export - base .

nevertheless , some u.s. import - sensitive industries , for example steel , may face increased competition from russian producers .

these industries may press u.s. negotiators to include as part of the terms and conditions for russia's accession , a special safeguard provision , beyond that provided in the wto agreements , that would cushion the potentially adverse impact of a large increase in russian imports upon accession .

such a provision was included in the conditions for china's accession to the wto and was codified in u.s. law as section 421 of the trade act of 1974 .

similar to section 201 ( escape clause ) provision of the trade act of 1974 , section 421 allows the united states to temporarily restrict fairly traded imports that cause or threaten to cause injury to the domestic injury .

unlike section 201 , however , section 421 permits the restrictions to be applied solely to imports of like products from china , rather than requiring them to be applied on an mfn basis on imports of like products from all countries .

in addition , the required thresholds of cause and level of injury to the domestic industry for relief under section 421 is lower than under section 201 .

section 201 requires that imports be a "substantial" cause of "serious injury," whereas section 421 requires only that the imports be a "significant cause" of "material injury. .

for many in the u.s. business and agricultural community , the issue is not whether russia should be allowed to join the wto but one of assurance that russia will enter under conditions that are commercially sound and will have minimal negative impact on u.s. industries .

russia is the largest and most populous country that is not a member of the wto .

if russia accedes , it would significantly expand the geographical coverage of wto rules to all major economies leading to a larger degree of stability and transparency to the international trading system .

at the same time , russia's entry into the wto would continue a trend in which as the membership of the wto becomes larger and more diverse , it becomes more difficult for that membership to reach a consensus on important issues .

in addition , trade disputes between russia and its trading partners will be brought to the wto for resolution rather than addressed bilaterally , adding to the ever growing caseload of the wto .

as an economy still in transition , russia would bring its own perspective to wto negotiations .

for example , russia could be expected to challenge the positions the united states and other countries have taken in the wto on the role of subsidies in trade and the degree to which trade in services should be liberalized .

