the federal reserve ( fed ) conducts monetary policy by buying and selling u.s. treasury securities .

this action alters the reserves of financial institutions , primarily commercial banks , which in turn alters the availability of money and credit in the u.s .

the ultimate goal of fed activity is to influence aggregate spending to achieve a low and stable inflation rate and maximum sustainable economic growth and employment over time .

in conducting monetary policy , the fed has a choice of a target .

since money spending involves money , it could buy and sell u.s. treasury securities with the objective of targeting the growth of the money supply .

alternatively , since changes in money and credit affect spending largely through changes in interest rates , it could target one or more of those rates directly simply by supplying whatever reserves are needed to meet its target .

it cannot target money growth and interest rates simultaneously , however .

the discussion in this report concentrates primarily on targeting the money supply to achieve such changes in money spending that the goals of full employment and stable prices are met .

in recent years , the fed has targeted interest rates instead of the money supply .

an important reason for this choice , as discussed below , is the unstable link between the money supply and money spending .

nevertheless , some economists for several reasons continue to prefer targeting money growth , and seek a stable measure of money as a means of furthering that goal .

there are few topics in economics as contentious as the role of money in business cycles .

no doubt that money and economic activity are highly correlated .

table 1 sets out the nature of this relationship .

the average rate of growth of nominal gross domestic product ( gdp ) over the past four decades is shown relative to the average growth of a popular measure of money known as m2 , which is defined in the glossary .

one cannot help but be struck by the close relationship between the two variables over most of the period .

moreover , when the growth rate of real gdp is subtracted from that of nominal gdp , the growth rate of m2 provides a good deal of information about the rate of inflation .

for example , over the period 1960-2008 , m2 grew at an average compound annual rate of 7.0% whereas real gdp grew at an average compound annual rate of 3.3% .

the difference , 3.7% , is exactly equal to the average annual compound rate of growth of the implicit price deflator for gdp , 3.7% .

thus , the excess of m2 growth over real gdp growth seems to be highly correlated with the inflation rate over this nearly half century period .

it is well known that correlation measures only the degree to which variations in the two data series coincide .

it does not necessarily imply anything about cause and effect .

indeed , in terms of table 1 , the contention among economists is whether the changes in m2 cause the changes in nominal gdp or vice versa .

the jury is still out on this question and probably will never be able to render a verdict acceptable to all parties .

nevertheless , the relationship of money to economic activity suggests two possible roles that money might play in the formulation and execution of monetary policy .

the first role is that of an intermediate target variable .

in this role , the fed would manipulate the money supply or its growth rate to achieve such goals as high employment , high real gdp growth , or low inflation .

as far as inflation is concerned , the information above suggests that a growth rate of m2 of about 3.5% per year would yield a fairly stable price level ( or low rate of inflation ) .

for m2,or any other measure of money to be used as an intermediate target , it must be either directly or indirectly under the control of the fed .

for much of the federal reserve era ( after 1913 ) , control of the money supply was not a viable option .

this was because the united states adhered to an international monetary system that used fixed exchange rates .

a central feature of fixed exchange rate regimes is that monetary policy must be directed to maintaining the exchange rate .

as such , it cannot focus on manipulating the money supply in a way that is inconsistent with that objective .

since the early 1970s , however , the united states has participated in the international monetary system on the basis of flexible exchange rates .

under this system , central banks theoretically have great freedom in manipulating their respective national money supplies .

however , they do not have direct control over that supply .

rather , they control the reserves that are available to depository institutions , on the basis of which deposit money can be created .

how much money is created in any given period also depends on other factors .

important among these are the preferences of the public for how it wishes to hold its money assets ( in the case of m2 this means currency , demand deposits , and various types of saving and time deposits ) and the actions of depository institutions that influence those preferences .

also of some importance are the reserves that depository institutions choose to hold relative to the various types of deposit liabilities outstanding ( some of these are legally imposed while others are voluntary ) .

a more extensive discussion on the ability of the fed to control the money supply is given below .

thus , the fed does not have day - to - day control over the money supply .

its control is only indirect and depends on the closeness of the relationship of reserves to the various measures of money .

even though a case can be made that the fed has been able to use the money supply as an intermediate target variable for the past 30 years or more , it has apparently chosen not to do so .

in recent years , this reluctance has been associated with what has been called the "instability in the velocity or turnover rate of money. .

while this topic is discussed below , what is involved can be gleaned from table 1 .

the close relationship between money and nominal gdp , so evident in the 1960-1989 period , is weaker in the 1990-1999 period .

clearly something altered the relationship between m2 money growth and the growth in nominal gdp .

nevertheless , for a considerable period of time the federal reserve reported to congress growth rate target ranges for various measures of money .

this practice commenced in the early 1970s and ended in the 1980s and 1990s ( depending on the measure of money ) .

this practice may seem curious since manipulating these measures of money is not the objective of monetary policy .

one might even have questioned the usefulness of this exercise .

however , the data above do show that for much of the past 50 years money growth ( measured as m2 ) has been closely related to both nominal gdp growth and the rate of inflation .

even if causation runs from income growth to money growth , or if the federal reserve cannot control the money supply , or it chooses not to control the money supply , movements in the growth rate of the money supply might , nevertheless , provide a good deal of useful information about some important performance parameters of the economy .

for example , the data above suggest that the growth rate of m2 has been a good predictor of ( or source of information about ) the future growth of nominal gdp and the rate of inflation .

however , for money to be the preeminent informational variable , the close relationship between it and various measures of economic performance must continue .

although the conditions under which a measure of money serves as an informational variable are less demanding than in its role as an intermediate target variable ( eg , it does not have to be under the control of the fed ) its usefulness in providing information diminishes in the absence of a close relationship between it and , for example , aggregate spending .

thus , the emergence of "velocity instability" which reduced the usefulness of money as an intermediate target variable has also reduced its usefulness as a source of information about the current and expected performance of the economy .

although the amount of money in existence is an important determinant of the amount of money spending that can or will take place , it is not the only factor .

also of importance is the number of times each unit of money is spent during a given time period .

this spending or turnover rate of the existing amount of money is commonly known as the velocity of money or the velocity of money ' s circulation .

these notions can be formalized in terms of a simple equation .

let the amount of money in existence be symbolized by m , its velocity of circulation by v , and total money spending by py ( where p is a price index and y a measure of the quantity of real goods and services ) .

then: mv = py in order to calculate v ( which is equal to py / m ) , we need to be able to measure both m and py .

in theory , py symbolizes total money spending on all goods , services , and financial and real assets that takes place in an economy over a given time period .

since measures of total spending do not exist , py is often proxied by the nominal value of gdp or some subdivision thereof such as net national product , national income , personal income , etc .

given any measure of py , the calculated value of v will be different for different definitions of m ( and , for each definition of m , v will also differ for different measure of py ) .

providing a generally accepted definition of money has proven to be elusive .

economists have taken several approaches to this task .

the first has been what might be called the traditional or functional approach .

it starts by saying that "money is what money does. .

and money is any asset that simultaneously performs all four of the basic functions of money: serving as a unit of account , medium of exchange , store of value , and standard of deferred payment .

a second definition holds that money is a "temporary abode of purchasing power. .

this definition seems to focus on the store of value role stressed by the traditional definition .

the role of each definition in selecting a group of assets to call money is worth exploring for it rationalizes the composition of assets included in m1 and m2 .

the unit of account role is basic to money as it is the common denominator in terms of which all goods , services , and assets can be expressed and their relative values compared .

in the case of the united states , the unit of account is the dollar .

the medium of exchange role says that whatever is money must be the dominant means used to make payments or effect exchange .

the store of value role emphasizes that money is a generalized means for holding wealth .

the standard of deferred payments means that money is used for writing contracts that require future payments .

the data on table 1 established the fact that money ( m2 ) and nominal gdp have a substantial degree of covariability ( at least over the period 1959-1989 ) .

what was controversial about this finding was the implied cause and effect relationship .

a number of economists who believe that causality runs from changes in the money supply to changes in nominal gdp have argued that the stability of this relationship could be exploited for forecasting purposes .

knowledge of money growth could be used , for example , to forecast the growth of nominal and real gdp and the rate of inflation .

a good deal of analytical effort has been expended on this subject .

increasingly , these efforts have been focused on what is called "time series analysis. .

a central feature of this analytical tool is the so - called granger test , named after prof. clive granger , a pioneer in time series analysis .

the essence of the granger test is to see whether additional variables can add any extra information or predictive power to forecasting a focus variable that is not already contained in the history of the focus variable itself .

if it can ( as determined by a statistical test of significance ) , the added variable is said to "granger cause" the focus variable or the variable whose value is being forecasted .

a seminal use of this methodology in the study of money's influence on economic activity was made by prof. christopher sims in 1972 .

in this study , using quarterly data from 1947 through 1969 , m1 was found to granger cause nominal gross national product .

that is , although the history of gnp provided a good deal of information about the current and future values of gnp , this information was enhanced ( or an improved prediction was possible ) by also using the history of the growth of m1 .

later , in 1980 , sims published the results of a more elaborate study using monthly data involving a possible granger causality role for both m1 and the commercial paper rate .

when both were used simultaneously with the focus variable being the industrial production index , m1 no longer played a granger causal role in explaining this measure of economic activity ( i.e. , its contribution to explaining the behavior of industrial production was no longer statistically significant ) .

a major role was , however , played by the commercial paper rate .

the sample period covered by this study ran from 1947 to 1978 .

what sims may have picked up in this study was the breakdown in the stability of m1's velocity — the extent of which was not too well documented in 1980 .

several subsequent studies using data from the 1980s and 1990s have come to inconclusive results on the granger causal role of money .

for example , a study by friedman and kuttner , incorporating quarterly data for the entire decade of the 1980s ( their sample runs from 1970:3 to 1990:4 ) , appeared to sound the death knell for all measures of money and credit then used by the federal reserve as information variables .

they could find no granger causal role for the monetary base , m1 , m2 , or credit in explaining the movements of nominal and real gdp and the rate of inflation over their sample period .

various short term interest rates and the spread between the four - six month commercial paper rate and the 90-day treasury bill rate ( this difference being a measure of risk ) did , however , play an important role in granger causing or explaining the behavior of the three focus variables .

estrella and mishkin reconfirm this conclusion in a later study .

using monthly data for the period 1960-1995 , they reject even an informational role for the monetary base and m2 .

the conclusions of these studies have been disputed by several others .

using the same time period and data , but with a slightly different equation than friedman and kuttner , feldstein and stock concluded that the relationship between m2 and nominal gdp was sufficiently strong and stable to warrant further investigations into using m2 to influence spending .

a 1992 study by becketti and morris , using quarterly data from 1970:1 through 1992:2 , found a granger causal role for m2 in explaining movements in real gdp when the observations from 1979:4 through 1982:4 were excised from the sample .

this was the period when the federal reserve supposedly abandoned interest rates as intermediate target variables and replaced them with monetary aggregates .

becketti and morris concluded: the forecasts that ignore m2 failed to foresee the most recent recession ( 1989-1990 ) and predicted a much stronger recovery than has occurred... .

the forecasts that included information on m2 also missed the recession , but they accurately predicted the weakness of the recovery since the second quarter of 1991... .

finally , duca reported some promising results in which m2 , expanded to include the dollars in bond mutual funds and bond and stock mutual funds , yielded better forecasts of nominal gdp growth over the 1990-1994 period than did m2 by itself .

however , the advantage of the two new monetary aggregates over conventional m2 was not large when the federal funds rate and the 10-year treasury note yields are added to the forecasting equation .

nevertheless , while these studies may have help us to understand the role of money in business cycles , they revealed that the results may have been highly sensitive to the focus variable used , the measure of money used , and the time period from which the data were drawn .

at most , these results should have been regarded as suggestive in nature .

as such , they suggest that at least m2 may have had continued value in providing some information about the future course taken by real gdp .

thus far , this report has discussed the link between the money supply and economic activity and chronicled the efforts to explain the breakdown in the link .

but ultimately , this exercise was useful to policymakers only in so far as it affects the conduct of monetary policy .

the remainder of the report discusses different ways that the money supply relates to ( or could alter ) the execution of monetary policy .

for some three decades , the united states has seen rapid changes in its financial system .

these changes have been spurred in part by a clash between rising interest rates and regulations that inhibited banks from being competitive players in financial markets .

the desire to survive as intermediaries motivated them ( and other depository institutions ) to innovate ways to get around these regulations .

this involved finding ways to pay interest to depositors and potential depositors .

in some cases this meant bringing into being new types of financial instruments such as now accounts , money market accounts , money market mutual funds , and repurchase agreements .

gradually , governments came to realize that the interest rate regulations were counterproductive if not harmful .

deregulation of interest rates made bank deposits better substitutes for a variety of other financial instruments .

it should come as no surprise that these changes have had an effect on the velocity of various measures of money .

trying to explain what these effects have been and how to adjust to them has been part of a large and ongoing research effort involving the specification of new monetary aggregates , new measures of opportunity cost and risk , and new measures of total spending .

in addition , a host of technical issues related to econometric estimations of velocity equations have arisen and been dealt with .

because of the continued instability in the velocities of the conventionally defined aggregates and the tentative and unsettled nature of much of this research , it has not been possible to use the existing or newly formulated monetary aggregates as intermediate control variables .

moreover , their role as preeminent information variables is also limited .

it may , nevertheless , be desirable to continue to monitor the existing aggregates and some of the new ones that have demonstrated promise for forecasting such relevant economic performance variables as nominal gdp .

in addition , interest rates can play a potentially useful information role .

however , since their movements are subject to influences other than the federal reserve , their movements must be interpreted with great care .

m1 is the sum of the following: 1 .

currency held by the public 2 .

outstanding traveler's checks of nonbank issuers 3 .

demand deposit balances 4 .

negotiable order of withdrawal ( now and super - now ) accounts and other checkable deposits .

m2 is the sum of the following: 1 .

m1 2 .

time and savings deposits in amounts under $100,000 3 .

individual holdings in money market mutual funds 4 .

money market deposit accounts ( mmdas ) .

m3 is the sum of the following: 1 .

m2 2 .

time deposits at commercial banks in amounts of $100,000 or more 3 .

term repurchase agreements 4 .

institution - only money market mutual funds 5 .

term eurodollars held by u.s. residents in canada and the u.k. 6 .

overnight retail purchase agreements ( repos ) 7 .

overnight eurodollars held by u.s. residents .

nonfinancial debt is the sum of the following sectors' outstanding debt: 1 .

u.s. government 2 .

state and local governments 3 .

nonfinancial domestic businesses 4 .

households .

anderson , richard , ed .

symposium on mutual funds and monetary aggregates .

federal reserve bank of st. louis review , vol .

76 , november / december 1994 .

bernanke , ben s. monetary aggregates and monetary policy at the federal reserve: a historical perspective .

board of governors of the federal reserve system .

2006 .

brunner , k. and a. h. meltzer , ed .

"money demand in the united states: a quantitative review," by robert e. lucas , jr. amsterdam , north holland , carnegie - rochester conference series on public policy , vol .

29 , 1988 , pp .

137-168 .

 — — .

"m1 — velocity and money demand functions: do stable relationships exist ? .

by robert h. rasche .

amsterdam , north holland , carnegie - rochester conference series on public policy , no .

27 , 1987 , pp .

9-88 .

carlson , john b .

"the stability of money demand , its interest sensitivity , and some implications for money as a policy guide. .

federal reserve bank of cleveland economic review , vol .

25 , no .

3 , 3 rd quarter , 1989 , pp .

2-13 .

 — — , and susan m. byrne .

"recent behavior of velocity: alternative measures of money. .

federal reserve bank of cleveland economic review , vol .

28 , no .

1 , 1992 pp .

2-10 .

collins , sean and cheryl edwards .

"redefining m2 to include bond and equity mutual funds. .

federal reserve bank of st. louis review , november 1994 , pp .

7-30 .

dotsey , michael and christopher otrok .

"m2 and monetary policy: a critical review of the recent debate. .

federal reserve bank of richmond economic quarterly , vol .

80 , winter 1994 , pp .

41-60 .

 — — , carl lantz , and lawrence santucci .

"is money useful in the conduct of monetary policy ? .

federal reserve bank of richmond economic quarterly , vol .

86 , fall 2000 , pp .

23-48 .

dwyer , gerald and r.w .

hafer .

"are money growth and inflation still related ? .

federal reserve bank of atlanta economic review , second quarter 1999 , pp .

32-43 .

fair , ray c. "international guidance on the demand for money. .

review of economics and statistics , vol .

69 , august 1987 , pp .

473-480 fitzgerald , terry j .

"money growth and inflation: how long is the long run ? .

federal reserve bank of cleveland economic commentary , august 1999 .

friedman , benjamin m. "lessons on monetary policy from the 1980s. .

journal of economic perspectives , vol .

2 , summer 1988 , pp .

51-72 .

hale , galina and oscar jorda .

"do monetary aggregates help forecast inflation ? .

federal reserve bank of san francisco .

economic letter .

april 13 , 2007 .

haslag , joseph h. "monetary aggregates and the rate of inflation. .

federal reserve bank of dallas economic review , march 1990 , pp .

1-12 .

hetzel , robert l. "how useful is m2 today ? .

federal reserve bank of richmond economic review , vol .

78 , sept / october 1992 , pp .

12-26 .

higgins , bryon .

"policy implications of recent m2 behavior. .

federal reserve bank of kansas city economic review , third quarter 1992 , pp .

21-36 .

ireland , peter .

"endogenous financial innovations and the demand for money. .

journal of money , credit , and banking , vol .

27 , february 1995 , pp .

107-123 .

laidler , david , ed .

"understanding velocity: new approaches and their policy relevance. .

journal of policy modeling , vol .

12 , summer 1990 .

 — — .

"the demand for money in the united states — yet again. .

amsterdam , north holland , carnegie — rochester conference series on public policy , no .

12 , 1980 , pp .

219-271 .

mehra , yash p. "some further results on the source of shift in m1 demand in the 1980s. .

federal reserve bank of richmond economic review , sept / october 1989 , pp .

3-13 .

 — — .

"a review of the recent behavior of m2 demand. .

federal reserve bank of richmond economic quarterly , vol .

83 , summer 1997.pp .

27 — 43 .

miyao , ryuzo .

"does a cointegrating m2 demand relation really exist in the united states ? .

journal of money , credit , and banking .

vol .

28 , august 1996 , pp .

365-380 .

orphanides , athanasios , brian reid , and david h. small. .

the empirical properties of a monetary aggregate that adds bond and stock funds to m2. .

board of governors of the federal reserve discussion paper 93-42 , december 1993 .

poole , william .

"monetary aggregates and monetary policy in the 21 st century. .

federal reserve bank of boston .

conference series 45 .

october 2000 .

porter , richard d. , thomas simpson , and eileen mauskopf .

"financial innovation and the monetary aggregate. .

brookings papers on economic activity , no .

1 , 1980 , pp .

213-229 .

siegel , diane f. and steven strongin .

"can monetary models be fixed ? .

federal reserve bank of chicago economic perspectives , nov / december 1986 , pp .

3-14 .

small , david h. and richard d. porter .

"understanding the behavior of m2 and v2. .

federal reserve bulletin , april 1989 , pp .

244-254 .

stone , courtenay c. and daniel l. thornton .

"solving the 1980s' velocity puzzle: a progress report. .

federal reserve bank of st. louis review , vol .

69 , aug / september 1987 , pp .

5-22 .

teles , pedro and ruilin zhou .

"a stable money demand: looking for the right monetary aggregate. .

federal reserve bank of chicago .

economic perspectives .

vol .

29 , no .

1 , q1 , 2005 .

wenninger , john and john partlan .

"small time deposits and the recent weakness in m2. .

federal reserve bank of new york quarterly review , spring 1992 , pp .

21-35 .

