the announcement by associate justice sandra day o'connor of her intention to retire and the death of chief justice william h. rehnquist in the summer of 2005 created the need for two new supreme court appointments .

the process for making these appointments led to three nominations to the associate justice position .

the first two of these nominations were subsequently withdrawn by president george w. bush , while the third — of samuel a. alito , jr. — was confirmed by the senate .

the two withdrawn nominations — of john g. roberts , jr. , and harriet e. miers — are the latest of 36 nominations to supreme court posts that have failed to be confirmed .

these two nominations exemplify the range of this class of supreme court nominations .

the roberts nomination to associate justice was withdrawn as a formality so that the president could nominate him to be chief justice .

therefore , although the first nomination was not confirmed , the nominee was confirmed for another position .

the miers nomination , on the other hand , was withdrawn without the expectation that she would subsequently be nominated for another position on the court .

consequently , neither this particular nomination nor the nominee was confirmed .

over the course of the nation's history , approximately one - quarter of the presidential nominations to the supreme court of the united states have failed to place a new associate or chief justice on the bench .

of the 160 nominations to the court since 1789 , 116 individuals were confirmed and served , 7 individuals were confirmed and declined to serve , 1 confirmed nominee died before he could take his seat , and 36 nominations were not confirmed .

this report discusses this last group of supreme court nominations .

these 36 nominations that did not lead to confirmation represent 31 individuals whose names were sent forward to the senate by presidents ( some of those 31 individuals were nominated more than once ) .

the supreme court nominations discussed here were not confirmed for a variety of reasons , including senate opposition to the nominating president , the nominee's views , or the incumbent court ; senatorial courtesy ; perceived political unreliability of the nominee ; perceived lack of ability ; interest group opposition ; and fear of altering the balance of the court .

the senate committee on the judiciary has played an important role in the confirmation process , particularly since 1868 .

summary discussions of the senate confirmation process and the unsuccessful nominations follow .

the reasons some nominations have failed confirmation and the role of the senate judiciary committee are also discussed .

finally , the report includes a detailed table that identifies each nomination and provides , for each , the facts that can be documented about the dates of relevant activity and votes in the judiciary committee and the full senate ( see table 4 ) .

a list of additional relevant literature is also provided .

the constitution of the united states provides for the appointment of a justice to the supreme court in article ii , section 2 .

this section states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint .. .

judges of the [s]upreme court. .

the practices involved in following this constitutional mandate have varied over the years , but they have always involved the sharing of the appointment power between the president and the senate .

nominations that failed to be confirmed by the senate have been disposed of in a variety of ways , including withdrawal by the president , inaction in the committee , inaction in the senate , postponement , tabling , rejection on the senate floor , and filibuster on the senate floor .

table 1 provides a summary of the unsuccessful nominations by final disposition .

the 36 supreme court nominations not confirmed by the senate represent 31 individuals .

six of these 31 were later re - nominated and confirmed for positions on the court .

of the other 25 nominees , four were nominated and failed confirmation more than once .

table 2 provides summary information concerning unsuccessful nominations .

the first of the six nominees who were not confirmed only to be later re - nominated and confirmed was william paterson , nominated by president george washington .

washington withdrew the nomination on the day following its submission .

he noted that paterson "was a member of the senate when the law creating that office was passed , and that the time for which he was elected [had] not yet expired. .

for this reason , president washington felt that the nomination was in violation of the constitution .

president washington re - nominated paterson at the beginning of the following congress a few days later , and paterson was immediately confirmed .

in this case , the failure of the first nomination was due to what might be considered formalities , rather than opposition to the nomination itself .

the last of these six nominations , that of john g. roberts , jr. , to be an associate justice , might be similarly categorized .

on july 29 , 2005 , president george w. bush nominated roberts to replace retiring associate justice sandra day o'connor .

subsequently , on september 3 , chief justice william h. rehnquist died .

on september 6 , president bush withdrew roberts's nomination to be associate justice and nominated him to be chief justice .

the senate confirmed this nomination on september 29 , 2005 .

all of the other unsuccessful nominations faced opposition in the senate .

the other four nominees who were later re - nominated and confirmed were roger b. taney , nominated twice by president andrew jackson ; stanley matthews , nominated first by president rutherford b. hayes and later by president james a. garfield ; pierce butler , nominated twice by president warren g. harding ; and john marshall harlan ii , nominated twice by president dwight d. eisenhower .

taney's first nomination , to associate justice , was postponed indefinitely by the senate .

during the next congress , he was nominated and confirmed as chief justice , and he went on to author the dred scott decision .

matthews's first nomination was never reported out of committee , but in the following congress , under a new president , he was re - nominated and confirmed by a one - vote margin .

butler was first nominated to the high court during the third session of the 67 th congress .

confirmation was blocked during that session , but butler was re - nominated and confirmed during the fourth session .

harlan was initially nominated to be an associate justice late in the 83 rd congress , and this nomination remained in committee at the time of adjournment .

his second nomination , at the beginning of the following congress , was confirmed a few months later .

four individuals were the subjects of more than one unsuccessful nomination .

the first three , john c. spencer , reuben h. walworth , and edward king , were nominees of president john tyler .

president tyler had the opportunity to fill two vacancies on the high court .

he made nine nominations of five men in the space of the last 15 months of his presidency .

eight of these nominations were not confirmed , giving president tyler the highest tally of unconfirmed supreme court nominations .

president tyler nominated spencer for the first vacancy .

after the senate rejected spencer , walworth was put forward for the position , and the senate tabled this nomination .

on june 17 , 1844 , the last day of the congressional session , president tyler withdrew the tabled walworth nomination and re - nominated spencer .

unable to gain unanimous consent for the spencer nomination to be acted upon , tyler then withdrew spencer's name on the same day and re - nominated walworth .

by this time , the nomination ( june 5 , 1844 ) of king for the second vacancy had also been tabled .

tyler went on to re - nominate walworth and king at the beginning of the following congressional session .

after these two nominations were once again tabled , they were both withdrawn .

the nomination of john m. read , which followed , was reported out of committee but never acted upon by the full senate .

samuel nelson was president tyler's fifth nominee , and he was confirmed .

the fourth individual subject to multiple unconfirmed nominations was william b. hornblower , who was nominated in successive sessions of congress by president grover cleveland .

his first nomination was never reported out of committee ; the second nomination was reported out and rejected .

one of the unsuccessful nominees had previously been associate justice , had left the court , and this time was being nominated for chief justice .

another was a sitting associate justice nominated for elevation to the chief justice position .

the first of these was also the first nomination in which the senate voted not to confirm .

john rutledge had previously served as one of the first associate justices from 1789 to 1791 .

in addition , he served as chief justice in 1795 under a recess appointment by president washington .

when the president nominated him later that year to succeed john jay as permanent chief justice , however , the senate asserted its constitutional power and voted against confirmation .

the second such nominee , justice abe fortas , was a sitting associate justice at the time of his nomination by president lyndon b. johnson to be chief justice in 1968 .

the nomination was favorably reported out of committee but filibustered on the floor of the senate until the president withdrew the nomination .

one unsuccessful nomination coincided with a legislative initiative to decrease the size of the court .

on april 16 , 1866 , president andrew johnson nominated henry stanbery to replace john catron , who had died the previous may .

by the time stanbery was nominated , however , the house of representatives had passed a bill decreasing the number of justices in the supreme court .

the act , as signed into law on july 23 , 1866 , called for a decrease in the number of associate justices from nine to six through the process of attrition .

at the time the bill was initiated and also at the time its final version was signed , only one position on the court , that to which stanbery was nominated , was vacant .

eight associate justice positions remained on the bench until the death of james m. wayne in july 1867 .

seven associate justice positions remained until a law was passed in april 1869 to increase the number to eight .

several scholars have suggested that , by reducing the number of associate justice positions , the republican congress was trying to thwart the ability of democratic president johnson to shape the supreme court , although the record of house and senate debate is silent as to each chamber's intention in this regard .

the law increasing the associate justice positions to eight was passed within two months of the beginning of the administration of president ulysses s. grant .

there have often been multiple reasons behind the failure of the senate to confirm a nomination .

the official senate records , particularly those prior to the 20 th century , have usually been silent on the issues involved .

scholars have used other records in an effort to shed more light on the factors underlying unsuccessful supreme court nominations .

this scholarship consists of analysis and interpretation of these records , and it provides a general understanding of the reasons that more than one in five nominations has failed to be confirmed by the senate .

one widely cited scholar in the area of the supreme court appointments process and history , henry j. abraham , has developed categories of unsuccessful nominations: among the more prominent reasons have been: ( 1 ) opposition to the nominating president , not necessarily the nominee ; ( 2 ) the nominee's involvement with one or more contentious issues of public policy or , simply , opposition to the nominee's perceived jurisprudential or sociopolitical philosophy ( i.e. , politics ) ; ( 3 ) opposition to the record of the incumbent court , which , rightly or wrongly , the nominee presumably supported ; ( 4 ) senatorial courtesy ( closely linked to the consultative nominating process ) ; ( 5 ) a nominee's perceived political unreliability on the part of the party in power ; ( 6 ) the evident lack of qualification or limited ability of the nominee ; ( 7 ) concerted , sustained opposition by interest or pressure groups ; and ( 8 ) fear that the nominee would dramatically alter the court's jurisprudential lineup .

the sections below discuss the nominations with respect to these categories based on the preponderance of scholarly evidence .

many of the nominations fall into multiple categories .

two nominations that were not confirmed by the senate — the first nomination of william paterson and the nomination of john g. roberts to be associate justice — do not appear to fall into any of the following categories .

as discussed above , in both cases the nomination was withdrawn as a formality and the nominee was then renominated and confirmed .

since 1816 , the senate has had a standing committee on the judiciary .

prior to that development , one of the three unsuccessful nominations was referred to a select committee .

between 1816 and 1868 , 11 of the 16 unsuccessful nominations were referred to the judiciary committee .

since 1868 , almost all supreme court nominations , including all that were ultimately not confirmed , have been automatically referred to the judiciary committee .

of the unsuccessful nominations that have been referred to the judiciary committee , seven were never reported or discharged .

the first four , henry stanbery , stanley matthews , william hornblower , and john marshall harlan ii , are discussed above .

the fifth was homer thornberry , nominated by president lyndon b. johnson to replace justice abe fortas as associate justice when he was nominated for elevation to chief justice .

when fortas's nomination was withdrawn by the president , the open position for thornberry was effectively eliminated , and his nomination was also withdrawn .

at that time , the thornberry nomination had not been reported by the judiciary committee .

the sixth of these nominations was that of john g. roberts to be associate justice .

before the judiciary committee acted on this nomination , chief justice william h. rehnquist died , creating a vacancy .

roberts's nomination to be associate justice was withdrawn , shortly before hearings on the nomination were to begin , so that he could be nominated to be chief justice .

the last of this group of seven nominations is that of harriet e. miers .

although the judiciary committee had scheduled hearings on her nomination to be associate justice , her nomination was withdrawn in the face of opposition before any formal committee action .

although their first nominations were never reported , second nominations of matthews , hornblower , and harlan in subsequent sessions of congress were reported to the full senate , and roberts's nomination to be chief justice during the same session of congress was also reported to the full senate .

only in the cases of stanbery , thornberry , and miers did nominations that had been referred to committee fail to be reported out of committee on any occasion .

the first two of these nominations were to fill associate justice vacancies that ceased to exist while the nominations were pending , and the last , as just mentioned , was withdrawn prior to any formal committee action .

this report provides two additional tables of information concerning supreme court nominations .

table 3 shows , by president , the number of vacancies , number of nominations , and disposition of nominations .

table 4 provides detailed information on the course and fate of each of the 36 unsuccessful supreme court nominations .

a variety of sources were used to develop this table , as identified in the table notes .

although most of these sources are widely available , some , particularly older committee records , are located at the national archives and records administration .

among the official sources , the journal of the executive proceedings of the senate of the united states of america and committee records , where available , provided the most information .

where the journal showed no evidence of a debate or vote on the floor of the senate , the indices of other official sources were also checked for evidence of any other senate activity related to the nomination .

these sources included the congressional globe , congressional record , annals of congress , and senate journal .

where the table indicates that there was no debate or further senate action , there is no known official record that provides additional information .

a list of related literature follows table 4 .

crs report rl31989 .

supreme court appointment process: roles of the president , judiciary committee , and senate , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32821 .

the chief justice of the united states: responsibilities of the office and process for appointment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33247 , supreme court nominations: senate floor procedure and practice , 1789-2011 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33225 , supreme court nominations , 1789 to the present: actions by the senate , the judiciary committee , and the president , by [author name scrubbed] and maureen bearden ( pdf ) .

abraham , henry j .

justices , presidents , and senators: a history of the u.s. supreme court appointments from washington to clinton , 4 th ed .

 ( lanham , md: rowman & littlefield , 1999 ) .

ginsburg , ruth bader .

"confirming supreme court justices: thoughts on the second opinion rendered by the senate. .

university of illinois law review , vol .

1988 , pp .

101-117 .

greenburg , jan crawford .

supreme conflict: the inside story of the struggle for control of the united states supreme court ( new york: penguin press , 2007 ) .

harris , joseph p. the advice and consent of the senate: a study of the confirmation of appointments by the united states senate ( new york: greenwood press , 1968 ) .

jacobstein , j. myron , and roy m. mersky .

the rejected: sketches of the 26 men nominated for the supreme court but not confirmed by the senate ( milpitas , ca: toucan valley publications , 1993 ) .

 ( note: the authors do not include the paterson nomination. ) .

maltese , john anthony .

the selling of supreme court nominees ( baltimore , md: the johns hopkins university press , 1995 ) .

massaro , john .

supremely political: the role of ideology and presidential management in unsuccessful supreme court nominations ( albany , ny: state university of new york press , 1990 ) .

massey , calvin r. "getting there: a brief history of the politics of supreme court appointments. .

hastings constitutional law quarterly , vol .

19 ( fall 1991 ) , pp .

1-21 .

sulfridge , wayne .

"ideology as a factor in senate consideration of supreme court nominations. .

the journal of politics , vol .

42 , no .

2 ( may 1980 ) , pp .

560-567 .

thorpe , james a .

"the appearance of supreme court nominees before the senate judiciary committee. .

in the first branch of american government: the united states congress and its relations to the executive and judiciary , 1789-1989 , vol .

2 , joel sibley , ed .

 ( brooklyn , ny: carlson , 1991 ) , pp .

515-546 .

tulis , jeffrey k. "the appointment power: constitutional abdication: the senate , the president , and appointments to the supreme court. .

case western reserve law review , vol .

47 ( summer 1997 ) , pp .

1331-1357 .

whittington , keith e. "presidents , senates , and failed supreme court nominations. .

in the supreme court review , 2006 , dennis j. hutchinson , david a. strauss , and geoffrey r. stone , eds .

 ( chicago: university of chicago press , 2007 ) , pp .

401-438 .

