the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , signed by president george bush ondecember 17 , 1992 , has been in effect since january 1994 .

after almost ten years ofimplementation , there is some evidence that nafta has achieved many of the trade and economicbenefits that proponents claimed it would bring , although there have been adjustment costs at thesectoral level .

most economists , but not all , believe that trade liberalization promotes overalleconomic growth among trading partners although there are short - term adjustment costs .

a major trade issue in the 107th congress was whether or not congress would approve authority for the president to negotiate certain trade agreements and submit the agreements for approval andimplementation under expedited legislative procedures .

this authority was formerly called"fast - track authority" and is now called "trade promotion authority" or "tpa" .

on august 6 , 2002,the trade act of 2002 , which included tpa , was signed into law by the president ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

 ( 1 ) as the united states considers free trade initiatives with other latin american countries , the effectsof nafta may provide policymakers some indication of how these initiatives might affect u.s.industries and the overall u.s. economy .

in recent years , the united states has taken further stepsto liberalize trade in the western hemisphere by entering into trade negotiations for a free tradearea of the americas ( ftaa ) and a u.s. - chile free trade agreement ( fta ) .

in addition , theadministration announced that it will explore a free trade agreement with the countries of centralamerica .

the u.s. - chile fta is close to the final stages of negotiations and ftaa negotiations arescheduled to be completed by january 2005 .

on november 20 , 1993 , congress approved the nafta implementation act submitted by president clinton ( p.l .

103-182 ) .

to address concerns regarding worker dislocations , congressincluded two adjustment assistance programs , designed to ease trade - related problems , in theimplementing legislation for nafta: the nafta transitional adjustment assistance ( nafta - taa ) program and the u.s. community adjustment and investment program ( uscaip ) .

the uscaip is administered by the north american development bank ( nadbank ) .

the uscaipprovides financial assistance to communities with significant job losses due to changes in tradepatterns with mexico or canada .

the nafta - taa program was consolidated with the former trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program under the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) and is now part of a new reformed taaprogram .

the previous nafta - taa program provided assistance , including employment servicesand training , to workers who have lost their jobs due to import competition or production shifts tomexico or canada .

the new reformed taa program would expand eligibility for workers hurt bya shift in production to certain other countries , and extend benefits to workers previously ineligiblesuch as secondary workers and downstream workers in the case of nafta countries .

 ( 2 ) this report will look at the broad effect of nafta on the u.s. economy and the trade - related effects at the industry level .

it will also describe the two main adjustment assistance programs .

thereport will analyze , to the extent feasible , the effectiveness of nafta trade - related adjustmentassistance programs .

the overall effect of nafta on the u.s. economy has been relatively small , primarily becausetwo - way trade with mexico amounts to less than three percent of u.s. gdp .

therefore , any changesin trade patterns with mexico would not be expected to be significant in relation to the overall u.s.economy .

in some sectors , however , trade - related effects could be expected to be more significant,especially in those industries that were more exposed to the removal of tariff and non - tariff tradebarriers , such as the textile and apparel , and automotive industries .

most of the trade - related effects of nafta may be attributed to changes in u.s. trade and investment patterns with mexico .

at the time of nafta implementation , the u.s. - canada freetrade agreement already had been in effect for five years and some industries in the united statesand canada were already highly integrated .

most tariffs on products traded between the unitedstates and canada were zero at the time of nafta implementation .

in contrast , mexico hadfollowed an aggressive import - substitution policy for many years prior to nafta in which it hadsought to develop certain domestic industries through trade protection .

one example is the mexicanautomotive industry which had been regulated by a series of five decrees issued by the mexicangovernment between 1962 and 1989 .

the decrees established import tariffs as high as 25% onautomotive goods and had high restrictions on foreign auto production in mexico .

under nafta,mexico agreed to eliminate these restrictive trade policies .

in 1997 , president clinton submitted a congressionally mandated comprehensive assessment of the operation and effects of nafta after three years .

 ( 3 ) the report , conducted by the internationaltrade commission ( itc ) , analyzes the actual impact of the first three years of nafta on the overallu.s .

economy , and on industries particularly affected by the agreement .

 ( 4 ) the report found thatnafta had a small positive effect on the overall u.s. economy , but that some industriesexperienced significant changes in the volume of bilateral trade with nafta partners .

the reportstates that nafta's most important effects are not easily measured or observed , and the full effectsof the agreement will take many years to make themselves known .

 ( 5 ) the report is based on databetween 1993 and 1997 .

some of the findings include the following: data inadequacies at the industry level make it difficult to isolate the effects of nafta on absolute trade flows .

u.s. trade with nafta partners increased more rapidly than u.s. trade withthe rest of the world .

the share of u.s. exports in the mexican market increased by a higherpercentage than the share of total foreign imports .

in industries such as autos , chemicals , textiles , and electronics , u.s. companieshave benefitted by achieving synergies across the north american market .

critics of nafta predicted that the agreement would cause industries to move their u.s.production operations to mexico and that thousands of u.s. jobs would be lost .

a recent briefingpaper by the economic policy institute states that nafta has eliminated about 766,000 existing orpotential u.s. jobs in the manufacturing industry .

 ( 6 ) one of the reports in the briefing paper maintainsthat the increasing trade deficit with mexico since nafta has caused manufacturing jobs in theunited states to disappear and that the threat of employers to move production to mexico helpedundercut workers' bargaining power , resulting in workers being downscaled to lower - paying,less - secure jobs .

 ( 7 ) the report's findings are largelybased on the assumption that the increasing u.s.trade deficit with mexico is primarily a result of nafta .

however , while nafta may haveaccelerated u.s. - mexico trade since 1993 , there are other important economic factors that havecontributed to the increasing trade deficit with mexico and that are not fully analyzed in the report .

the expansion of the u.s. economy in the 1990s and the mexican peso devaluation of 1995 havesignificantly influenced trade and investment patterns between the united states and mexico .

thereport does mention the mexican peso devaluation effects but does not fully distinguish these effectsfrom those of nafta .

another aspect of trade - related impacts is the relationship of trade deficitsto overall employment levels .

while nafta may be partially responsible for the dislocation ofworkers in some industries , a growing trade deficit with mexico does not necessarily indicate anincrease in overall unemployment levels .

 ( 8 ) a report published in industry trade and technology review provides another perspective on the effects of nafta and factors affecting increasing u.s. - mexico trade .

 ( 9 ) the report states thatonly part of the growth in u.s. - mexico trade can be attributed directly to the actual provisions ofnafta .

the report indicates that the increase in u.s. trade with mexico since 1994 was alsoaffected by currency fluctuations , economic growth in the united states and mexico , and animproved general business climate in north america .

it states that the overall effect of nafta onemployment tends to move jobs between sectors rather than to change national employment levels .

part of the report's discussion centers around the economy - wide estimates of employment effectsand mentions the epi estimate of actual and potential job losses of 766,000 as being the "mostextreme" estimate of job losses in studies that have generated estimates of employment changes dueto nafta .

 ( 10 ) the author states that this estimaterelies on an unlikely linkage between jobs and tradedeficits , but even this high an estimate would account for a relatively small percent of total u.s.layoffs , and that , therefore , job "creation" or "losses" are relatively small on an economy - wide basis .

the author writes that , while the negative impact on workers has been greater in some industries,the experience of workers displaced by nafta would be similar to that of workers displaced forreasons unrelated to trade .

 ( 11 ) the report cites ausitc ( 12 ) study which found that workers that havebeen unemployed as a result of trade liberalization have , in the long run , been re - employed in othersectors .

u.s. trade with mexico and canada has grown more rapidly than total u.s. trade since 1994,but at the sectoral level , it is difficult to measure the specific effects of nafta on specificindustries .

the automotive , chemical products , textile , and apparel industries have experienced themost significant changes in trade flows , which may also have affected employment levels in theseindustries .

not all changes in trade and investment patterns since 1994 can be attributed to naftabecause the u.s. economic expansion during the 1990s and the mexican peso devaluation of 1995also affected trade patterns .

this section discusses five major u.s. industries that have high volumesof trade with mexico and canada .

these industries include the automotive industry , chemicals andallied products , computer equipment , textiles and apparel , and microelectronics .

 ( 13 ) the expansion of the u.s. economy during the 1990s could be the most important factor to consider in evaluating the trade trends since nafta .

as the u.s. economy expands , so does thedemand for imports .

part of the growth in imports from mexico after nafta implementation couldhave been due to economic growth in the united states , and not entirely attributable to a reductionin trade barriers .

in addition , the peso devaluation of 1995 reduced the purchasing power of themexican people which likely reduced the demand of mexico's imports from the united states , atleast in the short term .

the nafta - taa program provided assistance to workers who have lost theirjobs because of increased import competition from mexico or canada or because ofproduction shifts to mexico or canada .

workers receiving benefits had to be certified by the u.s. secretary of the labor as having lost their jobs , or have beenthreatened with job loss due to import competition or production shifts to mexico orcanada .

 ( 28 ) in the 107th congress,legislation was passed to authorize taa as a singleprogram without the separate nafta - taa program through fy2007 .

presidentbush proposed in his fy2003 budget to extend the taa and nafta - taa programsand to include total funding of $462 million for both programs , representing anincrease of $46 million over fy2002 funding levels of $416 million .

from the program's inception in january 1994 through december 2001 , 415,371 workers were covered by certification .

the nafta - taa worker assistance includesemployment services , training , trade readjustment allowances , and job search andrelocation allowances .

the benefits are administered by the state employmentsecurity agencies under contract with the department of labor .

as part of theemployment services , certified workers can receive counseling , testing and placementservices , and supportive services .

another form of assistance is cash allowances .

certified workers may be eligible to receive cash benefits , called trade readjustmentallowances ( tra ) .

another program connected with the passage of nafta that provides assistance to communities with significant job losses due to changes in trade patternswith canada or mexico is the uscaip , which is administered for the united statesgovernment by the los angeles office of the nadbank .

the nadbank , and itssister organization , the border environment cooperation commission ( becc ) , werecreated under a binational side agreement to nafta to address environmentalinfrastructure problems along the u.s. - mexico border .

the uscaip is administeredby the nadbank for the u.s. government .

as of september 2001 , the program hadmade three direct loans totaling $2.18 million and helped fund 563 loans worth$377.6 million through the federal agency program .

 ( 29 ) the program works primarilythrough the loan programs of the small business administration and the u.s.department of agriculture , but also has a grants office that provides communitygrants on a competitive basis .

it may provide direct financing in cases whereconventional sources of financing are not available .

the program offers credit to newor expanded businesses in communities for commercial projects that create newprivate sector jobs .

the program combines efforts of the nadbank with certainfederal agencies , local financial institutions , and financial intermediaries to helpcommunities meet financing needs for business opportunities .

 ( 30 ) the uscaip reports that assistance loans have accounted for the creation or retention of 12,779 jobs .

 ( 31 ) however , the actualeffect of the program may not beknown .

according to a u.s. general accounting office ( gao ) report , the uscaipdoes not have a monitoring system in place to measure the program outcomes .

thereport states that the data in the records maintained by the uscaip are based onprojections by businesses when applying for program financing and are not verified .

gao stated that federal financing programs similar to the uscaip that assistspecific sectors or firms largely shift employment among sectors in the economyrather than raise the overall level of employment .

 ( 32 ) although the overall effects of nafta have been small but positive , some communities have had economic difficulties due to local plant closures .

a numberof communities have experienced a high number of trade - related layoffs and , whilesome have had time to absorb the losses , others have not .

the nafta - taaprogram provided assistance for these communities , but there have beenimplementation challenges .

a gao study on community adjustment assistancereported the experiences of six trade - impacted communities .

the study found thatthe trade adjustment assistance was limited and that all the communities had reportedstructural problems that impeded effective service delivery .

low educational levelsamong unemployed workers was a major factor in being able to implement effectivetraining benefits .

another problem was the lack of data on program outcomes toevaluate efficacy .

the study stated that there were no simple answers to communityrecovery , even when assistance funds were available .

 ( 33 ) .

after almost ten years of implementation , the full effects of nafta on the u.s.economy are still unclear .

proponents of nafta claim that the agreement hasincreased u.s. trade with mexico and canada , and benefitted the u.s. economy .

they believe that nafta has had a positive impact on u.s. trade and investmentwith canada and mexico , and that nafta has increased u.s. exports to canada andmexico .

 ( 34 ) critics of nafta argue that hundredsof thousands of u.s. jobs havebeen lost because of the agreement .

nafta critics generally base their argumentson the increasing trade deficit with mexico , stating that increasing u.s. imports frommexico have caused plant closures and job losses in the united states .

an examination of available data and studies related to nafta shows that the effects of nafta are not clear - cut .

first , it is difficult to isolate the effects ofnafta because of other variables affecting trade and investment such as economicgrowth and exchange rates , both of which affect consumer spending and the demandfor imports , foreign investment , employment levels , and relative wages .

second,some of the market opening measures in mexico that resulted from nafta werealready taking place prior to the agreement and nafta may have only acceleratedthe process .

although the effects of nafta may not be easily measured , the tradetrends following the agreement may give some overall indication of how the marketresponded to the new trade rules .

trade between the united states and mexicoexpanded considerably after nafta .

while trade expansion has benefitted theoverall u.s. economy in terms of improved production processes , and the increasedavailability of better goods and services for u.s. consumers at lower cost , there alsohave been job losses associated with nafta .

the two u.s. workforce sectors thathave been adversely affected are the textiles and apparel industry and the automotiveindustry .

the trade effects of nafta are of significance because of the possibilities of a u.s. trade agreements with chile and also the free trade area of the americasinitiative .

nafta may provide an indication of how further trade integration in thewestern hemisphere would affect u.s. industries .

one of the key concerns facingpolicymakers in developing trade policy initiatives is the labor issue and how toaddress the problem of worker dislocation in industries adversely affected by trade .

 ( 35 ) two nafta - related programs that were created to provide assistance to workers andcommunities affected by trade with mexico or canada , the nafta - taa programand the uscaip program , have been beneficial but also have limitations .

accordingto one gao study , nafta - taa training assistance has not always been effective,especially in cases of workers with low educational levels .

the study found thatthere were no simple answers to community recovery even when assistance wasavailable .

another gao report stated that the effectiveness of the uscaip programis not known because of the lack of a measuring mechanism to evaluate programoutcomes .

