in its fy2013 budget request , the obama administration is seeking around $880 million for threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia and the other states of the former soviet union .

this includes $519.1 million for dod's cooperative threat reduction program , around $291.4 million for nonproliferation programs in the former soviet union , and about $70 million in funding for state department programs .

this total does not include funds for nonproliferation programs , such as the global threat reduction initiative ( gtri ) , megaports , and the nonproliferation and disarmament fund , which do not provide assistance within the former soviet states .

congress authorized around $1 billion for u.s. programs that provide nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance to russia and the other states of the former soviet union in the fy2012 budget — including $508.2 million for dod's cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program , around $450 million for the department of energy's ( doe ) nonproliferation programs in russia , and around $75 million for state department nonproliferation programs in the former soviet union .

with these programs , the united states seeks to help the recipient nations transport , store , and eliminate nuclear , chemical , and other weapons ; secure and eliminate the materials used in nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons ; and prevent proliferation of the knowledge needed to produce these weapons to nations or groups outside the former soviet union .

since fy1992 , the united states has appropriated over $13 billion across these three agencies for these programs .

during his tenure , president george w. bush often voiced support for these programs .

in november 2001 , the white house noted that "the united states is committed to strong , effective cooperation with russia and the other states emerging from the former soviet union to reduce weapons of mass destruction and prevent the proliferation of these weapons or the material and expertise to develop them. .

at the u.s. - russian summit in may 2002 , the united states and russia pledged to "continue cooperative threat reduction programs and expand efforts to reduce weapons - usable fissile material. .

furthermore , in june 2002 , the president joined with the leaders of the g - 8 nations to create the g - 8 global partnership against the spread of weapons and materials of mass destruction .

as is discussed in more detail later in this report , under this partnership , the united states committed to provide up to $10 billion over 10 years to pursue nonproliferation and threat reduction programs in russia and the other former soviet states .

president obama has also embraced the goals of these programs , and has pledged to accelerate them .

he pledged to "lead a global effort to secure all nuclear weapons materials at vulnerable sites within four years" and convened a summit of world leaders in washington in april 2010 to address the international nuclear security agenda .

he appointed a "white house coordinator for nuclear security" who , as a deputy national security advisor , coordinates u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation programs .

in addition , president obama and russia's president medvedev signed a joint statement on nuclear cooperation , in july , 2009 , where they confirmed "their commitment to strengthening their cooperation to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. .

the statement highlighted their continuing commitment to pursue a wide array of threat reduction and nonproliferation programs , to secure both their own nuclear materials and vulnerable nuclear materials around the world .

moreover , in the 2010 quadrennial defense review , released on february 1 , 2010 , the department of defense notes that it will expand its capabilities to counter weapons of mass destruction and support cooperative threat reduction efforts .

congress has also supported u.s. nonproliferation and threat reduction programs in the former soviet states .

although some members have questioned the value and effectiveness of some specific projects , congress has authorized most of the funds requested by the executive branch in the 20 years since these programs began .

congress has also helped shape the programs , prohibiting funding for some types of projects and providing added funding for others .

many analysts have questioned , however , whether the united states has done all that it could to prevent the leakage of knowledge , weapons , and materials from the former soviet states .

in its first budget submission in early 2001 , the bush administration reduced funding for the dod threat reduction programs by nearly 10% and cut more than $100 million out of doe's defense nuclear nonproliferation programs , a funding category that includes u.s. nonproliferation assistance to russia .

the administration increased funding for these programs in fy2003 , fy2004 , and fy2006 , but its budget for fy2005 and fy2007 for the dod threat reduction programs again showed a 10% decrease .

even with increases in doe budgets , some analysts argue that , when combined with declines in the dod budget , the funding falls short of what is needed to address the continuing dangers of proliferation from the former soviet states .

further , funding has begun to shift funding away from programs that secure weapons and materials in the former soviet states and into programs that provide border security and assistance to a greater number of nations around the world .

some analysts support this shift in focus , and the emergence of a more global nonproliferation and threat reduction effort while others argue that this shift , if not accompanied by an increase in total funding , could undermine u.s. efforts to accelerate and complete programs with the former soviet states .

these concerns were evident in the congressional action on the fy2008 and fy2009 budgets , which increased several of the threat reduction and nonproliferation programs .

the current political environment may offer new challenges for these programs .

congress did not pass appropriations bills for fy2011 , and , instead , provided funding through a continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-10 ) .

with much of the fy2011 funding based on fy2010 budget levels , some programs received more money than was requested in the fy2011 budget and others received significantly less funding .

moreover , some in congress sought to fund the remainder of fy2011 at the levels provided in the fy2008 budget .

this would have left u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance with funding that fell far short of the amounts requested , and according to some analysts , would have seriously undermined u.s. efforts to secure vulnerable nuclear materials and reduce the threat of nuclear terrorism .

congress did not approve these deep cuts , however , and the funding for fy2011 , although lower than the president's budget request , will sustain many of the ongoing efforts .

many studies have offered recommendations for the size , shape , and operation of these programs that differ from the approaches taken by past administrations .

this report summarizes some issues raised in these reports and in congressional debates on the future of u.s. nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance .

however , it first reviews the history of these programs , describing their origins in 1991 , their expansion and evolution during the 1990s , and the changes in their direction during the first two years of the bush administration .

the report also provides a broad summary of many of the program areas and projects supported by u.s. funding .

this report focuses on funding for threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in the states of the former soviet union .

although the united states has expanded its efforts to programs that seek to assist other nations in securing nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons materials , the overwhelming majority of u.s. funds still support programs in the former soviet states .

nevertheless , because u.s. funding and focus has shifted in recent years , this report provides only a partial view of u.s. nonproliferation and threat reduction programs .

the state department has played an integral role in u.s. nonproliferation and threat reduction programs since their inception .

it has taken the lead in negotiating the broad agreements needed before recipient nations can receive u.s. assistance and in providing for broad policy coordination among the u.s. agencies and between the united states and recipient nations .

the state department also manages the nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) , which it can use to help nations address problems with proliferation - prone weapons located on their territories .

congress appropriated approximately $15 million for this fund each year between 1993 and 2003 .

the bush administration requested , and congress approved , $35 million for ndf in fy2004 , $31.7 million in fy2005 , and $37.5 million in fy2006 .

it requested $38 million in fy2007 and $30 million for fy2008 , with congress appropriating $37 million and $33.7 million for those years , respectively .

the bush administration requested an additional $40 million for the ndf in fy2009 ; congress approved this amount , and added $77 million more in the supplemental appropriations acts ( p.l .

111-32 ) .

the obama administration requested $57 million for this fund in fy2011 , $30 million for fy2012 , and $30 million in fy2013 .

the bush administration indicated that it planned to use this program to expand u.s. efforts to help countries establish better accounting and control mechanisms for nuclear , chemical , and biological materials .

according to john wolf , the former assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation , the state department also planed to use these funds to "focus on unanticipated opportunities to eliminate missile systems , chemical agents , and to secure orphaned radiological sources. .

for example , funding from this program contributed to the u.s. effort to eliminate libya's wmd infrastructure and to help redirect weapons scientists in libya and iraq .

most of the funding in this program is used on projects outside the former soviet union .

the state department also manages and funds the international science and technology center ( istc ) in moscow and its companion science and technology center ( stcu ) in kiev , ukraine .

in the fy2005 budget request , it combined these centers and the biological weapons redirect program into a new category , called nonproliferation of wmd expertise .

the state department also manages the export control and related border security assistance ( exbs ) program .

the following discussion provides more detail about these two program areas .

the department of energy has contributed to u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance to the former soviet states from the start , when ctr included a small amount of funding for materials control and protection .

officials from doe participated , along with their counterparts at dod , in early efforts to outline projects and reach agreement with russian officials on assistance to secure nuclear materials .

but these government - to - government negotiations proceeded slowly , in part because russia's nuclear energy ministry — known as minatom at the time — was less open to cooperation than the ministry of defense .

consequently , projects at facilities that housed nuclear materials did not begin until 1994 .

in a parallel effort that sought to reduce these delays , experts from the u.s. nuclear laboratories , which are a part of doe , also began less formal contacts with their counterparts in russia to identify and solve safety and security problems at russian facilities .

together , these government - to - government and lab - to - lab projects evolved into an effort to apply material protection , control and accounting ( mpc&a ) techniques to russian facilities .

the mpc&a program began with less than $3 million in fy1993 .

this amount grew to $73 million in fy1995 .

in fy1996 , doe assumed budgetary and management responsibility for the program .

doe also initiated a second program , the initiatives for proliferation prevention , which sought to provide employment opportunities for scientists and engineers from russia's nuclear weapons complex .

in the latter half of the 1990s , doe expanded these efforts and added several other programs to its nonproliferation assistance .

these programs are now managed by doe's national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) .

the discussion below summarizes the objectives and achievements of many of these efforts .

congress has addressed a number of issues during the years since it passed the nunn - lugar amendment and dod established the cooperative threat reduction program .

many of these are discussed in detail in crs report 97-1027 , nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction programs: issues for congress .

some of these issues have grown out of concerns with specific projects , as has been the case with the dispute over the chemical weapons destruction facility at shchuch'ye .

others have derived from broader concerns about whether threat reduction assistance to russia and the other former soviet states serves broader u.s. national security goals .

the question of whether u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance represents "defense by other means" — as former secretary of defense william perry used to argue — or foreign aid — as some in congress often assert — continues to echo in debates about these programs .

some program critics and some members of congress also continue to question whether u.s. assistance allows russia to divert its own resources to the development and production of new weapons that could threaten the united states .

secretary of defense rumsfeld raised this question during his nomination hearing in january 2001 .

on the other hand , as u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance to russia moves through its second decade , many of the issues discussed during the debates over the programs reflect new concerns raised during assessments of how the programs performed in their first decade and how they might improve in the second .

many of these issues also reflect the growing focus of the programs on the potential link between weapons of mass destruction that might leak out of russia and terrorist organizations that might seek these weapons to attack the united states and its allies .

the discussion below reviews many of these issues , describing concerns raised by those who support and those who criticize the programs .

the discussion draws heavily on the findings and proposals outlined by several non - governmental reports on u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance .

these provide a more detailed description of the status of the programs and proposals for the future .

as was noted above , ctr implementation was slow during the program's early years .

the need to negotiate umbrella agreements with russia , and to establish a "culture of cooperation," was a key reason for the early delays .

but some analysts also cite the need to coordinate project planning among several u.s government agencies as a problem .

many analysts contend that coordination problems remain today , even though each of the three key agencies — dod , doe and state — funds and manages its own projects .

these agencies still need to coordinate their efforts to avoid duplication and , in some cases , to share resources and expertise .

in addition , with the programs spread among three agencies , no one in the u.s. government has taken the lead in setting policies and priorities for u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance , or in serving as an advocate for these programs in interagency debates .

some members of congress and analysts outside government have proposed two specific solutions that they believe will improve implementation of u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance — the creation of a strategic plan and the designation of an overall program coordinator .

many analysts , both inside and outside the u.s. government , believe that u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation programs would benefit from the development of a government - wide strategic plan .

some officials and analysts expected the bush administration to develop a more comprehensive strategic plan for these programs during its review of u.s. nonproliferation assistance to russia in 2001 .

that review just identified those programs that would receive greater resources and expanded mandates .

but , according to former senator pete domenici , "these programs frequently are intertwined and interrelated in various complex and difficult ways. .

according to one analyst who has participated in both dod and doe programs , the growth in u.s. programs "has been by and large , organic , with each agency pursuing its own contacts and relationships in recipient countries , assembling and justifying its own budget , implementing programs based on its own culture and approaches , and interacting with its own congressional oversight committees. .

most analysts agree that a comprehensive strategic plan would allow for the development of an overall set of goals for u.s. assistance , better coordination among programs , a more consistent method to set priorities and measure progress , and a coordinated way to determine when and how the united states had achieved its goals and could complete a program .

many analysts have also called for the creation of a high - level program coordinator or a high - level interagency committee chaired by a representative of the national security council .

this program coordinator would set a consistent direction by setting priorities , resolving competing demands for budgetary resources , eliminating overlap and redundancy , and coordinating implementation across agencies .

this individual would also raise the political profile of the programs , bringing consistent political leadership that many analysts believe is lacking .

they argue that continued , coordinated success for the programs requires "active political engagement at the white house , cabinet , and sub - cabinet political appointee levels in the u.s .

government. .

neither the clinton nor the bush administrations accepted proposals for a single , high - level program coordinator , arguing that interagency coordination already occurs .

according to an official from the bush administration , "u.s. policy implementation and oversight of nonproliferation assistance to the states of the former soviet union is coordinated at senior levels by the proliferation strategy policy coordinating committee , or pcc , chaired by a national security council senior director , with assistant secretary - level representatives from state , defense , energy and other concerned agencies. .

others have argued that a new interagency committee would complicate the existing interagency coordinating process .

congress , however , continued to support a high - level coordinator , or czar , for the threat reduction and nonproliferation programs .

in late 2006 , representative ellen tauscher and senator hillary rodham clinton introduced legislation , known as the nuclear terrorism prevention act of 2006 ( h.r .

6419 , s. 4103 ) , that would have created a senior advisor to the president for the prevention of nuclear terrorism .

this advisor would have , among other things , been responsible for "overseeing the development , by the relevant federal departments and agencies , of accelerated and strengthened program implementation strategies and diplomatic strategies ... and overseeing the development of budget requests for these programs and ensuring that they adequately reflect the priority of the problem. .

the first piece of legislation introduced in the 110 th congress , the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( h.r .

1 , s. 4 ) took up the same theme .

it established an office of the united states coordinator for the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism within the executive office of the president .

this advisor would , among other things , lead inter - agency coordination of u.s. efforts to implement its wmd nonproliferation strategy and would oversee "the development of a comprehensive and coordinated budget for programs and initiatives to prevent wmd proliferation and terrorism , ensuring that such budget adequately reflects the priority of the challenges and is effectively executed , and carrying out other appropriate budgetary authorities. .

the bush administration never filled this position with a designated director on the nsc staff , and indicated that the existing nsc staff could achieve the goals outlined in the legislation .

the obama administration , in contrast , has created and filled a new nsc position for the coordinator of the prevention of wmd proliferation and terrorism .

this nsc director reportedly has a deputy director who will focus specifically on threat reduction efforts , and will seek to coordinate the threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in doe , dod , and the state department .

most analysts agree that the budget responsibility addressed in this legislation would be critical to the success of this new policy position .

a white house - based nonproliferation "czar" may be able to communicate high - level interest and political commitment to the programs .

however , unless this individual could control the budgets of the programs involved to ensure that funding levels matched stated priorities , and unless the individual could implement corrective actions to ensure that programs achieved their objectives , it seems unlikely that he or she would be able to establish priorities and enforce them across government agencies .

a high - level committee might have greater success creating a consensus about priorities , because each agency would have a representative at the table .

but it might still find it difficult to match funding levels to these priorities because each agency's budget would still reflect the overall priorities and missions of the agency .

many analysts and government officials note that the primary barrier to successful implementation of many threat reduction projects has been the need to gain access and transparency from officials in the recipient nations , particularly russia .

as was noted above , russia was slow to provide the united states with access to nuclear weapons storage areas , which delayed the implementation of security improvements at these facilities .

it has not provided complete information about or access to facilities in its biological weapons complex , and , in spite of more than eight years of negotiations , the united states and russia still have not completed a transparency agreement for the facility in mayak that will store fissile materials removed from weapons .

furthermore , russia has not provided the united states with access to many facilities in russia's nuclear weapons complex , leaving large holes in the u.s. ability to improve security for the nuclear materials at those facilities .

although many analysts note that russia's interest in protecting secret details about its nuclear weapons programs is understandable , most also argue that this secrecy , and the resulting delays in program implementation , serve to undermine support in the united states for threat reduction and nonproliferation programs .

while most agree that russia must step forward to solve this problem , they also note that the united states does not have a "systematic approach to identifying and addressing these problems. .

each agency has developed its own solutions .

for example , in some cases , doe has used photographs and diagrams , instead of on - site visits , to identify security weaknesses and design security improvements at nuclear complex sites .

analysts have identified this "ad hoc" process as one further incentive for better coordination among threat reduction programs ; a single program coordinator could help agencies identify problems and share solutions .

in the fy2006 defense authorization act ( p.l .

109 - 163 ) , congress called on the administration to submit a report on the impediments to successful implementation of these programs .

the report is to both identify these impediments and outline u.s. plans to overcome them .

problems with access to russian facilities is one of the impediments cited in the reporting requirement .

in 1992 , the united states and russia signed an umbrella agreement that outlined the rights and responsibilities assumed by each of the parties when implementing programs funded by u.s. threat reduction assistance .

this agreement provides the legal framework that allows for program implementation ; if it were to lapse , the united states could not award any new contracts for projects funded by u.s. assistance .

the original agreement was set to last for seven years ; the two parties agreed to extend it for another seven years in 1999 .

it was again set to expire in june 2006 .

at the time it was signed , this agreement applied only to those programs funded by the department of defense , but the department of energy has adopted a similar agreement to cover many of its programs in the former soviet union .

the most contentious elements of the umbrella agreement are the provisions that cover liability for accidents or incidents that might occur during project implementation .

in the original agreement , russia assumed all liability , freeing u.s. contractors from the threat of legal action or the possible need to pay fines and penalties if accidents were to occur .

however , in recent years , russia has objected to these blanket liability provisions , arguing , at a minimum , that u.s. contractors should be held liable for accidents resulting from sabotage .

as was noted above , this disagreement impeded the conclusion of a new implementation agreement for doe's plutonium disposition program .

when resolving this dispute , the united states was reluctant to ease its stand that u.s. contractors receive blanket liability protection , in part , because it was afraid that this would set an unacceptable precedent during negotiations on the broader umbrella agreement .

however , by the middle of 2005 , the united states and russia both recognized that a failure to resolve the liability debate stalling the plutonium disposition program could , eventually , lead to a failure to resolve the dispute in negotiations over the umbrella agreement .

this , in turn , could stall or stop a nonproliferation program that most experts agreed had made great strides to secure weapons and materials in russia .

conversely , if the two states could find an acceptable solution for the doe program's agreement , it might ease efforts to conclude a new umbrella agreement .

during this process , contractors participating in the doe program reportedly noted that they would not object to a provision that placed liability for accidents resulting from sabotage onto the u.s. companies ; they noted that this could expose them to russia's legal system , but they also noted that the united states might address this through a separate international treaty or by focusing on russian liability law , rather than by pressing for blanket liability protection .

the two sides reached agreement on the liability provisions for the doe programs during the g - 8 summit at gleneagles , scotland , in july 2005 .

reports indicate that , in exchange for the u.s. giving up its insistence on blanket liability protection in future contracts , the two countries would set up a separate process for addressing any situations that might arise as a result of sabotage .

in mid - june 2006 , the united states and russia reached agreement on liability protections and extended the umbrella agreement for another seven years .

this concluded the agreement just days before the existing agreement was due to expire .

reports indicate that the new agreement retains the original agreement's blanket liability protections for existing projects but will address russia's concerns when implementing future projects .

hence , u.s. contractors could be liable for damages caused by sabotage or other accidents , in some circumstances .

the original nunn - lugar amendment contained six "exclusions" that set out conditions the recipients had to meet before receiving u.s. threat reduction assistance .

the united states could not provide assistance until the president certified to congress that each recipient nation was "committed to:" ( 1 ) making a substantial investment of its resources for dismantling or destroying such weapons ; ( 2 ) forgoing any military modernization program that exceeds legitimate defense requirements and forgoing the replacement of destroyed weapons of mass destruction ; ( 3 ) forgoing any use of fissionable and other components of destroyed nuclear weapons in new nuclear weapons ; ( 4 ) facilitating united states verification of weapons destruction carried out under section 212 ; ( 5 ) complying with all relevant arms control agreements ; and ( 6 ) observing internationally recognized human rights , including the protection of minorities. .

congress expected the president to exercise his judgment when deciding whether to issue the certifications .

for example , the legislation states that the recipient nations must be "committed to" the policies listed in the six exclusions , a standard which can be less demanding than one that requires precise behavior .

the clinton administration certified russia for several years , even though the united states had questions about russia's compliance with chemical and biological weapons agreements , because russia's president yeltsin had offered verbal assurances of his commitment to resolve the outstanding questions .

using the same information , the bush administration withheld russia's certification .

in addition , the exclusions do not define many of their terms .

for example , they state that a recipient must make "a substantial investment" of its own resources , but it does not define a level of investment that would be necessary .

they also state that the recipients must forgo military modernization programs that exceed legitimate defense requirements , but it does not ban all military modernization or indicate how much would be too much .

congress debated adding new or modified exclusions to the ctr legislation several times over the life of the ctr program .

in some years , some members have sought to provide more precise standards of behavior for the recipient nations ; in others , they have sought to add new requirements linking receipt of assistance to a greater number of policy areas .

congress has rejected many of these efforts , particularly if they appeared certain to cut off u.s. threat reduction assistance to russia .

instead , it has usually crafted requirements with language that provides the president with the flexibility to balance u.s. concerns about the recipients' policies against the u.s. interest in continuing efforts to contain and eliminate weapons of mass destruction .

congress did add new certification requirements related to the construction of the chemical weapons destruction facility at shchuch'ye in fy1998 and fy1999 .

these stated that "no funds authorized to be appropriated under this or any other act for fy1998 for cooperative threat reduction programs may be obligated or expended for chemical weapons destruction activities ... until the president submits to congress a written certification" that: ( a ) russia is making reasonable progress toward the implementation of the bilateral destruction agreement ; ( b ) the united states and russia have made substantial progress toward the resolution , to the satisfaction of the united states , of outstanding compliance issues under the wyoming memorandum of understanding and the bilateral destruction agreement ; and ( c ) russia has fully and accurately declared all information regarding its unitary and binary chemical weapons , chemical weapons facilities , and other facilities associated with chemical weapons .

however , congress permitted the president to submit an alternative certification , which stated that "the national security interests of the united states could be undermined by a united states policy not to carry out chemical weapons destruction activities under the cooperative threat reduction programs. .

but when congress resumed funding for shchuch'ye in fy2002 , after a two year prohibition , it restored the certification requirements without the alternative provision .

the united states could not provide funding for chemical weapons destruction activities in russia until the secretary of defense certified that there has been: ( 1 ) information provided by russia , that the united states assesses to be full and accurate , regarding the size of the chemical weapons stockpile of russia ; ( 2 ) a demonstrated annual commitment by russia to allocate at least $25,000,000 to chemical weapons elimination ; ( 3 ) development by russia of a practical plan for destroying its stockpile of nerve agents ; ( 4 ) enactment of a law by russia that provides for the elimination of all nerve agents at a single site ; ( 5 ) an agreement by russia to destroy or convert its chemical weapons production facilities at volgograd and novocheboksark ; and ( 6 ) a demonstrated commitment from the international community to fund and build infrastructure needed to support and operate the facility .

the bush administration announced , in april 2002 , that it could not certify that russia was committed to its arms control obligations under the chemical weapons and biological weapons conventions .

this decision stalled many ongoing ctr projects by precluding the signing and implementation of new contracts .

furthermore , in an effort to balance its stated support for ctr with this decision , the administration asked congress to provide it with the authority to waive the certification requirements so that it could continue to fund ctr programs in russia .

most members of congress agreed with the administration's view that the ctr programs continued to serve u.s. national security interests , and the house and senate each included a waiver authority in its version of the defense authorization bill .

the senate provided the president with permanent waiver authority ; once passed , the authority would remain available to the president in all future fiscal years .

the house sought a less generous provision , providing the president with the authority to waive the certification requirements only in fy2003 .

the conference committee , in section 1306 ( h.rept .

107 - 436 ) , provided the president with the authority to waive the certification requirements for three years .

but this waiver only applied to the original six exclusions , not the separate certification for shchuch'ye .

congress included one year of waiver authority for that project in the fy2003 defense appropriations bill ( p.l .

107 - 248 ) , the fy2004 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

108-136 ) , and the fy2005 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

108 - 375 ) .

the three years of waiver authority in the fy2003 defense authorization act expired at the end of fy2005 .

the house , in its version of the fy2006 defense authorization bill provided the president with another three years of waiver authority .

the senate , in contrast , provided the president with unlimited waiver authority .

the conference committee adopted the senate position .

the president must still present a waiver each year , if he cannot certify russia's compliance with the requirements , but this authority is available to him every year .

in its version of the fy2007 defense authorization bill , the senate approved language that would have eliminated the certification requirements from the ctr legislation .

the house rejected this approach , although the final version of the bill continues to provide the president with unlimited waver authority .

the bush administration indicated that it believed that the combination of certification requirements and presidential waivers was an essential part of its effort to use the ctr program to encourage greater openness in russia and to transform russian behavior .

they allow the united states to signal to russia that it will hold it to a high standard , and , although the president can waive the certifications , he does not have to if russian behavior does not meet u.s. standards .

some in congress supported this approach .

they agreed that the ctr program should be afforded a high priority , but they noted that it could not proceed in a vacuum , without consideration for russian behavior in other policy areas .

some , however , disagreed with this approach .

they believed that u.s. threat reduction assistance to russia should be of the highest priority , and although russian policies in other areas are important , they should not interfere with the elimination and containment of weapons of mass destruction .

some of these members proposed that congress amend the ctr legislation to remove the certification requirements altogether .

others believed that congress should provide the president with permanent waiver authority so that this debate does not stop the program , as it did in 2002 , again in the future .

some in congress , however , believe that russian policies in other areas — such as russian nuclear cooperation with iran , russian military modernization , and the lack of russian compliance with arms control — can create new threats to u.s. security and , therefore , are of higher priority than threat reduction assistance .

they argued that the president should have only a limited ability to waive the certification requirements .

the 110 th congress addressed this issue again ; both the house and senate versions of the defense authorization bill would eliminate the certification requirements from the ctr program .

the conference report accepted this provision , and , as a result , u.s. assistance under the ctr program is no longer subject to the certification requirements that have been the cause of so much debate .

the united states currently allocates slightly more than $1 billion per year to its threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in the former soviet union ; it spends and additional several hundred million dollars on these types of programs in nations outside the former soviet union .

these programs expanded sharply in the latter half of the 1990s .

yet many analysts have argued that the united states should commit a far greater sum to these efforts .

the baker - cutler report , for example , released in january 2001 , argued that the united states should spend up to $30 billion over the next 10 years on doe's programs to secure nuclear materials .

this amount did not include funding for dod or state department programs , which could total around $5 billion over 10 years if spending continues at the current level .

most analysts agree that added funding will not necessarily accelerate all u.s. programs .

they acknowledge that implementation problems , such as the absence of access to many facilities and the u.s. failure to certify russia for receipt of ctr assistance for most of 2002 , slowed progress and left significant amounts of money unspent .

on the other hand , they have identified numerous programs that might achieve greater results with increased funding .

these include the science centers in moscow and kiev , where the united states and its partners have had to limit the number of scientists who receive research grants because of limits on the available funds .

this list at one time also included the program to dispose of plutonium in russia , where added funding might have sped construction of the mox facility and hasten the elimination of weapons grade plutonium , and the program to eliminate russia's plutonium producing reactors , where greater funding is now leading to the completion of replacement energy plants .

export and border control programs might also accelerate their progress with added funding , leading to the installation of improved equipment and procedures at a greater number of border crossing points .

the bush administration generally agreed with the need to add funding to some programs to accelerate their progress , and it took this route with several programs , such as the science centers and export and border control programs , during its first term .

it also called for added international funding to help accelerate the shutdown of russia's plutonium - producing reactors and to speed security improvements at storage sites for russian nuclear warheads .

however , analysts note that , with a fixed budget of around $1 billion per year , the united states will be able to expand these programs and introduce new programs only if it reduces funding for other programs .

but other programs , such as the effort to help russia dispose of its weapons - grade plutonium , could consume rapidly increasing sums in the future .

consequently , a fixed budget could force trade - offs between projects .

for example , in its budget request for fy2004 , doe sought to add funding to accelerate the blend - down of highly enriched uranium and to fund the new program to identify and secure radiological sources .

at the same time , it has reduced funding for mpc&a projects in russia's nuclear weapons complex .

on the other hand , some current programs are beginning to finish their missions , allowing increased funding for other programs .

many of the capital - intensive construction projects funded during the 1990s fall into this category , as is evidenced by the reduced budgets for strategic offensive arms elimination and the construction of the chemical weapons destruction facility .

some have even noted that , as these large projects conclude , the united states might find it difficult to fulfill its commitment to spend $1 billion each year .

dod's ctr budget has already declined , and funding in doe's budget for programs in russia declined as it completed many of the security upgrades at nuclear weapons storage facilities .

these changes could pave the way for added funding for new projects in the former soviet union , or they could release funds for use on other projects with an anti - terrorism focus , possibly outside the former soviet union .

if recent trends continue , however , it seems quite likely that , while the u.s. budget for nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance may hold steady , or even increase a little , funding for programs in the former soviet union could decline in the near future .

moreover , president obama has pledged to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials around the world in four years and the administration held a nuclear security summit in april 2010 .

most analysts agree that this endeavor could require significant increases in funds for some threat reduction and nonproliferation programs outside the former soviet union .

it is not yet clear whether these increases will come from a new , larger budget , from funds made available after the conclusion of some ongoing projects , or from a reduction in funding for some ongoing projects in the former soviet union .

u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation programs have pursued a number of different types of projects , trying different solutions to different problems .

however , most have followed one theme — these projects have sought to consolidate , contain , and destroy weapons and materials , and to consolidate and contain weapons knowledge , so that they would not leak out of the former soviet union .

in essence , the united states has sought to identify materials and knowledge that might leak out of russia and to contain them at their source .

several of the new projects initiated recently , such as the wmd proliferation prevention project at dod and doe second line of defense , take a different approach .

instead of improving security at the source , they seek set up barriers outside the nuclear weapons complex to prevent these resources from leaving the territory of the former soviet union .

these two approaches can be complementary and provide a "layered defense" against the leakage of weapons , materials , and knowhow .

however , in an era of constrained budgets , they might also compete for funding and political support .

furthermore , many analysts believe that the most effective approach to keeping nuclear materials away from terrorists is to protect them at their source , at facilities in russia's nuclear complex .

consequently , congress may address the issue of focus and priorities in its debate over u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance .

there is near - universal agreement , both within the u.s. government and among analysts outside the u.s. government , that the potential proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to rogue nations or terrorist groups presents a global problem that requires an international response .

while the legacy of the soviet union's weapons programs may create the most immediate and largest threat , other nations also possess materials , weapons , or knowledge that could leak out beyond their borders to those seeking their own nuclear , chemical or biological weapons .

in addition , although the united states has spent more than 15 years trying to help russia and the other former soviet states secure their weapons , materials , and knowledge , other nations can contribute to this effort with funding and cooperative programs .

the following section addresses three characteristics of the proposals for the "globalization" of threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance .

the first , the g - 8 global partnership against the spread of weapons and materials of mass destruction , is an initiative that has expanded the list of countries contributing to threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia .

the second describes possible initiatives to extend u.s. threat reduction assistance to nations outside the former soviet union .

the third is a more general approach to encourage all nations to better account for and secure their weapons of mass destruction and materials that might become attractive targets for terrorists seeking their own weapons of mass destruction .

during the g - 8 summit in kananaskis , canada , in july 2002 , the united states , russia , and other g - 8 leaders agreed to establish a long - term program — the g - 8 global partnership against weapons of mass destruction — to stop the spread of weapons of mass destruction and related materials and technology .

under this program , known as 10+10 over 10 , the united states has pledged to provide $10 billion over 10 years to sustain ongoing threat reduction programs in russia ; this amount of $1 billion per year is equal to current u.s. spending on threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia , so the u.s. commitment would not necessarily signal an increase in the u.s. level of effort .

the other g - 7 nations have also agreed that they will provide , together , up to $10 billion over 10 years .

russia has agreed to contribute $2 billion of its own money .

it has also agreed to adopt a set of guidelines that will allow it to receive assistance .

specifically it has agreed that it will provide for "effective monitoring , auditing , and transparency measures" and that it will "provide for adequate access for donor representatives at work sites. .

it has also agreed that the assistance will be free from taxes and other charges and that it will ensure adequate liability protections for donor countries and their personnel .

each of these issues continued to hinder nonproliferation assistance to russia , and all potential donors emphasized the need for their resolution before they provided additional assistance .

the g - 8 leaders agreed that this program would initially focus on threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in russia ; they have since extended it to ukraine .

the united states considers its assistance to the other former soviet states to be a part of its commitment under the global partnership .

the united states would also like the global partnership to contribute to programs designed to redirect scientists in iraq and libya .

during their 2004 meeting at sea island , georgia , the participants agreed to consider this proposal .

the participants have agreed that they could , individually , extend assistance to other nations , outside the specific global partnership , if these other nations adopt the partnership's guidelines .

the g - 8 leaders also invited other nations or organizations , such as the european union , to contribute to the program .

norway and others in europe have already outlined cooperative programs with russia .

at the g - 8 summit in evian , france , in 2003 , six other nations in europe ( sweden , finland , norway , poland , switzerland , and the netherlands ) joined the partnership .

seven additional nations ( australia , new zealand , south korea , belgium , denmark , ireland , and the czech republic ) joined during the 2004 summit in sea island , georgia .

president bush , in a speech on february 11 , 2004 , specifically emphasized that the g - 8 global partnership should expand its list of both donors and recipient nations .

some analysts have questioned how successful the global partnership will be in providing significant new funding for threat reduction and nonproliferation programs .

the partnership has received pledges for around $17 billion ( including the $10 billion from the united states ) .

pledges of support received since kananaskis may not necessarily extend into sustained funding over the next 10 years .

as senator richard lugar has noted , "many of our international partners will find it difficult to establish nonproliferation programs during a period of stagnating domestic economic growth. .

however , as the annex to the 2009 annual report of the global partnership working group indicates , the participating nations continue to fund hundreds of projects in the recipient nations and expenditure continue to grow .

analysts initially questioned how the allies will set priorities and divide up responsibilities over different types of nonproliferation projects .

in the statement released after the kananaskis summit , they listed several projects , including the destruction of chemical weapons , dismantlement of decommissioned nuclear submarines , disposition of fissile materials , and employment of former weapons scientists as high - priority projects .

these areas remain a high priority in 2009 .

most analysts agree that added funding would help to expand and accelerate each of these project areas .

at the same time though , the global partnership does not rely on a single coordinating body to either identify new projects or set priorities among competing projects .

each nation allocates its own funds to those programs that it views as high - priority endeavors .

in the debate over the fy2003 defense authorization bill , the senate approved an amendment , proposed by senator richard lugar , that would allow dod to use up to $50 million in fy2003 ctr funds "outside the states of the former soviet union" to resolve "critical emerging proliferation threats and to take advantage of opportunities to achieve long - standing united states nonproliferation goals. .

senator lugar argued that this type of effort could provide assistance to nations "seeking help in securing or destroying weapons or dangerous materials" and could also "create international standards of accountability for protecting and handling nuclear material and deadly pathogens. .

this legislation would also allow the united states to "undertake missions to secure dangerous materials or weapons that were at risk of falling into the wrong hands. .

the senate and the bush administration supported senator lugar's proposal .

the house , however , objected to this expansion of ctr , and the language was removed in conference .

the bush administration requested a similar authorization in its emergency supplemental appropriations bill for fy2003 .

the senate again approved the request and the house again rejected it ; it was removed from the final version of the bill .

the bush administration again requested the authorization to spend up to $50 million in ctr funds outside the former soviet union in the fy2004 defense authorization bill .

the senate again offered its unqualified support for this measure .

the house , in contrast , argued that these types of programs would be better managed by the state department than the defense department .

it authorized the transfer of up to $78 million in ctr funds to the state department nonproliferation and disarmament fund for use in threat reduction efforts outside the former soviet union .

the conference committee , in its report on the fy2004 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

108 - 136 ) , approved the president's request and permitted the use of up to $50 million in ctr funds outside the former soviet union .

however , in deference to the house concerns , the committee language indicated that this funding could be used only for short - term projects ; it also stated that the president should determine whether dod was the agency that is most capable of implementing the planned project .

the conferees stated that they would expect the president to assign the project to the most appropriate agency .

the bush administration exercised this authority for the first time in mid - 2004 , when it provided assistance to albania for the elimination of chemical weapons .

in its version of the fy2006 defense authorization bill , the senate sought to alter the provision , so that the secretary of defense , rather than the president , could approve expenditures outside the former soviet union .

the senate argued that this change would streamline the procedure and make it easier for the united states to respond to sudden and emerging proliferation problems .

the house , however , objected , and the conference committee did not accept the senate provision .

the 110 th congress addressed this issue again , both expanding the authority to spend ctr funds outside the former soviet union and to streamline the process of identifying and approving potential projects .

as was noted above , congress added $10 million to the ctr authorization to fund these programs , further , it eliminated the requirement included in the fy2004 authorization act ( p.l .

108 - 136 ) that limited the program to short - term projects that addressed sudden , emergency proliferation concerns .

instead , the conference report ( p.l .

110-181 , §1303 ) , specifies that ctr programs outside the former soviet union are defined in a similar way to those inside the former soviet union .

they would be programs designed to: facilitate the elimination , and the safe and secure transportation and storage , of chemical or biological weapons , weapons components , weapons - related materials , and their delivery vehicles .

facilitate safe and secure transportation and storage of nuclear weapons , weapons components , and their delivery vehicles .

prevent the proliferation of nuclear and chemical weapons , weapons components , and weapons - related military technology and expertise .

prevent the proliferation of biological weapons , weapons components , and weapons - related military technology and expertise , which may include activities that facilitate detection and reporting of highly pathogenic diseases or other diseases that are associated with or that could be utilized as an early warning mechanism for disease outbreaks that could impact the armed forces of the united states or allies of the united states ; and expand military - to - military and defense contacts .

congress emphasized its interest in expanding the ctr program beyond the borders of the former soviet union by noting , in section 1306 of the fy2008 defense authorization act , that ctr should be "strengthened and expanded , in part by developing new ctr initiatives. .

it stated that these new initiatives should "include broader international cooperation and partnerships , and increased international contributions. .

it also suggested that these new initiatives could include "programs and projects in asia and the middle east ; and activities relating to the denuclearization of the democratic people's republic of korea. .

moreover , congress mandated that the national academy of sciences conduct a study "to analyze options for strengthening and expanding the ctr program. .

the national academy completed this study and released its report in april 2009 .

it recommended that the united states use a new , broader ctr program to engage nations around the world in a global effort to secure dangerous weapons and materials .

it also suggested that congress authorize dod to accept funds from other nations for use in ctr efforts .

the fy2010 defense authorization bill included this provision .

moreover , the obama administration has indicated that it supports efforts to expand ctr and doe's nonproliferation assistance beyond the former soviet union ; its budget request for fy2011 includes funds for this purpose in several program areas .

those who support the expansion of ctr beyond the former soviet union argue that the united states could apply the model of threat reduction assistance that it has developed during the past 18 years to help other nations secure and eliminate weapons or materials that might be attractive to terrorists .

they point to nations such as pakistan , where insecure nuclear materials might be at risk of theft or diversion by government officials or representatives of terrorist organizations .

others , however , question whether a program like ctr can be applied successfully to nations outside the former soviet union .

they note that these nations might not be willing to allow the united states access to facilities that house nuclear materials or weapons ; that they might prefer to enhance , rather than reduce , the threat posed by their weapons of mass destruction ; and that u.s. assistance in securing weapons might actually make it easier for the recipient nations to deploy and use the weapons .

some have also questioned whether the united states can legally provide assistance , under u.s. and international law , to nations that are not parties to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty .

one of the key themes in recent reviews of the proliferation threat and the potential link to terrorism is the recognition that nuclear , chemical , and biological materials reside in many nations around the world .

nations with research facilities for these materials often lack the basic accounting , security , export , and border control systems that the united states has spent more than 10 years trying to bring to russia .

although few of these materials would be useful to those seeking to build nuclear weapons , they could be of use to those seeking a radiological dispersal device ( dirty bomb ) or a chemical or biological weapon .

there is a growing consensus that the international community and individual nations should take steps to address problems with these materials , beyond those already in place under the international atomic energy agency .

the united states would not necessarily need to adopt new programs and appropriate new funds to address this problem .

some believe , as was noted above , that efforts to expand ctr programs beyond the former soviet union could help address the problem .

but many believe that the iaea , with the support of the united states , could take steps in this direction through its existing programs that help countries secure and account for radiological materials .

the chemical weapons convention also provides a mechanism that might help nations secure and account for chemical agents and materials .

consequently , at least initially , the effort to address this global problem could be more diplomatic and political than technical , with the united states and others using the "bully pulpit" to encourage other nations to recognize the problem and take steps within their own systems to address their own vulnerabilities .

in essence , this new global focus may serve to shape the second decade of u.s. threat reduction and nonproliferation assistance .

during the first decade , the problem was dominated by concerns over the potential for the loss of control over nuclear materials and weapons in the former soviet union , and the solutions were dominated by u.s. programs to bring technical assistance to the former soviet states .

in the second decade , the problem is likely to be dominated by concerns about the potential acquisition of nuclear , chemical , and biological materials by terrorist organizations .

the solutions may be dominated by a growing sense of global cooperation in identifying and addressing weaknesses in a greater number of countries .

u.s. funding and technical assistance may still play a dominant role , but other nations may also step in to offer their experience , expertise , and financial resources .

