the older americans act ( oaa ) is the major vehicle for the delivery of social and nutrition services for older persons .

originally enacted in 1965 , the act supports a wide range of social services and programs for older persons .

these include supportive services , congregate and home - delivered nutrition services , community service employment , the long - term care ombudsman program , and services to prevent the abuse , neglect , and exploitation of older persons .

the act also supports grants to native americans and research , training , and demonstration activities .

p.l .

109-365 ( h.r .

6197 ) , the older americans act amendments of 2006 , was signed by the president on october 17 , 2006 .

p.l .

109-365 reauthorized all programs under the act through fy2011 .

h.r .

5293 , the senior independence act of 2006 , was reported by the house committee on education and the workforce and passed by the house on june 21 , 2006 .

s. 3570 , the older americans act amendments of 2006 , was reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions on september 19 , 2006 .

 ( for a side - by - side comparison of h.r .

5293 and s. 3570 , see crs report rl33660 , older americans act reauthorization: side - by - side comparison of current law , h.r .

5293 , and s. 3570 ( pdf ) . ) .

h.r .

6197 , the house and senate compromise bill , was passed by the house on september 28 , 2006 , and by the senate on september 30 , 2006 .

this report provides a brief summary of changes to the act made by p.l .

109-365 ; background on all titles of the act , followed by a discussion of selected major provisions made in each title by p.l .

109-365 ; and a discussion of recent funding for the act's programs .

table 2 shows the authorization of appropriations contained in p.l .

109-365 for each program under the act .

table 3 shows the appropriations history for the act's programs for fy1999-fy2006 .

appropriations amounts for previous years are available in crs report rl32437 , older americans act: history of appropriations , fy1966-fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

for information on fy2007 appropriations , see crs report rl33880 , older americans act ( oaa ) funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

the appendix at the end of the report summarizes major amendments to the act beginning in 1967 .

p.l .

109-365 focused attention on a number of specific groups of older people .

the oaa previously required state and area agencies on aging to target services and programs on specific groups of older people , including those with the greatest social or economic need , especially low - income older people and those residing in rural areas .

p.l .

109-365 added requirements that state and area agencies , and title iii aging service providers , focus services and programs toward additional groups , including older people at risk for institutional care , and older people with limited english proficiency .

the law added several new provisions to focus attention on older people with mental illness , including authorizing the assistant secretary on aging to designate an individual in aoa to be responsible for mental health services authorized by the act .

p.l .

109-365 included several provisions related to elder justice activities .

elder justice is defined in the law as efforts to prevent , detect , treat , intervene in , and respond to elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation and to protect elders with diminished capacity while maximizing their autonomy .

the law authorized the assistant secretary to designate within aoa an individual responsible for administering activities related to elder abuse prevention programs , and required a national study on the incidence and prevalence of elder abuse , neglect and exploitation in all settings where older people live .

in addition , the law added a requirement that the assistant secretary award funds for competitive grants to states for development and implementation of elder justice activities .

p.l .

109-365 expanded the role of aoa and state and area agencies on aging in promoting home and community - based long - term care services to help older people avoid institutionalization .

the assistant secretary is required to , among other things , conduct research and demonstration projects to identify innovative , cost - effective strategies for modifying state systems of long - term care .

the law also required state and area agencies on aging to develop and implement comprehensive , coordinated systems , at their respective levels , for home and community - based services .

recognizing that growing numbers of people turning age 65 in the coming decades will place increasing burdens on aging service providers supported by the act , p.l .

109-365 authorized state and area agencies to include in their respective plans on aging an assessment of how prepared the state and local communities are for demographic and other changes in the elderly population .

p.l .

109-365 revised the formula for distribution of title iii grant allotments to states for supportive services , congregate and home - delivered nutrition services , and disease prevention and health promotion services .

it did so by requiring that states receive , for these service programs , at least the same amount they received in fy2006 , and by gradually phasing out a "guaranteed growth" factor over a four - year period .

the law added requirements that the assistant secretary conduct several new demonstration programs under title iv .

among these are demonstration model projects to help older people "age in place," including in naturally occurring retirement communities ( norcs ) ; and to develop systems for the delivery of mental health screening and treatment services for older people who lack access to such services .

p.l .

109-365 revised the title v community service employment program to place more emphasis on training eligible older individuals ; however , it maintained the program focus on employing older people in community service jobs .

the law clarified the definition of income when determining an individual's eligibility , placed a time limit on enrollee participation , and placed more emphasis on transitioning participants to unsubsidized employment .

the law also required the secretary of labor to conduct a national competition for title v funds every four years .

the following provides a brief description of the act's titles and highlights selected amendments made by p.l .

109-365 in each title .

 table 2 shows the authorization of appropriations for each title of the act as stipulated by p.l .

109-365 .

funding for most older americans act programs is provided through appropriations legislation for the departments of labor , health and human services , education and related agencies ( labor - hhs - ed ) .

funds for all aoa programs ( titles ii , iii , iv , vi , and vii ) are part of the hhs appropriations ; title v is part of the dol appropriations .

in fy2003 , congress transferred administrative authority for the nutrition services incentive grant program from the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , where it had been since its inception , to aoa .

the program retains a separate authorization of appropriations under title iii and its appropriations are part of the labor - hhs - ed appropriations legislation .

fy2006 appropriations .

for fy2006 , the act was funded at $1.783 billion , which overall represents a 2% reduction from the fy2005 level .

this amount includes the 1% across - the - board reduction in all federal discretionary programs required by p.l .

109-148 .

although some programs received slight increases , such as the title vii long - term care ombudsman and the elder abuse prevention programs ( increases of 6% and less than 1% , respectively ) , most programs received slight decreases .

a major reduction was made in the title iv research , training , and discretionary projects program , which was reduced by 43% from the fy2005 level .

this is because the fy2006 amount does not include earmarked amounts approved for specific projects required by congress for fy2005 .

table 3 shows appropriations history for the act's programs for fy1999-fy2006 .

appropriations amounts for previous years are available in crs report rl32437 , older americans act: history of appropriations , fy1966-fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

for information on fy2007 appropriations , see crs report rl33880 , older americans act ( oaa ) funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

figure 1 shows the distribution of fy2006 funding by program .

congress created the older americans act in 1965 in response to concern by policymakers about a lack of community social services for older persons .

the original legislation established authority for grants to states for community planning and social services , research and development projects , and personnel training in the field of aging .

the law also established the administration on aging ( aoa ) within the then - department of health , education , and welfare ( dhew ) to administer the newly created grant programs and to serve as the federal focal point on matters concerning older persons .

although older persons may receive services under many other federal programs , today the act is considered to be the major vehicle for the organization and delivery of social and nutrition services to this group .

it authorizes a wide array of service programs through a nationwide network of 57 state agencies on aging and 655 area agencies on aging , supports the sole federal job creation program benefitting low - income older workers , and funds training , research , and demonstration activities in the field of aging .

prior to the creation of the act in 1965 , older persons were eligible for limited social services through some federal programs .

however , with the recognition that older persons were becoming an increasing proportion of the population and that their needs were not being formally addressed through existing programs , many groups began advocating on their behalf .

their actions led president truman to initiate the first national conference on aging in 1950 .

conferees called for government and voluntary agencies to accept greater responsibility for the problems and welfare of older persons .

further interest in the field of aging led president eisenhower to create the federal council on aging in 1956 to coordinate the activities of the various units of the federal government related to aging .

the beginning of a major thrust toward legislation along the lines of the later - enacted older americans act was made at the 1961 white house conference on aging .

the conferees called for a federal coordinating agency in the field of aging to be set up on a statutory basis , with adequate funding for coordinating federal efforts in aging , as well as a federal program of grants for community services specifically for the elderly .

in response to the white house conference on aging recommendations , representative john fogarty of rhode island and senator pat mcnamara of michigan introduced legislation in 1962 to establish an independent u.s. committee on aging to cut across the responsibilities of many departments and agencies , and create a program of grants for social services , research , and training that would benefit older persons .

because there were objections by the administration to the creation of an independent federal agency on aging , the legislation was not enacted .

legislation introduced the following year by representative fogarty and senator mcnamara modified the 1962 proposal by creating within dhew , the administration in aging ( aoa ) which was to be under the direction of a commissioner for aging , appointed by the president with the approval of the senate .

however , the 1963 proposal was not enacted .

the older americans act as introduced in 1965 basically paralleled the 1963 proposal .

sponsors emphasized how it would provide resources necessary for public and private social service providers to meet the social service needs of the elderly .

the act received wide bipartisan support and was signed into law by president johnson on july 14 , 1965 .

in addition to creating aoa , the act authorized grants to states for community planning and services programs , as well as for research , demonstration , and training projects in the field of aging .

in his remarks upon signing the bill , the president indicated that the legislation would provide "an orderly , intelligent , and constructive program to help us meet the new dimensions of responsibilities which lie ahead in the remaining years of this century .

under this program every state and every community can now move toward a coordinated program of services and opportunities for our older citizens. .

major amendments to the older americans act the older americans act has been amended 15 times since the original legislation was enacted .

the first amendments to the act in 1967 extended authorization for the state grant program and for research , demonstration , and training programs created in 1965 .

in 1969 , congress added authority for a program of area - wide model projects to test new and varied approaches to meet the social service needs of the elderly .

the 1969 amendments also authorized the foster grandparent and retired senior volunteer programs to provide part - time volunteer opportunities for the elderly .

 ( authority for volunteer programs was subsequently repealed and these programs were reauthorized under the domestic volunteer service act of 1973. ) .

major amendments to the act occurred in 1972 with the creation of the national nutrition program for the elderly , and in 1973 , with the establishment of substate area agencies on aging .

the 1973 amendments represented a major change because for the first time federal law authorized the creation of local agencies whose purpose is to plan and coordinate services for older persons and to act as advocates for programs on their behalf .

these amendments also created legislative authority for the community service employment program for older americans which had previously operated as a demonstration initiative under the economic opportunity act .

in 1975 , congress extended the older americans act through 1978 and specified certain services to receive funding priority under the state and area agency on aging program .

the 1978 amendments represented a major structural change to the act when the separate grant programs for social services , nutrition services , and multipurpose senior center facilities were consolidated into one program under the authority of state and area agencies on aging .

the intent of these amendments was to improve coordination among the various service programs under the act .

among other changes were requirements for establishing state long - term care ombudsman programs and a new title vi authorizing grants to indian tribal organizations for social and nutrition services to older indians .

the 1981 amendments made modifications to give state and area agencies on aging more flexibility in the administration of their service programs .

these amendments also emphasized the transition of participants to private sector employment under the community service employment program .

in 1984 , congress enacted a number of provisions , including adding responsibilities for aoa ; adding provisions designed to target services on low - income minority older persons ; giving more flexibility to states regarding service funds allocations ; and giving priority to the needs of alzheimer's victims and their families .

the 1987 amendments expanded certain service components of the state and area agency program to address the special needs of certain populations .

congress authorized six additional distinct authorizations of appropriations for services: in - home services for the frail elderly ; long - term care ombudsman services ; assistance for special needs ; health education and promotion services ; services to prevent abuse , neglect and exploitation of older individuals ; and outreach activities for persons who may be eligible for benefits under the supplemental security income ( ssi ) , medicaid and food stamp programs .

among other changes were provisions designed to give special attention to the needs of older native americans and persons with disabilities , emphasize targeting of services to those most in need , elevate the status of aoa within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and liberalize eligibility of community service employment participants for other federal programs .

the 1992 amendments restructured some of the act's programs .

a new title vii , vulnerable elder rights protection activities , was created to consolidate and expand certain programs that focus on protection of the rights of older persons .

title vii incorporated separate authorizations of appropriations for the long - term care ombudsman program ; program for the prevention of elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation ; elder rights and legal assistance development program ; and outreach , counseling , and assistance for insurance and public benefit programs .

in addition , provisions were included to strengthen requirements related to targeting of title iii services on special population groups .

other amendments authorized programs for assistance to caregivers of the frail elderly ; clarified the role of title iii agencies in working with the for - profit sector ; and required improvements in aoa data collection .

the 2000 amendments were enacted after six years of congressional debate on reauthorization .

p.l .

106-501 extended the act's programs through fy2005 .

these amendments authorized the national family caregiver support program under title iii ; required the secretary of the department of labor ( dol ) to establish performance measures for the senior community service employment program ; allowed states to impose cost - sharing for certain title iii services older persons receive while retaining authority for voluntary contributions by older persons toward the costs of services ; and consolidated a number of previously separately authorized programs .

in addition , the amendments required the president to convene a white house conference on aging by december 31 , 2005 .

the 2006 amendments extended the act's programs through fy2011 .

among other things , the law authorized the assistant secretary on aging to designate an individual within aoa to be responsible for prevention of elder abuse , neglect and exploitation and to coordinate federal elder justice activities .

it also authorized the assistant secretary to award competitive grants to states to support the development of coordinated state systems designed to detect and prevent abuse , neglect and exploitation .

p.l .

109-365 required aoa and state and area agencies on aging to focus attention on planning comprehensive and coordinated systems of home and community - based services to assist older persons with long - term care needs to remain in their own homes , rather than entering institutions .

it also authorized aoa to award funds for aging and disability resource centers ( adrcs ) to serve as a visible source of information on the full range of long - term care options to assist frail older people .

among other things , p.l .

109-365 revised the formula for the allocation of title iii funds by updating the "hold harmless" provision to the fy2006 funding level and phasing out over four years the guaranteed growth provision that had been added by the 2000 reauthorization legislation .

the law also required states to conduct increased planning efforts related to the growing number of older people in coming decades ; and focused attention on the needs of older people with limited english proficiency and those at risk of institutional placement .

the law added authority for the assistant secretary on aging to conduct several new demonstration programs under title iv .

among these are demonstration projects for model projects to assist older people to age in place , including in naturally occurring retirement communities ( norcs ) ; and for mental health services for older people .

it also revised the title v community service employment program to place more emphasis on training of older individuals , but also maintains the emphasis on employing them work in community service activities .

the law required the secretary of labor to conduct a national competition for title v funds every four years .

