the persian gulf region is rich in oil and gas resources but has a history of armed conflict and of challenging u.s. national security .

the gulf states — saudi arabia , kuwait , the uae , qatar , bahrain , and oman , bound together in a 1981 alliance called the gulf cooperation council ( gcc ) — have experienced three major wars in the past twenty five years: the iran - iraq war ( 1980-1988 ) , the persian gulf war ( 1991 ) , and operation iraqi freedom ( 2003-current ) .

this report , which will be revised periodically , discusses u.s. and gulf efforts to manage the new challenges posed by the september 11 , 2001 , attacks on the united states and the aftermath of the overthrow of saddam hussein .

the report is derived from a wide range of sources , including press reports , unclassified u.s. government documents , u.n. documents , observations by the author during visits to the gulf , and conversations with u.s. , european , iranian , and gulf state officials , journalists , and academics .

prior to the 2003 war against iraq , the united states was repeatedly drawn into conflicts in the gulf to counter iranian or iraqi aggression and contain regional escalation .

in the "iran - iraq war," iran and saddam hussein's iraq fought each other from iraq's invasion on september 22 , 1980 , until august 20,1988 , jeopardizing the security of the gulf monarchy states , which collectively backed iraq .

similarly , the united states tilted toward iraq in that war to defeat the radical islamist threat posed by iran's islamic revolutionary government , which came to power in february 1979 after ousting the u.s. - backed shah .

iran and the united states fought minor naval skirmishes during 1987-1988 , at the height of the iran - iraq war .

during one such skirmish ( operation praying mantis , april 18 , 1988 ) the united states fought a day long naval battle with iran that destroyed almost half of iran's largest naval vessels .

on july 3 , 1988 , the united states mistakenly shot down an iranian passenger aircraft flying over the gulf ( iran air flight 655 ) , killing all 290 aboard .

after about 400,000 iraqi and almost 1 million iranian casualties , the iran - iraq war ceased in august 1988 after iran's forces collapsed from a series of successful iraqi offensives and iran accepted u.n. security council resolution 598 , amounting to an iraqi victory in the war .

the iran - iraq war victory emboldened saddam hussein to assert himself as the "strongman" of the gulf .

he invaded and occupied kuwait on august 2 , 1990 , asserting that he did so because kuwait ( and uae ) were overproducing oil and thereby betraying iraq ( by lowering world oil prices ) .

others believe saddam hussein wanted to position iraq to control , directly or indirectly , oil exports from the gulf .

to liberate kuwait , the united states deployed over 500,000 u.s. troops , joined by about 200,000 troops from 33 other countries .

that war ( operation desert storm , january 16 – february 27 , 1991 ) resulted in the death in action of 148 u.s. service personnel and 138 non - battle deaths , along with 458 wounded in action .

the 1991 gulf war reduced iraq's conventional military capabilities roughly by half , but , prior to operation iraqi freedom ( march 2003 ) , iraq was still superior to iran and the gulf states in ground forces .

the gulf is one of the few theaters where weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and ballistic missiles have been used in hostilities .

iraq's missile , chemical , nuclear , and biological programs , accelerated during the iran - iraq war , were among the most sophisticated in the third world at the time of iraq's invasion of kuwait .

israel was sufficiently concerned about iraq's nuclear program that it conducted an air - strike against iraq's french - built osirak nuclear reactor on june 7 , 1981 , temporarily setting back iraq's nuclear effort .

during the iran - iraq war , iraq fired enhanced scud missiles at iranian cities , and iran fired its own scud missiles at iraqi cities as well in the so - called "war of the cities. .

on ten occasions during the iran - iraq war , iraq used chemical weapons against iranian troops and kurdish guerrillas and civilians , killing over 26,000 iranians and kurds .

u.n. investigation missions found that iran also used some chemical weapons against iraq during the war , although iran's capability was less advanced than that of iraq during that period .

during the 1991 gulf war , iraq fired 39 enhanced scud missiles at israel , a u.s. ally , and 39 enhanced scud missiles on targets in saudi arabia .

one iraqi missile , fired on coalition forces on february 25 , 1991 ( during desert storm ) hit a u.s. barracks near dhahran , saudi arabia , killing 28 military personnel and wounding 97 .

u.n. weapons inspectors dismantled much of iraq's wmd infrastructure during 1991-1998 , but they left in 1998 due to iraqi obstructions and without clearing up major unresolved questions about iraq's wmd .

new u.n. inspections began , under threat of u.s. force , in november 2002 , but were ended after the bush administration and its allies determined that iraq's regime was not fully disarming and that it was necessary to overthrow the regime by force ( operation iraqi freedom , oif ) .

the external threats the gulf monarchies face have not produced regime - threatening instability within the gulf states .

however , there are domestic forces that , particularly if aggravated by outside gulf powers such as iran , could suddenly and unexpectedly prove destabilizing .

bahrain and saudi arabia have experienced periodic open unrest since the early 1990s , although both have largely quieted that unrest .

the gulf states are instituting gradual domestic political and economic reform efforts that are intended to satisfy the pro - reform elements of the population while maintaining tradition .

the united states has looked to the gulf states to support u.s. policy on several other regional and international issues .

one such issue is the arab - israeli dispute , which concerns most citizens in the gulf countries .

other issues on which the united states seeks gulf support would include such crises as may arise , such as the july – august 2006 israel - hezbollah conflict .

another is counter - terrorism , an issue on which the gulf states have been increasingly cooperative since their interests in preventing islamic extremist movements have converged with u.s. goals .

in the case of the august 2005 hurricane katrina disaster , some gulf states , particularly kuwait , have sought to express solidarity with the american public by offering financial disaster assistance to the united states .

since iran's islamic 1979 revolution began a period of instability and warfare in the gulf , the gulf states have not focused on the arab - israeli dispute to nearly the degree that "frontline states" such as egypt , syria , jordan , and lebanon have .

most of the gulf states have tried to support u.s. mediation efforts in the arab - israeli dispute , but they also have sought to modify and shape u.s. policy on that issue , as well as on other issues such as the july - august 2006 israel - hezbollah conflict .

in the aftermath of the 1993 israeli - plo mutual recognition agreement , the gcc states participated in the multilateral peace talks , even though syria and lebanon boycotted those talks .

bahrain , qatar , and oman hosted sessions of the multilaterals , and a regional water desalination research center was established in oman as a result of an agreement reached in that forum .

in 1994 , all six gcc countries relaxed their enforcement of the secondary and tertiary arab boycott of israel , enabling them to claim that they no longer engage in practices that restrain trade ( a key wto condition ) .

oman and qatar opened low - level direct trade ties with israel in 1995 and 1996 and hosted visits by israeli leaders during that period .

in november 1997 , at a time of considerable strain in the peace process , qatar bucked substantial arab opposition and hosted the middle east / north africa economic conference , the last of that yearly event to be held .

at the same time , saudi arabia — to which the other gulf states tend to defer on arab - israeli matters — is taking a more active role on this issue now that abdullah is king .

he has always been highly focused on this issue and has often tried to guide and support u.s. policy on this issue ; he engineered arab league approval of a vision of peace between israel and the arab states at a march 2002 arab league summit .

the gulf states all publicly endorsed the bush administration's "road map" for israeli - palestinian peace .

in september 2005 , after israel's unilateral withdrawal from the gaza strip , qatar's foreign minister held a widely publicized meeting with his israeli counterpart as part of what the qataris said should be encouragement and praise for israel's move .

the final statement of the gcc summit in december 2005 "hailed" the august 2005 israeli withdrawal from the gaza strip as a "step in the right direction" but expressed the hope it would be followed by a complete israeli withdrawal from all occupied palestinian territories .

in october 2005 , qatar became the first arab country to donate money to a town inside israel , giving $6 million to build a stadium in the ethnically arab city of sakhnin in northern israel .

oman and bahrain have also dropped the primary arab boycott in connection with their ftas with the united states , as discussed above .

on the other hand , the gulf states , as arab states , clearly support the arab position on the dispute .

after the latest palestinian uprising began in september 2000 , oman closed its trade office in israel and ordered israel's trade office in muscat closed .

qatar announced the closure of israel's trade office in doha , although observers say the office has been tacitly allowed to continue functioning at a low level of activity .

 ( qatar did not open a trade office in israel. ) .

that uprising also prompted the arab league , with heavy gulf financial support , to set up funds to support the palestinian authority ( pa ) and the palestinian people .

the funds , called the al aqsa fund and the intifada fund , and managed by the islamic development bank , were to provide up to about $1.2 billion in donated funds to the pa. saudi arabia pledged$270 million of that amount , and it has largely fulfilled that commitment .

the other gulf states have mostly been in arrears .

a key difference between the united states and the gulf states has been on how to treat palestinian militant groups , particularly hamas .

the differences sharpened in the wake of hamas' victory in the january 2006 palestinian legislative elections , which enabled hamas to form a cabinet for the palestinian authority ( pa ) .

the united states still sees hamas as a designated foreign terrorist organization ( fto , as named by the state department in 1997 ) that conducts attacks on israelis and moved to curb aid to the pa in the aftermath of the hamas win .

the gulf states see hamas as a legitimate defender of palestinian interests and resister of israel's occupation of palestinian territories .

to help the hamas - led pa cope with the reduction of western aid , saudi arabia and qatar pledged funds ( $92 million and $50 million , respectively ) to alleviate a pa budget crisis .

in july 2006 , saudi arabia announced a longer term program of reconstruction aid for the palestinian territories in the amount of $250 million .

differences between the united states and the gulf states was far less pronounced in the israel - hezbollah conflict of july - august 2006 .

hezbollah is a named fto and the united states supported israel's decision to combat hezbollah following hezbollah's cross - border raid on july 12 , 2006 .

viewing the shiite movement as an ally of iran , saudi arabia criticized the hezbollah raid as "adventurism," although it and the other gulf states subsequently denounced israel's raids on civilian targets and urged an immediate ceasefire .

qatar and the uae were directly involved in negotiations leading to u.n. security council resolution 1701 ( august 11 , 2006 ) , which called for a ceasefire and the movement of hezbollah's militia away from the border with israel .

the uae flew in humanitarian aid to lebanon during the crisis , and saudi arabia announced a $500 million grant to lebanon on july 26 , 2006 — over and above a $50 million emergency relief grant — to help the country rebuild after the conflict .

in august 2006 , there reportedly was agreement among the gcc states that , in addition to the saudi pledge , uae would help rebuild schools and hospitals and remove landmines in south lebanon , qatar would rebuild the town of bint jubail , site of heavy israeli - hizballah fighting , and kuwait would donate $800 million in reconstruction funds for lebanon .

the september 11 attacks stimulated some tensions between the united states and some of the gulf monarchy states , particularly saudi arabia , over allegations that gulf donors had , wittingly or unknowingly , been contributing to or tolerating groups and institutions linked to al qaeda .

many experts believe the gulf states were tolerant of the presence of militants in order to avoid a backlash among citizens that agree with the militant's anti - u.s. , anti - western stances .

osama bin laden's saudi origins , coupled with the revelation that fifteen of the nineteen september 11 hijackers were saudis , caused substantial criticism of saudi arabia among some u.s. experts and opinion - makers .

two of the hijackers were uae nationals .

the september 11 commission report stated that khalid shaykh mohammad , alleged mastermind of the september 11 plot , lived in qatar during 1992-1996 at the invitation of shaykh abdullah bin khalid al thani , the current interior minister and a former minister of islamic affairs , adding that khalid shaykh was warned by qatari officials in 1996 of a u.s. indictment , and fled .

qatar also hosts an outspoken islamic cleric of egyptian origin , shaykh yusuf al - qaradawi .

in september 2004 , in one of his most hardline statements , qaradawi said that it is a religious duty for muslims to fight u.s. forces and civilians in iraq .

despite his statements , qaradawi meets with and sometimes appears at panel discussions with qatari senior officials .

some saudi clerics , and even some saudi officials , such as interior minister prince nayef , have earned opprobrium in the united states for similar statements that appear to blame the united states and u.s. policy for islamic terrorism against the united states .

others accept the official view of some gulf states that they hoped to calm regional militancy through negotiations and by working with governments , such as the taliban , in an effort to keep al qaeda militants contained .

saudi arabia and the uae were joined only by pakistan in extending official recognition to the taliban regime of afghanistan during 1996-2001 , breaking ties with the movement only after the september 11 , 2001 attacks .

prior to september 11 , the uae had refused repeated u.s. requests to break ties with the taliban and to stop hosting ariana ( afghan national airline ) flights to and from dubai emirate ; these flights were one of the few connections between the taliban and the outside world .

the september 11 commission report on the attacks noted that the hijackers had made extensive use , among other means , of financial networks based in the uae , in the september 11 plot .

there has also been extensive public discussion about the use of saudi charities and other saudi - based networks to fund al qaeda and other terrorist networks , although the september 11 commission found no evidence that the saudi government or saudi officials funded al qaeda .

since the september 11 , 2001 , attacks and the start of the iraq war in march 2003 , the gulf states have been partners of the united states against al qaeda and pro - al qaeda movements as these militants have posed a threat to the gulf states themselves .

as noted in the table earlier in this paper , the united states has increased u.s. anti - terrorism assistance to almost all of the gulf states to help them counter al qaeda and other terrorist and proliferation threats .

as of mid - 2006 , the domestic al qaeda - related terrorist threat to the gulf states appears to be receding as these states have moved assertively against the militants .

in saudi arabia , there have been attacks on westerners , regime installations , and those perceived as linked to the u.s. military or the u.s. - led war in iraq .

the most well known was the may 12 , 2003 attack on a western housing complex in riyadh .

in december 2004 there was an attack on the u.s. consulate in jeddah .

saudi authorities have found and captured or killed several successive leaders of the al qaeda organization in saudi arabia , including abdul aziz al - muqrin and his successor , saleh al - oufi , the latter of whom was reputedly killed in august 2005 shoot - out with saudi authorities .

in kuwait , there have been sporadic attacks on kuwaiti security personnel in attacks that might have been attempts to disrupt oif - related u.s. military deployments there , but kuwaiti authorities have taken actions similar to those of their saudi counterparts .

in addition , in december 2005 , kuwait convicted six men of belonging to a terror group ( "lions of the peninsula" ) allegedly planning attacks on u.s. troops in kuwait .

qatar's tranquility was disrupted in march 2005 when an egyptian expatriate bombed a theater frequented by westerners as a purported response to qatar's hosting of u.s. forces in oif .

no similar incidents have occurred there since .

in its most recent annual report on global terrorism , covering the year 2005 ( "country reports on terrorism: 2005," released april 2006 ) , the bush administration generally praises gulf state cooperation against such extremists , although noting some deficiencies: all of the gulf states are credited with enacting at least some new measures to combat terrorism financing , including freezing suspected terrorist assets , requiring approval for charitable transaction , adopting anti - money laundering laws , or instituting laws and procedures to track suspicious financial transactions .

each of the gulf states has joined the middle east and north africa financial action task force ( mena - fatf ) , and bahrain hosted its inaugural meeting .

u.s. officials continue to press their gulf state counterparts to rigorously enforce these new measures , and some u.s. officials have criticized some gulf governments , particularly saudi arabia , for failing to prosecute some individuals suspected of being terrorist financiers .

some gulf states are credited with arrests of suspected al qaeda figures .

the uae is praised by u.s. officials for providing assistance in several terrorist investigations ; it assisted in the 2002 arrest of at least one senior al qaeda operative in the gulf , abd al - rahim al - nashiri .

in august 2004 , the uae emirate of dubai , in cooperation with pakistani investigators , arrested an alleged senior al qaeda operative , qari saifullah akhtar .

bahrain has on a few occasions in 2003 and 2004 arrested suspected al qaeda activists , although it has later released many of them pending trial or because of a lack of legal justification for holding them .

qatar and oman are generally cited by the 2005 state department terrorism report for supporting or assisting u.s. counter - terrorism efforts , and the 2004 and 2005 state department reports did not repeat language from the 2003 report that "members of transnational terrorist groups and state sponsors of terrorism are present in qatar. .

several of the gulf states are providing assistance on port and container security .

in december 2004 , the uae emirate of dubai , a major gulf port hub , signed a statement of principles to participate in the u.s. "container security initiative" to screen u.s. - bound container cargo in dubai .

oman joined that initiative as well in november 2005 .

on the other hand , some in congress have expressed concern , including during consideration of the u.s. - oman fta , that some gcc or non - gcc firms might try to use u.s. - gulf ftas to invest in operations of u.s. ports .

the new concerns built on earlier security - related questions that scuttled a february 2006 u.s. decision to allow the dubai - owned firm , dubai ports world , to take over operations at six u.s. ports .

u.s. officials say that the fta agreements with the gulf countries would permit the united states to block such investments on security grounds .

