e ach house of the united states congress is expressly authorized within the constitution to "punish" its own members for misconduct .

in imposing legislative discipline against its members , the house operates through its rulemaking powers , and the express provision for legislative discipline is set out along with congress's rulemaking authority in article i , section 5 , clause 2 , of the constitution: each house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member .

the underlying justification for legislative discipline has traditionally been to protect the integrity and dignity of the legislature and its proceedings , rather than merely to punish an individual ; and such internal legislative process is additional to any potential criminal or civil liability that a member might incur for any particular misconduct .

members of congress , like any other persons in the united states , are subject generally to outside law enforcement and criminal prosecution if their misconduct constitutes a violation of federal , state , or local criminal law .

unlike members of the legislatures or parliaments of many foreign nations , there is no general immunity from all criminal prosecution for members of the united states congress during their tenure in office .

rather , members of congress have a fairly narrow ( although complete ) immunity from outside prosecution for "speech or debate" in either house of congress .

members of the house of representatives are subject to internal , congressional discipline for any conduct which the institution of the house believes warrants such discipline .

the express constitutional authority drafted by the framers of the constitution was drawn from the british parliamentary practice , as well as from our own colonial legislative experience , and reflects the principle and understanding that although the qualifications of members of congress were intentionally kept to a minimum to allow the voters the broadest discretion in sending whomever they please to represent them in congress , the institution of the house has the right to discipline those who breach its privileges or decorum , or who damage its integrity or reputation , even to the extent of expelling from congress a duly elected member .

internal , congressional discipline of a member may take several forms .

the most common forms of discipline in the house of representatives are now "expulsion," "censure," or "reprimand," although the house may also discipline its members in other ways , including fine or monetary assessment , loss of seniority , or loss of certain privileges .

an "expulsion" is a removal of a member from the house of representatives by a two - thirds vote of the house .

a "censure" or a "reprimand" is a legislative procedure where the full house , by majority vote on a simple resolution , expresses a formal disapproval of the conduct of a member .

in addition to these punishments or disciplines by the entire house of representatives , the house committee on ethics — formerly called the committee on standards of official conduct — is authorized to issue , on its own accord , a "letter of reproval" to a member when that committee disapproves of conduct but makes no recommendation for legislative sanctions to the full house of representatives .

the committee has also from time to time expressed its disapproval of particular conduct in informal letters and other communications to members .

there is no precise listing or description in the rules of the house of representatives of the specific types of misconduct or ethical improprieties which might subject a member to the various potential disciplines .

the rules adopted by the house committee on ethics provide simply that: with respect to the sanctions that the committee may recommend , reprimand is appropriate for serious violations , censure is appropriate for more serious violations , and expulsion of a member or dismissal of an officer or employee is appropriate for the most serious violations .

a recommendation of a fine is appropriate in a case in which it is likely that the violation was committed to secure a personal financial benefit ; and a recommendation of a denial or limitation of a right , power , privilege , or immunity of a member is appropriate when the violation bears upon the exercise or holding of such right , power , privilege , or immunity .

the house may discipline its members for violations of statutory law , including crimes ; for violations of internal congressional rules ; or for any conduct which the house of representatives finds has reflected discredit upon the institution .

each house of congress has disciplined its own members for conduct which has not necessarily violated any specific rule or law , but which was found to breach its privileges , demonstrate contempt for the institution , or which was found to discredit the house or senate .

when the most severe sanction of expulsion has been employed or recommended in the house , however , the conduct has historically involved either disloyalty to the united states government , or the violation of a criminal law involving the abuse of one's official position , such as bribery .

expulsion is the form of action by which the house of representatives , after a member has taken the oath of office , removes that representative from membership in the body by a vote of two - thirds of the members present and voting .

an expulsion is considered a disciplinary matter and a matter of self - protection of the integrity of the institution and its proceedings , and as such is substantively and procedurally different from an "exclusion," which denies a member - elect his or her seat by a simple majority vote of the body , prior to the member - elect being seated ( or after being seated "without prejudice" pending investigation and resolution of the matter ) , because of failure of the member - elect to meet the constitutional qualifications for office ( i.e. , age , citizenship and inhabitancy in the state from which elected ) , or because of a failure to have been "duly elected" ; an "exclusion" is now understood not to be a disciplinary procedure .

a member is "expelled" by a two - thirds vote , however , precisely for issues of misconduct , and expulsion is generally taken against a member after the member has been sworn into office .

members of the united states congress are not removed by way of an "impeachment" procedure in the legislature , as are executive and judicial officers , but are subject to the more simplified and expedited legislative process of expulsion .

a removal through an impeachment , it should be noted , requires the action of both houses of congress — impeachment in the house and trial and conviction in the senate .

an expulsion , however , is accomplished merely by the house or senate acting alone concerning one of its own members , without the consent or action of the other body , and without the constitutional requirement of trial and conviction .

the term "censure," unlike the term "expel," does not appear in the constitution , although the authority is derived from the same clause — article i , section 5 , clause 2 , concerning the authority of each house of congress to "punish its members for disorderly behaviour. .

censure , reprimand , or admonition are traditional ways in which parliamentary bodies have disciplined their members and maintained order and dignity in their proceedings .

in the house of representatives , a "censure" is a formal vote by the majority of members present and voting on a resolution disapproving a member's conduct , generally with the additional requirement that the member stand at the "well" of the house chamber to receive a verbal rebuke and reading of the censure resolution by the speaker of the house .

prior to the 1970s in the house of representatives , although there were some inconsistencies , the terms "reprimand" and "censure" were often considered synonymous and used together in a resolution .

in 1921 , for example , a resolution adopted by the house instructed the speaker to summon representative blanton of texas "to the bar of the house and deliver to him its reprimand and censure. .

the more formalized distinction in the house whereby it is considered that a "reprimand" expressly involves a lesser level of disapproval of the conduct of a member than that of a "censure," and is thus a less severe rebuke by the institution , is of relatively recent origin .

the term "reprimand" was used to explicitly indicate a less severe rebuke by the house in 1976 in the reprimand of a member for his failure to disclose certain personal interests in official matters , and for the apparent use of his office to further his own personal financial interests .

procedurally in the house , a "censure" resolution will generally involve a verbal admonition , such as a reading of the resolution , to be administered by the speaker of the house to the member at the bar of the house .

in the case of a "reprimand," however , the resolution is merely adopted by a vote of the house with the member "standing in his place," or is merely implemented by the adoption of the committee's report .

ten house members have been "reprimanded" by the full house for a range of misconduct , including failure to disclose certain personal interests in official matters and using one's office to further one's personal gains ; misrepresentations to investigating committees ; failure to report campaign contributions ; conversion of campaign contributions to personal use and false statements before the investigating committee ; false statements on financial disclosure forms ; ghost voting and maintaining persons on the official payroll not performing official duties commensurate with pay ; the misuse of one's political influence in administrative matters to help a personal associate ; the failure to ensure that a member - affiliated tax - exempt organization was not improperly involved in partisan politics , and for providing inaccurate , incomplete , and unreliable information to the investigating committee ; and the misuse of official resources by compelling congressional staff to work on political campaigns .

in 2009 , the house of representatives adopted a resolution of disapproval by a formal vote ( and which thus would be considered to be a "reprimand" by the entire body of the house ) , stating that the house "disapproves" of the behavior of a member "interrupting" the president's remarks to the house and senate , which the house found to be "a breach of decorum" that "degraded the proceedings of the joint session. .

when the house committee on ethics makes a report recommending to the house a "censure" or a "reprimand," it may also include in that report a recommendation for an additional action such as a fine , a restitution or payment of funds , or recommendations for the loss of seniority or privileges , when such actions are deemed appropriate .

in addition to more traditional disciplines of censure , reprimand , or expulsion , the house of representatives as an institution has the authority to levy a fine against a member of the house concerning a disciplinary matter .

this authority appears to be incidental to the express constitutional grant of power to the house to determine the rules of its proceedings and to punish its members for misconduct .

deschler's precedents states expressly that under the constitutional authority of the house at article i , section 5 , clause 2: "a fine may be levied by the house against a member pursuant to its constitutional authority to punish its members. .

the house committee on ethics notes expressly in its committee rules that sanctions that it may recommend to the house concerning a member may include expulsion ; censure ; reprimand ; denial or limitation of any right , privilege , or immunity of the member ; or a "fine. .

the authority for each house of congress to fine one of its own members was recognized by the supreme court in dicta in kilbourn v. thompson , where the court noted that "either house" of congress has "the power of punishment ... by fine or imprisonment," relating to areas where congress has been expressly granted authority , such as where the "constitution expressly empowers each house to punish its own members for disorderly behavior. .

fines for disciplinary purposes in the house , as well as in the senate , have been relatively infrequent occurrences .

the precedents in the house have demonstrated that the house fined a member in 1969 the sum of $25,000 to be repaid by automatically withdrawing a certain amount regularly from his pay , for various conduct offenses , including the misuse of official committee appropriations , payroll , and expenses .

a member of the house who was censured in 1979 was required to "make restitution of substantial amounts by which he was unjustly enriched," that is , the member was expressly ordered within the resolution of censure to pay to the house a specific amount by executing an interest - bearing demand promissory note for $40,031.66 , made payable to the treasury of the united states .

a member of the house who was officially "reprimanded" by the house in 2012 for misuse of official resources in compelling official congressional staff to work on political campaigns was also "fined" $10,000 as part of the reprimand .

the ethics committee issued a "letter of reproval" to a member in june 2014 regarding improper gifts and misuse of campaign funds , and the committee directed the member to "repay the full amount of the improper gifts and the improperly used campaign funds" in the amount of $59,063 .

at other times the house pursuant to disciplinary actions required certain monetary assessments of members of congress which were not expressly or necessarily characterized as "fines. .

a member of congress , pursuant to a formal "reprimand," was required to make restitution to the district of columbia of certain monies and fines , concerning which he had improperly used his influence to have "fixed" or reduced .

in 1997 , a monetary assessment or penalty , which was not characterized by the committee as a "fine," was imposed upon the speaker of the house to pay "for some of the costs" of an ethics investigation which resulted in the reprimand of the speaker .

the "fines" and / or monetary assessments ordered in the disciplinary cases appear to involve the repayment or restitution of funds misused or wrongfully received , as opposed to fines merely or strictly for "punishment" purposes and not necessarily connected to the wrongful conduct .

this is consistent with the current guidance in the house committee on ethics rules concerning the recommendation of a "fine," which the committee notes "is appropriate in a case in which it is likely that the violation was committed to secure a personal financial benefit. .

there does not appear to be , however , a constitutional or institutional requirement for such fines to be so connected with unjust enrichments or misuse of funds ; and the committee on ethics has noted in its rules that the guidance concerning fines and other sanctions recommended to the house "sets forth general guidelines and does not limit the authority of the committee to recommend other sanctions. .

although a temporary "suspension" is traditionally listed as one of the possible disciplinary actions that a legislative body may take against one of its members , the house of representatives has in recent years questioned its authority to disqualify or mandatorily suspend a member by a simple majority vote .

such a "suspension" would most likely involve a prohibition on a member of the house from voting on or working on legislative or representational matters for a particular time .

although not addressing a "suspension" specifically , the house has generally considered a decision of a member not to vote on a matter as within the discretionary purview of the member individually under house rule iii ( 1 ) , even when a legislative matter may involve possible conflicting personal interests .

as noted by the house , its authority to require a member to disqualify himself or herself from voting has traditionally been questioned , and such "recusal" has therefore been traditionally left to the discretion of the member .

jefferson's manual and rules of the house of representatives , at §658 , states: [t]he weight of authority also favors the idea that there is no authority in the house to deprive a member of the right to vote ( v , 5937 , 5952 , 5959 , 5966 , 5967 ; viii , 3072 ) .

in one or two early instances the speaker has decided that because of a personal interest , a member should not vote ( v , 5955 , 5958 ) ; but on all other occasions and in the later practice the speaker has held that the member himself and not the chair should determine this question ( v , 5950 , 5951 ; viii , 3071 ; speaker albert , dec. 2 , 1975 , p. 38135 ; speaker o'neill , mar .

1 , 1979 , p. 3748 ) , and the speaker has denied his own power to deprive a member of the constitutional right to vote ( v , 5956 ; speaker albert , dec. 2 , 1975 , p. 38135 ; speaker o'neill , mar .

1 , 1979 , p. 3748 ) .

as to refraining from voting and committee work specifically , the house of representatives in the 94 th congress adopted a rule which stated a sense of the house that members who have been convicted of a crime for which a sentence of two or more years may be imposed "should refrain from participation in the business of each committee of which he is then a member and should refrain from voting on any question at a meeting of the house , or of the committee of the whole house ..." until there has been a judicial or administrative reinstatement of his or her presumption of innocence , or until the member is reelected .

the supporters of the provision noted that the rule was worded in a discretionary manner because , they believed that if the provisions were mandatory , then "it would have been unconstitutional [because] [i]t would have deprived the district , which the member was elected to represent , of representation.... " although the rule on refraining from voting is couched in what can be considered advisory terms of guidance to members , the rules of the house also provide , in the code of official conduct , that members of the house "shall adhere to the spirit and the letter of the rules of the house. .

members are thus expected to conform to and abide by the abstention provision .

in the house of representatives , a "letter of reproval" is an administrative action of the house committee on ethics , authorized under the rules of the house of representatives "to establish or enforce standards of official conduct for members , officers , and employees of the house. .

the issuance of a letter of reproval by the committee is made public , as it is issued as part of a public report from the committee to the house on an "investigation" that the house committee on ethics has undertaken .

a letter of reproval may be sent by the committee on ethics on its own accord by majority vote of the committee , without any approval or action by the full house of representatives .

as such , a letter of reproval is clearly distinguishable from legislative "discipline," "punishment," or "sanctions" that the full house may invoke against a member , such as censure , reprimand , fine , or expulsion .

it appears that a letter of reproval is intended to be an action by the committee which is an alternative to the recommendation of sanctions to the house , and is an action which is used for infractions of rules or standards which , because of the nature of the infractions or because of mitigating circumstances , do not rise to the level of requiring action by the full house of representatives .

the rules of the committee on ethics provide , after setting out procedures when "a majority of the committee does not vote in favor of the recommendation that the house of representatives take action," that "[t]he committee may also , by majority vote , adopt a motion to issue a letter of reproval or take other appropriate committee action. .

the committee may issue such letter "[i]f the committee determines a letter of reproval constitutes sufficient action.... " the committee procedural rules appear to indicate that such a "letter of reproval" may be sent only after an investigatory subcommittee has issued a statement of alleged violations , at least one count of which has been proved by an adjudicatory subcommittee , and upon completion of a sanction hearing .

a letter of reproval was characterized by the ethics committee in the house — then known as the house committee on standards of official conduct — as a "rebuke of a member's conduct issued by a body of that member's peers acting , as the committee on standards of official conduct , on behalf of the house of representatives. .

the house ethics committee has issued letters of reproval for the improper use of campaign accounts for personal loans ; for a member's borrowing of campaign funds for personal use , and a subsequent "inadequate" disclosure of such transaction ; and concerning allegations of sexual harassment of a female employee , and the use of one's office for political campaign activity .

in october 2000 , after a lengthy investigation of a member , the committee issued a letter of reproval for actions for which the member was found to have "brought discredit to the house of representatives," including a relationship with a former chief of staff which gave the appearance that official decisions might have been improperly affected , violations of the house gift rule , misuse of official congressional resources , misuse of official congressional staff for campaign purposes , and the appearance that certain expenditures of the member's campaign committee were not for bona fide campaign or political purposes .

in june 2001 , the committee issued a letter of reproval to a member for the improper expenditure of campaign funds to benefit businesses in which the member and his family had a personal stake , and for the improper conversion of campaign funds to personal uses .

in 2014 the ethics committee issued letters of reproval regarding the conduct of three different members of the house .

one letter of reproval involved interference ( by communicating with a potential material witness ) with the committee's investigation of allegations that a member's official staff had been directed to perform campaign activities on behalf of the member .

another member received a letter of reproval for actions which "did not reflect creditably on the house" involving official assistance to a business institution in which the member had just recently made a significant financial investment .

the third letter of reproval in 2014 involved a member's conduct in receiving improper and prohibited gifts , improperly using campaign funds for personal use , and failing to disclose gifts on the member's financial disclosure report as required under the ethics in government act .

in addition to a formal , public "letter of reproval," the committee has addressed ethical issues concerning allegations of misconduct by members by way of "other appropriate committee action," upon agreement of a majority of the committee , when an investigation is undertaken by a subcommittee but the recommendation of sanctions to the full house is not made .

such actions by the full committee have included writing a letter to a member concerning "necessary corrective action" that should be taken by the member , or by noting "poor judgment" and the creation of an "appearance of impropriety. .

the committee has also noted violations of house rules or standards , has "so notified" the member , and announced that no further action by the committee will be taken .

in 1990 , the committee made a public report concerning a member's behavior , noting that the "committee clearly disapproves" of the member's conduct .

in 2004 , after an investigation by an investigatory subcommittee , the full committee issued a report which "will serve as a public admonishment by the committee" of three members .

similarly , in 2006 , the committee made public a report from its investigative subcommittee finding that a member's actions with regard to the release of recordings of intercepted telephone conversations of other members "were not consistent with the spirit of the committee's rules. .

the committee issued "a public admonishment" of a member in 2010 for accepting gifts of travel in violation of the house gifts rule , and required the member to "repay the costs of the trips to the respective entities that paid for his travel. .

in 2012 , the ethics committee reported that it "agrees with the findings and conclusions of the investigative subcommittee" concerning a violation of house rules by a member "improperly using her official position for her beneficial interest by permitting her office to take official action specifically on behalf of her husband's medical practice. .

specifically , the report from the investigative subcommittee "recommends that the committee issue this report , and that this report serve as a reproval" of the member .

the ethics committee in the house has characterized past actions such as these generally by stating that the committee "has publicly admonished several other members for their conduct. .

such informal notifications , public reports , public admonishments , or letters for corrective action thus may be distinguished from those instances when the committee "formally and publicly reproved" a member by way of a formal "letter of reproval," although it may be argued that these other committee actions are to some degree comparable since they are all "administrative action[s]" taken by the committee itself "pursuant to an investigation" that had been conducted by an investigative subcommittee of the committee on ethics .

the committee has also sent a so - called "letter of admonition" to a member against whom a complaint was filed by another member of the house , which was apparently different from , and was not technically , a "letter of reproval" or even any other "administrative" action "pursuant to an investigation" by an investigatory subcommittee of the committee .

the "letter of admonition" in this case was a method of disposing of a complaint by the committee upon the recommendation of the chairman and ranking minority member of the committee for a "resolution of the complaint by a letter to the member ... against whom the complaint is made," without moving forward with a subcommittee investigation .

