the welfare reform law of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) provided an increase in federal child carefunding for low - income families , with the expectation that newly implemented work requirementsfor welfare recipients ( many being single mothers ) would create a greater demand for child careservices .

this additional funding was accompanied by the creation of a unified and expanded childcare and development block grant ( ccdbg ) program , with the aim of serving low - incomefamilies , regardless of welfare status .

the expanded program is financed through two fundingstreams: one discretionary ( authorized by the ccdbg act ) , and one mandatory ( appropriated undersection 418 of the social security act ) .

these two funding streams are commonly referred to incombination as the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) .

since passage of the welfare law , states have spent increasing amounts of both federal and state money on child care .

 ( as will be discussed later , a portion of federal mandatory funding to statesis contingent on states spending some of their own state funds on child care. ) .

although the ccdfis considered the primary source of federal funding for child care subsidies for low - income workingand welfare families , two other federal block grants are contributing significantly to the child carefunding picture: the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , and the socialservices block grant ( ssbg ) .

states use all three of these sources to help finance child care assistance for families , but only the ccdf is dedicated solely for this purpose .

the ccdf supports child care subsidies andactivities , and nothing else , whereas tanf and ssbg provide a wide range of assistance , includingchild care .

this report focuses on the financing structure of the ccdf , actual expenditures made from it , and the role of tanf and the ssbg in child care funding and spending .

authorization for thediscretionary portion of the ccdf and appropriations for both the ccdf mandatory funds , as wellas the tanf block grant , are due to expire at the end of fy2002 .

therefore , congress is expectedto confront child care financing issues this year as part of both the child care and welfarereauthorizations .

debates over the level of funding necessary for child care are already percolating,and although the 1996 law consolidated several components of federal child care funding , thefinancing structure remains complicated , potentially leading to calls for simplification .

multipleccdf funding streams ( with different state funding and spending rules ) fall under differentcongressional committee jurisdictions , and comprise only a portion of a complex child care financingpicture .

seeing the full picture also requires focusing on the degree to which tanf funds contribute to child care expenditures .

recent tanf expenditure data show that states are spending increasingamounts of tanf funds for child care services within the tanf program ( $2.2 billion in fy2000 ) ; however , the extent to which this will continue during an economic downturn is an unansweredquestion for tanf and child care state administrators alike .

states also have the authority to transferup to 30% of their annual tanf block grant to the ccdf and / or the ssbg ( at a maximum of 10% ) for use under those programs' rules , and as this report will discuss , many states have done so .

before examining these three sources of child care funding in greater detail , the next section provides an overview of how changes made as part of the 1996 welfare law affected child careprograms and funding .

the report concludes with an analysis of trends in child care expenditures,both nationally and by state , and the implications of the recent spending trends for reauthorization .

the current structure of federal child care programs and funding is more easily understood bytracing its evolution from the system that existed prior to 1996 , when the welfare law simultaneouslyrepealed , created , and consolidated child care programs described below .

welfare ( afdc ) child care programs .

before 1996 , four separate federal programs specifically supported child care for low - income families .

three were associated with the cash welfare system .

families on welfare ( then aid to families withdependent children ( afdc ) ) were entitled to free child care .

families who had left the afdc rollswith employment were entitled to 12 months of "transitional" subsidized child care .

the thirdafdc - related child care program targeted families who , without a child care subsidy , would be "atrisk" of qualifying for afdc .

these three programs operated under three separate sets of rules , andtargeted three separate populations .

critics argued that mothers navigating their way through thewelfare system faced unnecessary complexity that could be alleviated with a more unified child careprogram .

all three of the afdc - related child care programs were funded with mandatory money , and fell under the same congressional committee jurisdiction ( ways and means committee in the house,and the finance committee in the senate ) .

afdc child care and transitional child care were bothopen - ended federal entitlements ( i.e. , there was no limit on program funding ) , with the federal shareof payments to states based on the state's medicaid matching rate .

the afdc at - risk program , onthe other hand , was not open - ended , but was instead authorized as a "capped entitlement" to thestates at an annual level of $300 million .

ccdbg .

the fourth pre - 1996 child care program for low - income families was the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) .

establishedin 1990 , it supported child care for low - income families not connected to the afdc welfare system .

the block grant subsidized child care for children under age 13 whose working family income didnot exceed 75% of state median income ( smi ) , adjusted for family size .

in addition , it providedfunds for activities to improve the overall quality and supply of child care for families in general .

unlike the afdc - related programs , the ccdbg was funded with discretionary funds appropriatedas part of the annual appropriations process .

authorizing legislation fell under the jurisdiction ofthe education and labor committee in the house ( later renamed the committee on education andthe workforce ) and the labor and human resources committee in the senate ( later renamed thecommittee on health , education , labor and pensions ) .

how the 1996 welfare law expanded child care funds .

the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) repealed afdc and its threeassociated child care programs .

like cash welfare , child care was no longer to be an individualentitlement to welfare families .

instead of preserving three separate programs , the new law createda consolidated block of mandatory funding under section 418 of the social security act .

like theearlier three programs , this new block of funding was designed to be largely targeted toward familieson , leaving , or at risk of receiving welfare ( now temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) ) .

 ( 1 ) however , unlike the three afdc - related child care programs , each of which was administered underits own set of rules , the 1996 law instructed that the new mandatory funding be transferred to eachstate's lead agency managing the ccdbg , and be administered according to ccdbg rules .

the lawappropriated $13.9 billion for this new child care block grant over 6 years ( up $4 billion fromspending estimated by cbo under old law ) .

committee jurisdiction for the mandatory fundsremained with the house ways and means and senate finance committees .

in addition to creating the new block of mandatory child care funding , the 1996 welfare law reauthorized and amended the ccdbg .

the 1996 law authorized discretionary funding levels at $1billion annually ( the authorized "such sums as necessary" for fy1995 had led to an appropriationof $935 million ) , and modified the program rules , including an expansion of program eligibility ( from 75% of smi to 85% of smi ) .

the discretionary funding and the ccdbg program rulesremained under the same committees' jurisdiction as before .

this combination of new mandatory funding and expanded ccdbg discretionary funding is commonly referred to as the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) and makes up the largestsource of federal program funding ( $4.8 billion in fy2002 ) appropriated solely for child caresubsidies and child care activities for low - income families .

 ( 2 ) ( states are required to spend no lessthan 4% of their combined mandatory and discretionary ccdf allotments on activities to improvethe quality and availability of child care. ) .

a more detailed explanation of the ccdf , its fundingstreams , rules , and appropriations , is provided below .

as noted earlier , child care for low - income families is also supported by funds from tanf andthe ssbg .

although states are not required to use these funds for child care , expenditure dataindicate that these block grants are indeed supplementing funds appropriated directly through theccdf .

tanf .

the welfare reform law provides fixed block grants ( $16.5 billion annually through fy2002 ) for state - designed programs of time - limitedand work - conditioned aid to families with children .

 ( 5 ) since its implementation , increasing amountsof tanf funding have been used for supporting child care , both through transfers to the ccdf , andby funding child care within the tanf system itself .

as mentioned earlier , states are permitted totransfer a combined total of 30% of their annual tanf allotments to the ccdf and the ssbg ( witha maximum limit of 10% to the ssbg ) .

once transferred , the funds must be administered accordingto the rules of the program that receives them .

tanf rules apply to funds that remain within thetanf program .

 ( 6 ) over the course of fy1997-fy2000 , states transferred a total of $6 billion from tanf to the ccdf , representing over 9% of their tanf allotments awarded over the 4-year period .

the $2.4billion of that total that was transferred in fy2000 represents 14% of states' fy2000 tanfallotment .

in other words , the amount transferred from tanf to ccdf in fy2000 ( $2.4 billion ) exceeds the amount that was appropriated directly in discretionary ccdf funds for fy2002 ( $2.1billion ) , or any single fiscal year so far .

for a state - by - state table showing cumulative amounts oftanf funds transferred to the ccdf in fy1997-fy2000 , and transfers made from fy2000allotments in fy2000 , see appendix b of this report .

transferring funds to the ccdf is not the only channel through which states may use tanf funding to support child care services for low - income families .

tanf funding can be used directlyto pay for a variety of services that support work , and child care is a prime example .

in fy2000,states reported spending a total of $2.2 billion of federal tanf and related state funds on child care .

 ( 7 ) note that this is in addition to the aforementioned tanf funds transferred to the ccdf forexpenditure under that program .

 ( an analysis of trends in expenditures from both these fundingsources begins on page 13. ) .

ssbg .

the ssbg is a flexible source of federal funds that states may use to support a variety of social services , including child care .

 ( 8 ) states areentitled to a specified allotment of funds , based on population size , and there is no state matchrequired for receipt of these federal funds .

states have complete discretion over how these funds aredistributed and to whom .

restrictions are placed only on any funds states opt to transfer from theirtanf allotment to the ssbg .

states have the authority ( through fy2002 ) to transfer up to 10% oftheir tanf allotment to the ssbg .

any of these transferred funds must be used only forexpenditures to assist children and families whose income is less than 200% of the federal povertyguidelines .

over fy1997-fy2000 , states have cumulatively transferred $3.9 billion ( or 6% of their tanf awards for the period ) to the ssbg .

however , unlike tanf transfers to ccdf , a transfer to thessbg is not necessarily subsequently spent on child care .

nor are the funds that are directlyappropriated for the ssbg required to be used for child care .

states use ( at their own discretion ) only a portion of all ssbg funds to support child care services .

the most recent hhs analysis ofstate - reported ssbg expenditures reveals that in fy1999 , 43 states spent a total of $397 million forchild day care services , accounting for 13% of all fy1999 ssbg expenditures .

 ( 9 ) this represents agreater percentage of all ssbg expenditures than that made in fy1998 , when 46 states applied justover 9% ( $279 million ) of all ssbg expenditures toward child day care services .

as shown in table 2 , funding appropriated directly to the ssbg has been decreasing since 1997 , with additional transfers from tanf hovering around $1 billion .

 ( the amount transferred infy2001 is not yet available. ) .

appropriations for fy2002 were $1.700 billion , a decrease of $25million from the prior year .

the extent to which fy2000 and fy2001 ssbg funding , in additionto any funds transferred from tanf , has and will be used for child care expenditures is not yetknown .

table 2 .

ssbg appropriations and tanf transfers ( $ in billions ) source: table prepared by the congressional researchservice ( crs ) .

this report has thus far focused on sources of child care funding , emphasizing the amounts made available each year through federal block grants , and the rules that apply to states forobligating and spending those funds .

the next sections focus on the data that show what amounts states have actually spent from year to year .

following is an analysis of trends in actual child careexpenditures using data available from the ccdf , tanf , and their predecessor programs .

 ( thelimited information available regarding the ssbg's role in funding child care expenditures hasalready been discussed in the preceding section. ) .

in this report , expenditures for a given fiscal year reflect expenditures made within that given fiscal year , regardless of the year in which the funding was provided .

however , for fy2000 , abreakdown of spending by year of funding source is also provided .

 ( recall that as described earlier,states are afforded different time frames for spending money from different funding streams. ) .

withmultiple funding sources available , expenditure data help in answering the questions of how muchstates are spending on child care for low - income families , via which programs , and in what timeframe .

the following sections look at components of child care spending by program ( ccdf and tanf ) , and more specifically , by funding stream within a given specified program .

however , beforedoing so , it is useful to focus on the "big picture. .

what is the "big picture" ? .

child care expenditures made through the ccdf and tanf programs have been growing steadily since thepassage of the 1996 welfare law , and build on levels that were already increasing prior to that time .

the most recent available data indicate that in fy2000 , combined child care expenditures made fromthese two programs totaled over $9 billion - more than double the level of expenditures made forchild care via these same two programs in fy1997 .

expenditures from the ccdf ( made from funds provided either directly through the ccdf or from tanf transfers to the ccdf ) represent the largest portion of that child care spending , reachingover $7 billion in fy2000 .

supplementing this were over $2 billion in additional child carespending within the tanf system .

figure 3 displays the growth in spending for child care,showingcombined expenditures from ccdf and tanf ( both federal and state shares ) for fy1997-fy2000 .

for fy1992-fy1996 , the figure reflects expenditures made for afdc - related child care programs ( both federal and state shares ) and the ccdbg .

the chart does not indicate which programs andfunding streams comprise what portion of each year's spending .

a discussion of those breakdownsfollows , starting with an analysis of ccdf expenditures .

source: figure prepared by the congressional researchservice ( crs ) based on data provided by the department ofhealth and human services ( hhs ) .

note: for a breakdown of these expenditures by funding source , see appendix c .

as described earlier , ccdf funding comes in both mandatory and discretionary amounts .

one portion of mandatory money is "guaranteed" ; another portion of the mandatory money is onlyavailable to states if they first meet an moe requirement ( with state funds ) and then provideadditional state matching funds .

no match applies to the discretionary fund .

therefore , expendituredata for ccdf can be broken down into those same categories: mandatory and discretionary,distinguishing between federal and state contributions .

table 3 shows the breakdown of ccdf ( and predecessor program ) expenditures forfy1992-fy2000 , by funding source .

for fy1992-fy1996 , the amounts shown as federal ccdfmandatory "guaranteed" spending actually reflect federal expenditures for afdc - related child carespending .

why ? .

because the "guaranteed" funding amounts for the ccdf are based on afdcchild care spending during this period .

likewise , the moe requirements established for the ccdfare based on the state spending from the afdc era , and are therefore included in the moe column .

the ccdf federal matching money essentially represents "new" mandatory funding , which statescan only access by spending the required share of their own state funds .

expenditures made from federal funds are shown in the first three columns of expenditures , and those made from state funds are in the fourth and fifth columns .

the final column shows totalexpenditures made from the ccdf and its predecessor programs in each year .

the trend in totalccdf spending mirrors that of "the big picture. .

that is , total ccdf expenditures have grown eachyear .

table 3 .

total ccdf expenditures by funding source fy1992-fy2000 ( $ in millions ) source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by the department ofhealth and human services ( hhs ) .

notes : child care expenditures in the territories areexcluded .

totals may not add due to rounding .

a discretionary fund expenditures include spending from tanf transfers to ccdf .

b expendituresmade in fy1992-fy1996 from the federal share of afdc - related child care matching funds are includedin the same column as the mandatory ccdf expenditures because these expenditures were the basis fordetermining mandatory "guaranteed" funding levels for the ccdf .

similarly , the fy1992-fy1996 expendituresmade from the state share of afdc - related child care matching funds appear in the same column showing ccdfmoe expenditures ( for fy1997-fy2000 ) because they formed the basis of determining the moe requirementlevel .

ccdf spending in fy2000 .

as table 3 shows,in fy2000 , a total of $7.2 billion was spent from the ccdf .

over $3 billion of the $7.2 billion totalreflect expenditures made from federal ccdf discretionary funds .

approximately $2.2 billion inccdf expenditures were made from "guaranteed" mandatory funding and the federal share ofmatching funds .

why do the federal expenditures made from the ccdf in fy2000 ( discretionary+ mandatory + federal share of matching = $5.3 billion ) significantly exceed the fy2000 ccdffunding level ( see table 1 ) of $3.5 billion ? .

first , the expenditure numbers shown in table 3 reflectspending by states in fy2000 , and , as explained in the discussion of time limits for obligation andexpenditure of funds , states may make expenditures from not just the current year's funding , but alsofrom funds provided in earlier years .

 ( 10 ) moreover,when states transfer funds from tanf to theccdf , those transfers ultimately show up as ccdf expenditures ( included in the discretionarycolumn ) .

table 4 provides a breakdown of ccdf expenditures made in fy2000 , showing the source ofthose expenditures both by type ( i.e. , discretionary , mandatory , matching ) and the year the fundingwas actually appropriated .

for example , the first column of expenditures shows that a cumulativetotal of almost $3.1 billion in expenditures from ccdf discretionary funds were made in fy2000 .

of that amount , over $1.2 billion can be attributed to discretionary funding appropriated in fy1998and fy1999 , and $1.8 billion was expended from funds appropriated in fy2000 .

states were ableto spend more in discretionary funds than were actually appropriated in fy2000 , in part becauseexpenditures from transferred tanf funds are included as discretionary .

table 4 .

ccdf expenditures made in fy2000 by funding type and year of funding source ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by the department ofhealth and human services ( hhs ) .

a included in the discretionary totals are any expenditures made from funds transferred from tanf to ccdf in the givenyear .

b states mustmake expenditures for meeting the moe requirement within the given year , and therefore fy1998 andfy1999 moe expenditures were made in each of those respective years , and applied to the moe requirement forthose years .

c federal andstate shares of ccdf matching funds must be expended by states by the end of the fiscal year followingthe year of appropriation .

therefore , fy1998 matching funds had to have been expended by the end of fy1999,and could not be a source of fy2000 expenditures .

tanf contributes to the big picture of child care spending in two ways: expenditures made from funds transferred to ccdf ( discussed above ) and expenditures made directly within the tanfsystem .

of the expenditures made directly within tanf , some are made from federal funds , whileothers are made from state funds associated with the tanf maintenance - of - effort ( moe ) requirement .

tanf , like the ccdf , has its own moe requirement , which states must meet if theyare to be eligible for their full tanf allotment .

the tanf moe requires states to expend ontanf - eligible families an amount equal to their "historic" spending level ( generally infy1994-1995 ) on tanf predecessor programs: afdc , emergency assistance , job opportunitiesand basic skills , and afdc - related child care .

why is this important to the calculation of tanf'scontribution to child care spending ? .

role of the tanf moe in calculating child care spending .

within the rules for applying state child care expenditures toward tanfand ccdf moe levels , states may "double count" many expenditures toward both programs'requirements .

in other words , as long as a child care expenditure is for a tanf - eligible family , itmay be applied toward both the tanf's moe level and the ccdf moe .

states are notrequiredto explain in either their tanf or ccdf expenditure report whether any , all , or none of their moespending overlaps .

as a result , if moe expenditures from the ccdf and tanf expenditure formswere to be added together , the resulting total might overstate the level of moe child care spendingactually made by the states .

therefore , for this analysis of tanf child care expenditures , onlytanf moe spending that exceeds the level of ccdf moe expenditures made by a state will becounted ( recognizing that this method results in the most conservative estimate ) .

a step - by - step lookat the process of reaching "unduplicated" tanf moe expenditure amounts is provided later in thereport , where tanf expenditures are analyzed on a state - by - state basis .

trends in tanf child care spending .

tanf expenditure data reveal that states as a group are spending increasing amounts of tanf funds onchild care services .

table 5 shows that the combined total of federal tanf funding and the"excess" ( or "unduplicated" ) child care expenditures made from state funds has grown from over$133 million in fy1997 to almost $2.2 billion in fy2000 .

table 5 .

tanf child care spending fy1997-fy2000 ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by the department ofhealth and human services ( hhs ) .

note : child care expenditures in the territories are excluded .

ccdf trends .

earlier tables provide the spending picture from a national perspective , but do not reveal trends in individual state spending .

table 6 shows total ccdf ( and predecessor program ) spending made by each state over the samefy1992-fy2000 period shown for the nation as a whole in table 3 .

the final column of table 6 reveals the percentage change that occurred in total ccdf expenditures made by each state betweenfy1996 ( the last year before the unified ccdf was implemented ) and fy2000 .

tanf trends .

as expressed in the discussion of funding sources , states are not required to spend any given amount of their tanf funds on childcare .

states have the flexibility to spend their tanf funding on a variety of services , in addition tocash assistance , and therefore it is useful to look not only at national trends regarding the use oftanf funding for child care , but also at state - by - state trends .

table 7 provides the samebreakdownof tanf child care expenditures by year and type ( federal or state ) as that shown in table 5 , butona state - by - state basis .

table 7 shows that all but 13 states have reported spending some level oftanf funds for child care over the 4 year period .

source : table prepared by the congressional researchservice ( crs ) based on data provided by the health and human service ( hhs ) .

note : included in these amounts are any expenditures made from funds transferred from tanf .

source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

note : these amounts do not include expenditures made from funds transferred from tanf to the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) .

a closer look at fy2000 .

table 8 provides adetailed breakdown of ccdf and tanf child care expenditures made by each state , showingspending amounts by funding source .

the final column of the table reflects the calculation of"excess" child care tanf moe expenditures , which are explained in more detail below .

calculating "excess" tanf moe child care expenditures .

table 9 includes the expenditure data used to make the"excess" tanf moe expenditure calculations for fy2000 .

the "excess"expenditure amount isdefined here as any amount that remains after the total reported ccdf moe expenditures aresubtracted from the tanf child care moe reported amount .

if the subtraction yields a negativeamount , or zero , then there is no excess amount to report as a state - funded tanf expenditure .

ifthe reported tanf moe child care spending amount is greater than the amount reported toward theccdf moe , then the positive difference is counted in table 9 as the excess amount .

for example , as shown in the first column of numbers in table 9 , alabama was required tomake $6.896 million in child care expenditures from state funds to meet its annual ccdf moerequirement .

according to alabama's reporting form for fy2000 ccdf expenditures , they spentprecisely that amount in fy2000 .

the third column shows the level of child care expendituresreported on the tanf expenditure form toward the tanf moe: $4.409 million .

because thetanf moe expenditures do not exceed the ccdf moe expenditures , and all $4.409 million couldalready potentially be accounted for as part of the $6.896 million reported as ccdf moe spending,no expenditures are counted toward state tanf child care spending .

 ( in other words $4.4 millionminus $6.8 million yields a negative number. ) .

in other cases ( arkansas , for example ) , table 9 shows that the reported tanf moe child careexpenditures ( $5.278 billion ) exceed those reported toward the ccdf moe ( $1.887 billion ) .

therefore , the excess ( rounded to $3.4 billion in this case ) is the amount that appears in table 8 under tanf child care moe .

table 9 also reveals the extent to which states reported expenditures above the required moelevel .

according to fy2000 expenditure reports , 12 states reported ccdf expenditures above thelevel required for meeting the ccdf moe .

source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by health and human services ( hhs ) .

source : table prepared by the congressional researchservice ( crs ) based on data provided by the department ofhealth and human services ( hhs ) .

figure 4 "fills in" the big picture with a more detailed breakdown of the overall spending trends presented in figure 3 .

the supporting table of data can be found in appendixc .

source: figure prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided bythe department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

congress is expected to address child care financing issues as part of reauthorizing child care and welfare legislation .

the issue of how much funding to make available for child care will likelybe at the forefront , but is complicated by the fact that child care is supported by multiple fundingsources .

as policymakers consider funding levels for child care , the following questions might beasked with respect to each potential funding source: are funds from this source specifically dedicated for child care ? .

how are funds from this source allocated to states ? .

 ( what is the distributionformula ? ) .

are states required to match funds from this source with their own statefunds ? .

can funds from this source be transferred to otherprograms ? .

how long do states have to obligate and spend funds from this source ? .

the answers to these questions highlight the varying implications of providing child care funding through different sources .

for instance , funds provided through ccdf are the only fundsdedicated solely for child care , but nevertheless , expenditure data ( through fy2000 ) reveal thattanf has also played a significant role in funding child care , both through transfers to ccdf anddirectly within tanf .

therefore , should ccdf funding levels be set with the presumption thatstates will continue to use the same amount of tanf funds for child care ? .

a lesser or greateramount ? .

likewise , what are the implications of the ccdf funding decision on setting the overalltanf funding level ? .

will an economic downturn prompt states to make different decisions as tohow they allocate their tanf funds ? .

greater child care expenditures have been fueled by reducedcash welfare caseloads through fy2000 ; will these spending trends continue if cash welfarecaseloads level off or rise ? .

to what extent are ccdf funds used to serve welfare ( tanf ) families ? .

even with respect to the funds targeted specifically for child care ( i.e. , the ccdf ) the implications for states differ depending on whether funds are provided via the mandatory ordiscretionary stream .

as described earlier , the mandatory and discretionary portions of the ccdfare currently allocated among states according to different formulas , based on different factors .

consequently , the same amount of funding will translate into different allocation amounts for states,depending on the funding stream from which the money is allocated .

furthermore , mandatory fundsbring with them state matching requirements ( for the non - "guaranteed" portion ) .

of course , whetherstates actually spend state funds in order to access the available federal mandatory funds depends oneach state's individual decision to participate in the matching program .

for example , michigan hasnot always opted to access its full matching grant , but has instead applied state child careexpenditures toward meeting its tanf moe requirement .

discretionary and mandatory ccdf funds also carry with them different time limits for states to obligate and spend the money .

policymakers will be faced with deciding: what portion of ccdffunding should be delivered via discretionary money versus mandatory money ? .

should the formulasfor allocating those funds remain as they are ? .

should states' historical spending levels from theearly 1990s continue to serve as the basis for the fixed amount of "guaranteed" mandatory funding ? .

should matching requirements remain the same ? .

how long should states have for obligating andspending the funds ? .

decisions regarding states' authority to transfer funds between block grants ( i.e. , tanf funds to ccdf and ssbg ) are also expected as part of the reauthorization process .

in addition to theallowable level of transfer , some critics of the status quo argue that states should be allowed totransfer tanf funds remaining from prior years , rather than only current year funds .

of course , justas an economic downturn could prove to affect states' decisions to use tanf funds directly for childcare , so too could it affect their decisions to transfer funds .

appendix a. fy2002 ccdf allotments , by fundingtype ( $ in millions ) source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) .

appendix b .

transfers from tanf to ccdf , cumulatively ( fy1997-fy2000 ) and for fy2000 , by state ( with percentages of cumulative grants and fy2000tanf grant ) source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided byhhs .

appendix c. total ccdf and tanf child care expendituresby funding source: fy1992-fy2000 ( $ in million ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided by the department of health and humanservices ( hhs ) .

note : child care expenditures in the territories are excluded .

a discretionary fund expenditures include spending from tanf transfers to ccdf .

b expenditures made in fy1992-fy1996 from the federal share of afdc - related child carematching funds are included in the samecolumn as the mandatory ccdf expenditures because these expenditures were the basis for determining mandatory"guaranteed"funding levels for the ccdf .

similarly , the fy1992-fy1996 expenditures made from the state share ofafdc - related child carematching funds appear in the same column showing ccdf moe expenditures ( for fy1997-fy2000 ) because theyformed the basisof determining the moe requirement level .

