publication of scientific research results that might be used by terrorist groups has led some policymakers to question whether the method used to control scientific research results , namely classification , should be revisited .

the administration , legislators , and scientific professional societies are reexamining policies relating to scientific information that might threaten national or homeland security .

policymakers may wish to determine what changes , if any , should be made to current government policy regarding publication of federally funded research results , and whether the options currently under consideration adequately balance the concerns and needs of the security and scientific communities .

this report presents examples of scientific research results whose publication raised concern regarding the threat they potentially pose to national security .

past and current information control mechanisms are discussed , along with current federal policy concerning dissemination of fundamental research results through the open literature .

recent policy actions regarding dissemination of federal information and federally funded research results are outlined , along with the responses these actions have evoked from various professional societies and publishers .

the advantages and disadvantages to potential policy actions addressing classification and other controls over open publication of federally funded research results are also described .

since the 1950s , the united states has developed an established policy of identifying , prior to publication , areas of basic and applied research where information controls may be required .

this research , typically related to weapon systems or nuclear technologies , may be designated classified and have strict information controls placed upon it .

when fundamental research is not classified , the government generally did not place other information controls on it .

this policy remained essentially unchanged until the 1970s , when controls were developed on the export of domestically developed , advanced , dual - use technologies and technological information .

under export control regulations , even if a technology is barred from export , the fundamental , basic science underlying the technology is generally exempt from controls and can be published in the open literature .

in the early 1980s , foreign student and scientist access to technological information that might fall under export control regulations became the focus of a department of defense effort to restrict such information presented in classrooms and conferences .

in 1985 , following a report from the national academy of sciences asserting that openness in science leads to stronger long - term security , president reagan issued national security decision directive 189 ( nsdd - 189 ) , reiterating that fundamental research results were to be controlled only through classification .

nsdd - 189 continues to define federal policy on restricting the dissemination of fundamental research results .

since then , the conduct of science and the composition of the scientific community have become increasingly international , and concerns about the effectiveness of export control regulations have grown .

the international spread and independent development of dual - use technologies has made the united states the sole technology source less often .

concern that export control regulation is negatively impacting domestic business prosperity has led to attempts to lower the trade barriers erected by export control .

additionally , the presence of foreign students and scientists in the united states has increased the availability of education and training in basic skills that may be transferred to other countries upon the return of those individuals to their home countries .

since the terrorist events of 2001 , concern that open publication of scientific and technological results may provide unwitting assistance to other nations or terrorist groups in developing weapons of mass destruction has resurged .

scientific research is conducted in many disparate areas .

historically , the areas where the balance between scientific openness and national security required consideration have been centered in the mathematical and physical sciences and their applications , such as aerospace engineering , advanced computer technology , and cryptography .

research in biology – such as the origins of virulence , development of vaccines , and the genetic manipulation of biological agents – has emerged as an area of concern because of its potential relevance to biological weapons of mass destruction .

whether the current method of using classification to limit the dissemination of fundamental research results is the best or most effective method of maintaining national security is an open question .

it is unclear whether classification will be effective when applied to research areas that have not historically been classified , and whether a system of classified research will be embraced by scientists working in these areas .

in march 2002 , executive branch agencies were instructed by then - assistant to the president and chief of staff andrew card to determine if government - owned information , especially that regarding weapons of mass destruction , was being inappropriately disclosed .

also in march 2002 , the department of defense ( dod ) promulgated a draft regulation expanding information controls to basic and applied science research and development .

scientific professional societies are engaged in developing self - regulatory mechanisms to address the concerns of the national security community .

in 2003 , at the annual meeting of the american association for the advancement of science , 32 editors of leading scientific journals issued a policy statement regarding publication of research results that could be misused .

additionally that year , the national academy of sciences held a meeting discussing whether current publication policies and practices in the life sciences could lead to the inadvertent disclosure of "sensitive" information to those who might misuse it .

in 2004 , the national research council issued a report , biotechnology research in an age of terrorism , which recommended an oversight structure , based on institutional biosafety committees , for research in select areas of concern .

following some of the recommendations presented in this report , the department of health and human services established the national science advisory board for biosecurity to , among other duties , provide advice , guidance , and leadership regarding biosecurity oversight of dual - use research .

competing proposals regarding how to control federally funded research results have been proposed , ranging from strict information control on all federally funded research to maintaining the status quo .

some scientific professional societies have suggested that self - regulation , either by scientists themselves or through the editors of scientific journals , would be an appropriate mechanism for limiting the publication of research results that might aid terrorist groups .

others have advocated more formal government oversight of potentially contentious research .

the development of a new category of "sensitive , but unclassified" information to protect information which does not require classification , but may still have the potential to damage national security , might encompass such research results .

the potential impact of these options raises much concern and debate .

a fundamental trade - off between scientific progress and security concerns is the crux of the policy debate .

the scientific enterprise is based upon open and full exchange of information and thrives on the ability of scientists to collaborate and communicate their results .

on the other hand , this very openness provides potential enemies with information that may allow them to harm u.s. interests .

the technological advances arising from scientific breakthroughs contribute to economic prosperity , but the openness required to continue this process creates risks , which may be perceived as more acute since september 11 , 2001 .

what level of risk caused via publication of scientific advances is acceptable in the eyes of policymakers and the public ? .

how will controlling the publication of federally funded research results increase safety ? .

if policymakers determine that more control of these sorts of research results is warranted , what possible mechanisms could be used to oversee these results ? .

the publication of several scientific articles reignited concerns that information published in the open literature may aid terrorist groups in developing weapons of mass destruction .

presented below is a selection of some of the more highly publicized examples .

in 2000 , researchers at the co - operative research centre for the biological control of pest animals ( crc ) in australia genetically modified mousepox virus while conducting rodent fertility research .

this modification unintentionally enabled the virus to infect mice that had been previously vaccinated against mousepox .

the publication of this result was greeted with criticism due to its weapons potential .

this experiment was repeated in 2003 by dr. mark buller at the university of st. louis using funding supplied by the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases .

another article widely viewed as having bioweapon potential was published in july 2002 .

researchers at the state university of new york at stony brook assembled functional poliovirus from chemical sequences ordered from a scientific mail - order firm .

dr. eckard wimmer , the lead scientist , described the experiment as graphic proof that bioterror agents can be made without a terrorist ever having access to dangerous microbes .

other scientific publications have been viewed as potentially aiding development of biological weapons by terrorist groups or countries .

publication of successes in "reverse genetics" has led some to believe that other viruses could be constructed in the laboratory without having access to actual virus ahead of time .

in october 2001 , the full genome of yersinia pestis , the bacteria which causes bubonic and pneumonic plague , was published in the journal nature .

simultaneous with the release of this article was the publication of an accompanying news article in nature science update that highlighted the existence of "a debate about whether releasing genomic information for virulent diseases , such as plague or smallpox , might aid malicious science. .

the full genome sequence of coxiella burnetii , the causative agent of q fever , was published in proceedings of the national academies of science of the united states of america ( pnas ) in april 2003 , and the annotated genome of bacillus anthracis , the causative agent of anthrax , was published in nature .

researchers at the university of pittsburgh identified key proteins which provide variola major , the causative virus of smallpox , with high virulence .

accompanying this article was a commentary explaining how "the work is far more likely to stimulate advances in vaccinology or viral therapy than it is to become a threat to biosecurity. .

researchers published in the journal of clinical microbiology a potential cause of enhanced virulence for some strains of bacillus anthracis .

the assessment of antibiotic resistance in select bacillus anthracis isolates was also identified as an article of potential concern .

articles such as these have led some to question the wisdom of openly publishing information that could be used to threaten national security .

an editorial in new scientist stated: that this mind - boggling quantity of information is going to transform medicine and biology is beyond doubt .

but could some of it , in the wrong hands , be a recipe for terror and mayhem ? .

bioethicist arthur caplan from the university of pennsylvania was reported as saying: we have to get away from the ethos that knowledge is good , knowledge should be publicly available , that information will liberate us .

... information will kill us in the techno - terrorist age , and i think it's nuts to put that stuff on web sites .

stewart simonson , then - assistant secretary for public health emergency preparedness for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , when discussing the decision of the proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america to publish an article on vulnerabilities of the milk supply chain , reportedly stated through a spokesman that he regretted the journal's decision to publish the paper: we recognize , of course , that this is an issue about which good and reasonable people disagree .

but i must say that if the academy is wrong , the consequences could be dire and it will be hhs – not the academy – which will have to deal with it .

past examples of research excluded from publication in the open literature have focused on military applications such as cryptography and nuclear weapons .

prior to u.s. entry into world war ii , physicists in the private sector researching nuclear fission voluntarily stopped publishing results in scientific journals , fearing that they would provide crucial information to germany's nuclear bomb project .

a joint national academy of sciences – national research council advisory committee on scientific publications was established to restrict publication on nuclear fission .

while the united states was involved in world war ii , this committee secured the cooperation of scientific journals in restricting the transfer of select scientific information within the united states .

nuclear power is another area where information controls have been instituted .

private industry was permitted to explore applications of nuclear power under the atomic energy act of 1954 .

prior to this act , nuclear energy activities were protected by the federal government with security and secrecy programs .

the federal government retains authority over results which relate to atomic weapons , production of special nuclear material , and use of special nuclear material in the production of energy .

information developed in those areas , even if developed privately without federal government aid , is regarded as "born classified. .

genetic engineering and recombinant species were an area of great contention in the 1970s , and there were calls for regulation of the methods for manipulating dna and of experiments containing genetically engineered species .

in response to criticism and public pressure , a voluntary moratorium on such research was set .

in 1975 , at the asilomar conference center in pacific grove , california , discussion on how scientists could self - regulate such research was held .

a consensus statement regarding a voluntary moratorium on some types of recombinant research and an increase in security and containment requirements for other research areas successfully allayed many public concerns , and provided a uniform framework to address such issues .

this consensus statement formed the starting point for research rules developed by the national institutes of health recombinant dna advisory committee , which was formed to oversee such research .

in the united states , there has long been support for a policy of not restricting publication of federally supported extramural and intramural research results , except where classified for national security reasons .

this position was restated in 1985 by president ronald reagan in national security decision directive 189 , which said: it is the policy of this administration that , to the maximum extent possible , the products of fundamental research remain unrestricted .

it is also the policy of this administration that , where the national security requires control , the mechanism for control of information generated during federally - funded fundamental research in science , technology and engineering at colleges , universities and laboratories is classification .

each federal government agency is responsible for: a ) determining whether classification is appropriate prior to the award of a research grant , contract , or cooperative agreement and , if so , controlling the research results through standard classification procedures ; b ) periodically reviewing all research grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements for potential classification .

no restrictions may be placed upon the conduct or reporting of federally - funded fundamental research that has not received national security classification , except as provided in applicable u.s .

statutes .

fundamental research is also defined within nsdd - 189: 'fundamental research' means basic and applied research in science and engineering , the results of which ordinarily are published and shared broadly within the scientific community , as distinguished from proprietary research and from industrial development , design , production , and product utilization , the results of which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary or national security reasons .

nsdd - 189 has not been superceded and continues to be the government policy regarding controls on federally funded research results .

in the wake of the terrorist attacks of september 2001 , then - assistant to the president for national security affairs condoleezza rice reaffirmed this position in a letter to the center for strategic and international studies , by stating , ...this administration will review and update as appropriate the export control policies that affect basic research in the united states .

in the interim , the policy on the transfer of scientific , technical , and engineering information set forth in nsdd - 189 shall remain in effect... executive branch agencies have followed this general policy by requiring that the results of agency - funded extramural research be published promptly and with wide dissemination .

for example , the national science foundation research policy states: nsf expects significant findings from research and education activities it supports to be promptly submitted for publication , with authorship that accurately reflects the contributions of those involved .

it expects investigators to share with other researchers , at no more than incremental cost and within a reasonable time , the data , samples , physical collections and other supporting materials created or gathered in the course of the work .

research performed with national institutes of health funding is also to be disseminated to the public: it is nih policy to make available to the public the results and accomplishments of the activities that it funds .

therefore , pis [principal investigators] and grantee organizations are expected to make the results and accomplishments of their activities available to the research community and to the public at large , and to effect their timely transfer to industry for commercialization .

the department of defense also encourages the publication of research it funds .

for example , office of naval research policy states: publication of results of the research project in appropriate professional journals is encouraged as an important method of recording and reporting scientific information .

in general , federal agencies appear to agree that there should be open publication of research results when the research has been funded by taxpayer dollars .

the exception is when research is classified .

classified research projects , even those performed by scientists outside of government laboratories , are not published in the open literature , with information being transferred only between those who possess requisite clearance .

some classified research areas are later declassified , and the advances developed in these programs used more generally .

current mechanisms for federal agencies to control the publication of federally funded extramural research results include classification , export and arms trafficking regulations , and specifications in federal contracts , such as prepublication review .

the catastrophic terrorist attacks of 2001 led to an executive branch reevaluation of the treatment of government - owned information .

in the wake of these events , many government agencies evaluated information which was available to the public through government websites and began to reassess documents that had recently been declassified .

the balance between publication of federally funded research results and protecting national security raises numerous questions , such as: should there be regulation of the publication of federally - funded research results ? .

is the potential impact on scientific quality , productivity , and advancement resulting from publication controls worth the added potential security gained through such controls ? .

how might relevant policy be uniformly employed by all agencies of the federal government ? .

should such policy vary by scientific and technical disciplines ? .

at what stage , if any , of the civilian research process might regulation or restriction occur ? .

how much authority , if any , does the federal government have over the publishing of research results developed through private funding ? .

how might development or implementation of such authority introduce first amendment conflicts ? .

since science is an increasingly international discipline , how would national security concerns regarding federally funded research results be implemented in a global context ? .

how might the federal government encourage scientists to develop guidelines for self - regulation ? .

given the international nature of scientific publication , might self - regulation by domestic publishers cause sensitive research results to be published in international journals rather than domestic journals ? .

how might congress provide oversight of this issue with respect to extramural research and development funded by the department of homeland security ? .

developing policy in this area balances many concerns , some of which may be more difficult to address than others .

how would a federal policy that encouraged self - regulation of manuscript submissions , either by journal publishers or scientists , be enforced ? .

how would the concerns of security officials regarding national security be met if scientists are relied upon to review articles ? .

conversely , how would the concerns of scientists regarding scientific openness and academic freedom be met if security officials review articles ? .

a policy involving review of research may require the cooperation of members of both the scientific and security community , two communities that generally have limited interaction .

finally , how would the success of a program controlling scientific research results be measured ? .

some aspects of such a program , like the economic costs involved in processing the articles , might be directly measurable , while others , such as the success in blocking terrorist group access to this information , might not be so easily measured .

