congress established a statutory formula governing distribution of financial aid for municipal wastewater treatment in the clean water act ( cwa ) in 1972 .

since then , congress has modified the formula and incorporated other eligibility changes five times , actions which have been controversial on each occasion .

federal funds are provided to states through annual appropriations according to the statutory formula to assist local governments in constructing wastewater treatment projects in compliance with federal standards .

congress has appropriated more than $91 billion since 1972 .

the formula originally applied to the act's program of grants for constructing such projects .

that grants program was replaced in the law in 1987 by a new program of federal grants to capitalize state revolving loan funds ( srfs ) for similar activities .

the most recent formula change , also enacted in 1987 , continues to apply to federal capitalization grants for clean water srfs .

the current state - by - state allotment is a complex formulation consisting basically of two elements , state population and "need. .

the latter refers to states' estimates of capital costs for wastewater projects necessary for compliance with the act .

funding needs surveys have been done since the 1960s and became an element for distributing cwa funds in 1972 .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , in consultation with states , has prepared 15 clean water needs surveys since then to provide information to policymakers on the nation's total funding needs , as well as needs for certain types of projects .

legislation to fund water infrastructure projects has been on congress's agenda regularly since the 107 th congress .

the 113 th congress enacted some changes to the srf provisions of the cwa in title v of the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( wrrda , p.l .

113-121 ) .

these amendments did not modify the existing allotment formula , but requested epa to conduct a review of the current allotment formula and submit a report to congress .

in part because the formula is more than 25 years old , while needs and population have changed , the issue of state - by - state distribution of funds remains an important topic .

this report describes the formula and eligibility changes adopted by congress since 1972 , revealing the interplay and decisionmaking by congress on factors to include in the formula .

two types of trends and institutional preferences can be discerned in these actions .

first , there are differences over the use of need and population factors in the allocation formula itself .

during the 1970s , the senate strongly favored reliance on use of population factors in the allocation formula , while the house strongly advocated a needs - based approach .

during the 1980s , the period when categorical eligibilities were restricted in order to emphasize water quality benefits , the senate favored needs as the basis for grants distribution , while the house position generally was to retain formulas used in prior years , which incorporate both needs and population elements .

when population has been used as a factor , differences have occurred over whether a current or future year population estimate is appropriate , but there is no clear trend on this point .

second , until recently , there have been gradual increases in restrictions on types of wastewater treatment projects eligible for federal assistance .

beginning with a limitation that denied use of federal funds for stormwater sewer projects in 1977 , debate over categorical eligibility has had two elements .

one has been fiscal: a desire to not fund types of projects with the highest costs and often the most unreliable cost estimates .

the other focus has been environmental: a desire to use federal resources to assist projects which benefit water quality protection most directly .

while some of these eligibility restrictions presented congress with rather straightforward choices , others have been more complex .

some continue to be debated , such as whether certain types of projects should be fully eligible for federal aid or should be the responsibility of state and local governments .

the 2014 cwa amendments enacted as part of wrrda revised the list of project categories that are srf - eligible to include some that have been eligible by practice , such as stormwater management and treatment , and to identify newly - eligible categories , such as decentralized wastewater treatment systems .

the following table provides a generalized summary of the components of the allocation formula since 1972 .

details discussed below should be consulted , because a summary table such as this cannot fully reflect factors such as "hold harmless" or "minimum share" provisions frequently included in the state - by - state distribution scheme to protect states with small allocations or to minimize potential disruptions when formula changes were adopted .

the term "total needs" refers to funding needs identified by states for all categories of projects and water quality activities eligible for assistance .

the term "partial needs" refers to a subset of eligible project categories , primarily construction or upgrades to comply with the act's minimum requirement that municipalities achieve secondary treatment of wastewater .

since adoption of the allocation formula that has governed distribution of clean water act assistance since 1987 , epa and the states have produced seven updated needs surveys ( in 1988 , 1992 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 , 2008 , and 2012 ) .

in addition , updated population information became available through three subsequent decennial censuses ( in 1990 , 2000 , and 2010 ) .

although population changes have occurred during that time , and needs for water quality projects also have changed ( total needs increased 17% between the 2004 and 2008 surveys , but decreased 20% between the 2008 and 2012 surveys ) , none of this more recent information is reflected in the currently applicable distribution formula .

the recent needs surveys have included estimates of needs for traditional wastewater project categories , but they also have included estimates for newer categories , such as stormwater management — now identified separately from combined sewer overflow correction — recycled water distribution , and decentralized wastewater treatment systems ( eg , onsite and clustered community systems often found in rural areas ) .

crafting an allotment formula has been one of the most controversial issues debated during reauthorization of the clean water act .

the dollars involved are significant , and considerations of "winner" and "loser" states bear heavily on discussions of policy choices reflected in alternative formulations .

this is likely to be the case again , when congress reauthorizes the wastewater infrastructure funding portions of the act .

in part because the current allocation formula is now more than 25 years old , the issue of how to allocate state - by - state distribution of federal funds remains an important topic of interest to policymakers and state and local officials .

