analysis of the effects of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , suggests various "lessonslearned" concerning public and private information infrastructures .

what results are some insightsto the range of challenges and opportunities facing policymakers as they seek to identify relevanttechnical solutions to homeland security concerns .

this report considers these homeland securityissues in the context of critical information infrastructure protection and continuity of operations ( coop ) planning .

as part of the congressional and presidential efforts to develop and implement a comprehensive response to homeland security concerns , the role of information technology ( it ) has become anincreasingly important focus .

in july 2002 , the president released the country's first nationalstrategy for homeland security , outlining the strategic objectives , critical mission areas , andinitiatives in support of the administration's proposed department of homeland security .

 ( 1 ) thestrategic objectives included: preventing terrorist attacks within the united states ; reducingamerica's vulnerability to terrorism ; and minimizing the damage and recover from attacks that dooccur .

in november 2002 congress passed , and the president signed into law , the homelandsecurity act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) creating the department of homeland security .

common toboth the national strategy document and the legislation is an emphasis on developing informationsharing initiatives and fostering partnerships between and within the levels of government and thesectors of industry .

the heavy reliance upon information technology to carry out mission critical tasks and provideother citizen services highlights the need to ensure these assets are protected , backed up , and resilientto attack .

moreover , the growth of the use of electronic government ( e - government ) applicationsto conduct government - to - citizen interactions , as well as government - to - business and government - to - governmenttransactions , has put additional pressure on the need to reconstitute systems quicklyto minimize any disruptions and financial costs associated with a major infrastructure failure .

 ( 2 ) inaddition , renewed emphasis is being placed on reducing the vulnerability of the nation's criticalinformation infrastructures while more fully integrating and utilizing public and private informationtechnology assets .

 ( 3 ) taken together , these issuesdemonstrate the importance of ensuring thereliability and continuity of information technology systems , as part of the government's overallapproach to homeland security .

the accounts of successes and failures regarding how agencies andbusinesses responded to the september 11 , 2001 attacks provide an unusual opportunity to examineoptions for further improving the nation's emergency preparedness .

in the months following september 11 , 2001 , there were a number of accounts of successes,failures , and 'lessons learned' regarding continuity and disaster recovery planning .

in many cases,these descriptions are specific to a particular organization or business activity .

however , one canidentify some observations and lessons learned that are widely applicable and that policymakers andbusiness leaders may wish to consider as they develop and implement new homeland securityinitiatives .

continuity of operations ( coop ) and disaster recovery planning are not new concepts .

however , surveys have shown that only about half of american businesses have disastermanagement plans in place .

in many cases , past threats are often the motivating influences fororganizations to make these plans .

for example , morgan stanley , one of the tenants in the southtower of the world trade center , adopted thorough plans in response to bomb threats being madeduring the persian gulf war in 1991 , and reinforced those plans following the 1993 bombing of theworld trade center .

the financial services firm's regular evacuation drills were credited as one ofthe reasons why nearly all of its approximately 3,500 employees were able to escape before thebuildings collapsed .

 ( 31 ) in the case of information technology disaster recovery planning , preparation for the year 2000 transition ( y2k ) has been cited by a number of private and public sector organizations as one of themain reasons they were able to respond and recover quickly from the september 11 , 2001 , attacks .

 ( 32 ) y2k planning began substantially in the 1990s , led primarily by the private sector and followed byfederal and state government agencies .

 ( 33 ) y2kpreparation spurred many organizations tooperationalize strategies for backing up data , enabling remote working , and enhancingcommunication links between organizations , employees , customers , and vendors .

 ( 34 ) many tenantsof the world trade center also cited the 1993 bombing of the building as their rationale for havingdeveloped extensive disaster recovery plans , which they , in turn , attributed to their success inevacuating employees and preserving vital data .

 ( 35 ) the amount of time and resources spent on information technology disaster planning can vary with the size and type of organization .

according to the gartner group , a research and advisoryfirm , an average company allocates approximately three percent of its annual information technologybudget to disaster recovery .

in contrast , financial services companies , which have to meetrequirements set by the federal reserve board and / or the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , spend an average of seven to eight percent .

 ( 36 ) however , if it may seem costly to dedicate a significant portion of one's budget to planning for an event with a low chance of occurring , the financial consequences for being unprepared can beeven higher .

in the case of financial companies , many , if not most , had invested in data backup anddisaster recovery facilities to one degree or another .

while this allowed them to save a significantamount of customer and business - critical data , it was estimated that these firms will still spend $3-5billion over the two years following the attack to replace their destroyed information technologyinfrastructure .

 ( 37 ) for example , dow jones inc.,a global financial news company and publisher of thewall street journal and barron's publications , was expected to spend $2 million to replaceinformation technology hardware and office equipment .

 ( 38 ) although it had relatively few offices inor around the world trade center and a portion of the affected area of the pentagon was notoccupied , the federal government was also expected to spend a significant amount to replace lost anddamaged information technology systems .

input , a web - based information technology marketresearch and marketing services firm , predicted that the federal government would spend $75million , with the customs service ( now part of the department of homeland security ) aloneexpected to account for $15 million of that amount .

 ( 39 ) while information technology disaster recovery planning is often compared to the preparations for y2k , it is important to recognize that these scenarios are qualitatively different .

y2k had a finitetime line with a clear indicator of success or failure .

in contrast , the war on terrorism appears to bean open - ended and evolving process .

as the examples below demonstrate , measures of success arerelative , and the task of planning is never truly done .

the lessons learned today can help prepare fortomorrow , but they do not represent the final word on information technology disaster recoveryplanning .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , have brought a new urgency to continuity and recoveryplanning and practices .

while attention has been growing over time , this multifaceted undertakingcan often be a very challenging and frustrating process as planners try to coordinate disparate partsof their organizations while trying to strike a balance between how much they cannot afford to beunprepared and how much they can afford to spend on resources they may never use .

furthercomplicating matters has been the tendency for organizations to "stovepipe" the different protectionsrelevant to information technology disaster recovery planning .

for example , information securityhas often been handled independently from physical security .

similarly , the compartmentalizationof an organization's units and processes can contribute to a fractured planning process that can leavean organization vulnerable .

 ( 40 ) one reported example indicating the possible costs and consequences when an organization does not have a fully integrated plan is the may davis group .

the privately held financial servicescompany had its offices on the 87th floor of one of the world trade center towers .

in addition tolosing $100,000 of equipment , the firm apparently lost some regulatory documents and $1 millionin revenue due to data loss and downtime .

 ( 41 ) a less severe example is the secret service field office , located in 7 world trade center , which did have a contingency plan , but had not fully implemented it at the time of the attack .

the agency'sfield office was able to resume operations the following day at an alternative location .

it reportedlylost some of the information it was collecting on criminal suspects .

 ( 42 ) another example is deloitte consulting , whose primary telecommunications hub in new york city , located in the world financial center next to the world trade center towers , was put out ofservice , affecting an estimated one thousand employees in the area .

as a consulting firm , deloitteconsiders its ability to share information with clients to be its core business .

during the weeks ittook to rebuild its land line communication center , deloitte's new york area employees used cellphones to stay in contact with customers and fellow employees .

 ( 43 ) even organizations that have planned extensively can sometimes overlook small details that appear insignificant , but later prove to be important .

one such example is american internationalgroup ( aig ) inc .

the financial services company has offices and information technology operationsnear the world trade center site .

using its backup business center in parsippany , nj , and a secondpreviously contracted emergency facility in livingston , nj , aig was able to use data from itsautomated backup system to be operational the day after the attacks .

however , not all of its serverswere part of the automated backup system , and the backup tapes for these servers reportedly wereleft behind when its building was evacuated .

 ( 44 ) .

a second major category of lessons learned concerns the decentralization of operations and theeffectiveness of distributed communications .

the rise of networked computing and the internet hasprovided the opportunity to connect far - flung locations around the country and the world .

manypublic and private sector organizations have used this technology to reach outward to new markets,deliver new services , and reduce communications costs .

however , the lessons learned discussedbelow suggest there is also a need for organizations to turn this technology inward to reduce thevulnerabilities of internal operations and to strengthen communications links with internal , as wellas external , constituencies .

the third category of lessons learned involves the institutionalization of redundancy ininformation infrastructures .

redundancy , as used here , includes having computer or network systemcomponents , including hardware , software , and telecommunications links , installed and ready to useas a backup in the event primary resources fail .

a related aspect of redundancy is the ability toreplace and / or reconstruct hardware and software quickly and easily when necessary to preventextended periods of downtime .

although there are undoubtedly additional lessons learned from the september 11 , 2001 attacks,the lessons highlighted in the previous pages provide a broad sense of the breadth and depth of theissues facing public and private sector organizations .

while not all - inclusive , they emphasize threegeneral approaches: the establishment and practice of comprehensive continuity and recovery plans,the decentralization of operations , and the development of system redundancies to eliminate singlepoints of weakness .

the lessons learned from september 11 , 2001 build , in part , upon the lessonslearned from the 1993 world trade center bombing and the preparation for the y2k transition .

however , as agencies and businesses move ahead with continuity planning and implementation,there are indicators that the character of this preparation is changing .

crs report rl31594 , congressional continuity of operations ( coop ) : an overview of concepts and challenges , by [author name scrubbed] and jeffrey w. seifert .

crs report rl31857 , continuity of operations ( coop ) in the executive branch: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30153 , critical infrastructures: background , policy , and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31534 , critical infrastructures remote control systems and the terrorist threat , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs terrorism electronic briefing book ebter129 , information and telecommunications infrastructure , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31978 , emergency preparedness and continuity of operations ( coop ) planning in the federal judiciary , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31493 , homeland security: department organization and management , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31513 , homeland security: side - by - side comparison of h.r .

5005 and s. 2452 , 107th congress , by the crs homeland security team .

crs report rl31465 ( pdf ) , protecting critical infrastructure from attack: a catalog of selected federal assistance programs , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

dorobek , christopher j. , "web sites that worked," federal computer week , 1 october 2001 , p.18 .

input , attack on america: the impact of the september 11 terrorist attacks on the federal government , 3 october 2001 , http: / / www.input.com / article_printver.cfm ? article_id=310 .

national research council .

2002 .

the internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11 .

washington , dc: national academy press .

pentagon renovation program web site http: / / renovation.pentagon.mil / .

schulz , james , "new urgency for disaster recovery planning," washington technology , 8 october 2001 , p.18 .

"special coverage: attack on america," computerworld , http: / / www.computerworld.com / news / special / pages / 0,10911,1446,00.html .

"special report: september 11 , 2001," government executive magazine , http: / / www.govexec.com / 091101report.htm .

