although argentina emerged from its 2001-2002 economic and political crisis , the current administration of president nƸstor kirchner faced considerable challenges .

these include the abilityto build the political consensus needed in order to ensure sustainable economic growth and financialstability and the ability to negotiate a debt restructuring deal for over $100 billion in defaulted bonddebt .

a center - left peronist ( justicialist party or pj ) , kirchner emerged from a crowded april 2003 presidential race with 22% of the vote and was inaugurated to a four - year term on may 25 , 2003 .

hesucceeded another peronist , eduardo duhalde , who had become president in january 2002 in theaftermath of the resignation of president fernando de la rua of the radical civic union ( ucr ) indecember 2001 .

social protests over deteriorating economic conditions had led to de la rua'sresignation .

although the country was under considerable stress in 2001 and 2002 , the democraticpolitical system weathered the crisis and economic growth has resumed from a decline of almost11% in 2002 to an estimated increase of over 7% in 2003 .

the forecast for 2004 is for economicgrowth of 7% .

president kirchner's bold policy moves in the areas of human rights and institutional reform helped restore argentines' faith in government .

he vowed to prosecute military officials responsiblefor past human rights violations during the last era of military rule ( 1976-1983 ) .

in the economicarena , the kirchner government reached a three - year stand - by agreement with the internationalmonetary fund ( imf ) in september 2003 , after several months of tough negotiations , that providedcredit line of about $12.5 billion .

although imf accords are not normally politically popular , theaccord was widely praised in argentina as an agreement with realistic fiscal targets that wouldenable argentina to deal with such issues as employment and social equity .

on the economic front , argentina suspended its imf loan program in mid - august 2004 because of imf pressure on its debt negotiations with bondholders and on argentine progress inimplementing key economic reforms .

the imf had delayed its third review of the stand - byagreement because of concerns about these issues ; the delay held up disbursement of $778 millionto argentina under the agreement .

argentina expected to renew talks with the imf in december orjanuary 2005 , after it had made progress in restructuring its $100 billion in defaulted bond debt .

thebondholders had strongly criticized the terms of argentina's initial restructuring proposal , whichincluded a 75% "haircut" or debt reduction .

a new argentine proposal in early june 2004 includedan agreement to pay billions in unpaid interest , but the proposal again was criticized by manybondholders ; a formal launching of the proposal was expected in late november 2004 , but has beendelayed until mid - january 2005 .

although argentina's economic recovery has enabled it to achievethe macroeconomic targets set by the imf , many poor and middle - class argentines have yet to seemajor improvements in living standards .

u.s. - argentine relations have been strong since the country's return to democracy in 1983 and were especially close during the menem presidency .

the tough u.s. approach toward argentinaduring its political and financial crisis in 2001-2002 caused some friction in the bilateral relationshipand contributed to an increase of anti - americanism in argentina .

at present , despite strong bilateralrelations , there have been several irritants in the relationship , such as argentina's closer relationswith cuba .

u.s. officials also urged both the argentine government and its private creditors to moveexpeditiously to work out a fair and mutually agreeable debt restructuring agreement , which theybelieve is critical to ensuring argentina's continued economic recovery .

as noted above ( section on terrorism ) , congress has expressed concern regarding the continuing investigation into the july 1994 bombing in buenos aires of the argentine - israeli mutualassociation ( amia ) that killed 86 people .

both the house and the senate approved similarresolutions - - h.con.res .

469 ( ros - lehtinen ) and s.con.res .

126 ( coleman ) - - on july 22 , 2004 , that urged argentina to provide resources to investigate all areas ofthe amia case , encourage u.s. law enforcement support , and encourage the establishment of anoas task force to assist in the investigation .

political unrest in bolivia led to the resignation of president gonzalo sanchez de lozada on october 17 , 2003 , just fifteen months after he was elected .

succeeding him as president is hisformer vice president , carlos mesa , a popular former television journalist , historian , and politicalindependent .

this change in leadership came about after months of protests led by indigenousgroups and workers who carried out strikes and road blockages that resulted in up to 80 deaths inconfrontations with government troops .

the focus of the protests was the continued economicmarginalization of the poorer segments of society especially in response to government plans toexport natural gas via a port in chile , an historic adversary of bolivia .

the new president facesmany difficulties in governing a politically fractured society within a context of a highly mobilizedindigenous community , and the uncertainty of being able to obtain consensus on natural gas exportsas a basis for the country's future economic development .

the change in government and the rolethat indigenous groups played in it represents challenges for u.s. policy , which has been seen asfocusing almost exclusively on coca eradication and less on equitable economic developmentpolicies .

luis inƭcio lula da silva of the leftist workers' party ( pt ) was inaugurated president of brazil on january 1 , 2003 , pledging to bring fundamental change to the country while maintaining soundeconomic policies .

he won the october 2002 elections decisively , with the support of leftist partiesand a variety of centrist elements .

as he sought to fashion support for his programs in congress , hereached out beyond the parties that supported him in the election to other centrist parties , especiallythe centrist pmdb , but the alliance was strained by the october 2004 municipal elections and splitswithin the pmdb .

during his first two years in office , president lula da silva has pursued cautious economic policies and met and even surpassed previously established targets for international monetary fund ( imf ) loans , while stressing that one of his main priorities is the eradication of hunger in the countrythrough programs called zero hunger and family payments .

as a result of his policies , the countryhas experienced lower inflation , a strengthening of the currency , and a dramatic lowering of brazil'scredit risk rating .

tackling long - standing problems that were not resolved during the presidency offernando henrique cardoso ( 1995-2002 ) , president lula da silva obtained a reform of the socialsecurity system to make it more self - sustaining and a modification of the tax system to make it moreeffective and fair .

while economic growth was only 0.3 % in 2003 , most observers expect 3.5-4%growth in 2004 , although interest rates and unemployment rates have remained fairly high .

toguarantee against external shocks to the heavily indebted economy , in early november 2003 , brazilagreed to extend the loan with the imf and to maintain the previous austere fiscal targets .

underthe agreement , brazil would have available about $20 billion in resources , including a rollover of$8 billion from the past loan , about $6 billion in fresh funds , and postponement of payment of $5.5billion due in 2005 .

brazilian finance minister palocci argues that the loan is an insurance packageand notes that brazil may not draw upon the funds .

relations with the united states have been generally positive , although president lula da silva has made relations with the neighboring countries in the southern common market ( mercosur ) hisfirst priority , has orchestrated the linking of the mercosur with the andean community of nations ( can ) , and has been seeking to strengthen ties with the european union and with othernon - traditional partners , including india and china .

on june 20 , 2003 , president lula da silva madean official visit to washington , d.c. , and the countries' leaders resolved "to create a closer andqualitatively stronger [bilateral] relationship. .

leaders agreed on a framework for regular high - leveldiscussions on a wide range of issues , including agreements to enhance cooperation in science andnuclear energy ; to jointly promote hiv / aids treatment in the portuguese - speaking african countriesof mozambique and angola ; and to establish an energy partnership for cooperation on alternativeenergy sources .

on october 4-6 , 2004 , secretary of state colin powell visited brazil for high leveldiscussions on international trade , hunger , and security matters , as well as brazil's leading role inthe u.n. - sanctioned peacekeeping force in haiti .

lower level u.s. officials have visited brazil on many occasions , with much of the discussion relating to the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) since brazil and the united states areco - chairs of the ftaa trade negotiation committee with responsibility for guiding the talks in thefinal phase of negotiations .

brazil has been taking the position that the ftaa must includemeasures to curtail agricultural subsidies and to reduce the use of anti - dumping and countervailingduties to be acceptable , while the united states has argued that the broader agricultural issues shouldbe resolved in the doha round of wto talks .

the wto talks stalled in september 2003 in cancun , mexico , when brazil led a group of developing countries called the g - 20 that insisted that developed countries agree to reduceagricultural subsidies as part of any settlement .

however , the talks were revived in early 2004 , anda series of meetings led to agreement on august 1 , 2004 , on the framework of a possible agreement .

this framework included commitments to make substantial reductions in trade - distorting domesticagricultural support programs , to phase - out all export subsidies under a yet - to - be - determinedschedule , and to significantly improve market access for agricultural products .

 ( 9 ) in the ftaa talks , brazil and the united states took divergent positions in the november 2003 eighth ministerial meeting in miami , florida.. brazil argued that if the united states insisted ondeferring action on agricultural subsidies and anti - dumping measures to the doha round of wtonegotiations , the agreement would be much less attractive for brazil where agriculture has becomethe primary area for exports and development .

in that case , brazil argued that it would like to deferto the wto negotiations a number of sensitive issues , including investment , services , governmentprocurement , and intellectual property rights .

in a mini - ministerial meeting in washington , d.c. inearly november 2003 , brazil and the united states agreed to a flexible formula for the ftaa , calledby some an "ftaa light" or an "ftaa ala carte. .

under the formula , subsequently adopted by theministers , all of the countries would agree to a set of core obligations , while countries which favoreda more ambitious agreement would negotiate plurilateral agreements .

when the trade negotiationscommittee ( tnc ) met in puebla , mexico , in early february 2004 , the delegates were unable to agreeon the ftaa common obligations , and the tnc was suspended .

despite four separate efforts inmarch , april , and may 2004 , the cochairs were unable to agree upon a framework for the ftaanegotiations , and it became increasingly clear that negotiations would not be completed by thescheduled deadline of january 2005 .

at the same time , negotiations for a free trade agreement between the european union and mercosur that were scheduled to conclude by the end of october 2004 , broke down in mid - july2004 , with the eu demanding better access to mercosur's services sector , while mercosur insistedon greater access to the european market for mercosur agricultural products .

under thesecircumstances , the two sides called for a meeting of the lead negotiators by the end of the year anda ministerial meeting in the first quarter of 2005 .

cuba under fidel castro remains a hard - line communist state , with a poor record on human rights that has deteriorated significantly since 2003 .

with the cutoff of assistance from the formersoviet union , cuba experienced severe economic deterioration from 1989 to 1993 .

while there hasbeen some improvement since 1994 as cuba has implemented limited reforms , the economy remainsin poor shape .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely of isolating the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions .

the bush administration has further tightenedrestrictions on travel and remittances to cuba significantly .

another component of u.s. policyconsists of support measures for the cuban people , including private humanitarian donations andu.s. - sponsored radio and television broadcasting to cuba , radio and tv marti .

while there appearsto be broad agreement on the overall objective of u.s. policy toward cuba - - to help bringdemocracy and respect for human rights to the island , there are several schools of thought on howto achieve that objective .

some advocate maximum pressure on the cuban government until reformsare enacted , others argue for lifting some u.s. sanctions that they believe are hurting the cubanpeople , and still others call for a swift normalization of u.s. - cuban relations by lifting the u.s.embargo .

there was considerable reaction to the bush administration's june 2004 tightening ofrestrictions for family visits and other categories of travel .

congress continued its high level of interest in cuba in the 108th congress with a variety of legislative initiatives regarding sanctions and human rights .

several fy2005 appropriationsmeasures had provisions that would have eased cuba sanctions , but ultimately these were notincluded in the fy2005 omnibus appropriations measure ( p.l .

108-447 , h.rept .

108-792 ) .

thehouse - passed version of the fy2005 commerce , justice , and state appropriations bill , h.r .

4754 , would have prohibited funds to implement , administer , or enforce recentrestrictions on gift parcels and on baggage for travelers .

the house - passed version of the fy2005transportation / treasury appropriations bill , h.r .

5025 , had three cuba provisions thatwould have eased sanctions on family travel , travel for educational activities , and private commercialsales of agricultural and medical products .

the senate committee version of the fy2005transportation / treasury appropriations bill , s. 2806 , had a provision that would haveprohibited funds from administering or enforcing restrictions on cuba travel .

the senate committeeversion of the fy2005 agriculture appropriation bill , s. 2803 , would have allowedtravel to cuba under a "general license" when it was related to the commercial sale of agriculturaland medical products .

the administration had threatened to veto both the transportation / treasuryand agriculture appropriations measures if they had provisions weakening cuba sanctions .

in other action , the 108th congress demonstrated concern about the poor human rights situation by approving four resolutions: s.res .

97 , h.res .

179 , s.res .

62 , and s.res .

328 .

numerous other legislative initiatives were introduced that wouldhave ease sanctions on cuba , but no action was taken on these bills: h.r .

187 , h.r .

188 , h.r .

1698 , h.r .

2071 , h.r .

3422 , h.r .

4678 , s. 403 , s. 950 , and s. 2449 / h.r .

4457 .

two initiatives , h.r .

3470 and h.r .

3670 ,would have tightened sanctions .

h.r .

2494 / s. 2002 would have repealeda provision in law that prohibits trademark registration or courts from considering trademark claimsif the trademark was used in connection with confiscated assets in cuba ; in contrast , h.r .

4225 / s. 2373 would have applied a narrow fix to the law so that itconformed with a world trade organization ruling .

since a 1995 u.s. - cuban migration accord , the u.s. coast guard has interdicted thousands of cubans at sea trying to enter the united states and returned them to cuba , while those deemed at riskfor persecution have been transferred to guantanamo and then found asylum in a third country .

those cubans who reach shore usually are allowed to apply for permanent resident status in one yearpursuant to the cuban adjustment act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-732 ) .

this so - called "wet foot / dry foot"policy has been criticized by some as encouraging cubans to risk their lives in order to make it tothe united states and as encouraging alien smuggling .

others maintain that u.s. policy shouldwelcome those migrants fleeing communist cuba whether or not they are able to make it to land .

president leonel fernƭndez of the dominican liberation party ( pld ) , who served as president previously ( 1996-2000 ) , took office on august 16 , 2004 .

fernƭndez is charged with helping thedominican republic recover from a deep economic crisis that occurred primarily as the result ofthree major banking failures and bailouts in 2003 .

since then , the country has faced high inflation,double - digit unemployment , currency depreciation , and chronic power shortages .

presidentfernƭndez used his electoral mandate to push the prd - dominated congress to pass tax increases aspart of a fiscal reform package necessary to restart a suspended $600 million imf loan .

the package has been controversial , however , as it contains a tax on fructose - sweetened drinks , aimedat u.s. - produced high fructose corn syrup .

president fernƭndez and the dominican congress aretrying to negotiate a way to pass a 2005 budget that repeals the tax , complies with imf fiscal targets,and placates the country's sugar industry .

if the tax is not repealed , the dominican republic couldbe excluded from the u.s. - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) .

in january 2003 , lucio gutierrez , a former army colonel who was part of the junta that toppled the government of jamil mahuad in january 2000 , became the country's sixth president in sevenyears .

upon assuming the presidency , gutierrez abandoned his populist rhetoric and adoptedeconomic reform and good governance policies in order to secure support from the united states andthe international monetary fund ( imf ) .

despite rapid economic growth driven by high oil prices,president gutierrez's power has been limited by legislative gridlock , protests organized byindigenous groups that at once formed part of his governing coalition , and allegations of corruptionwithin his administration .

gutierrez's party , the patriotic society party ( psp ) , won barely 5% of thevote in the regional and municipal elections held on october 17 , 2004 .

since that time , presidentgutierrez has formed new alliances with mid - size parties , including that of exiled president abdalƭbucaram , in order to stave off impeachment proceedings and shore up support for his government .

despite some recent disagreements , ecuador continues to cooperate with the u.s. counter - narcotics program and has mobilized its military and police forces to help control spillovereffects from the conflict in colombia along its northern border .

ecuador and the united statespossess a significant trade and investment relationship that has been enhanced since 1992 by theandean trade preference act .

the united states has concluded six rounds of negotiations withecuador , along with colombia and peru , for an andean free trade agreement .

ecuador was placedon the state department's 2004 tier 3 list of countries that had not adequately combated traffickingin persons , but avoided u.s. sanctions by making progress on that issue between june and september2004 .

on march 21 , 2004 , businessmen tony saca of the conservative national republican alliance ( arena ) party soundly defeated his nearest rival , shafick handal , a former guerrilla andcommunist party member , of the farabundo marti national liberation front ( fmln ) to win thesalvadoran presidential elections .

mr. saca took office on june 1 , 2004 , alongside ana vilma deescobar , who became the first salvadoran woman to serve as vice president .

the new administrationis facing a divided legislature , in which the fmln continues to hold 31 of 84 seats .

president sacascored a number of early legislative triumphs , such as the approval of the 2004 budget and toughlegislation to combat gang violence .

although 60% of salvadoran approve of his overall jobperformance , 73% disprove of his august decision to send a new contingent of 380 salvadoransoldiers to iraq .

the united states is working with president saca to combat narco - trafficking , toresolve immigration issues , and to promote free trade , possibly through the proposed unitedstates - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) .

on december17 , 2004 , despite the opposition of the fmln , el salvador became the first country in centralamerica to ratify dr - cafta .

since taking office on january 14 , 2004 , for a four - year term , president oscar berger has attacked corruption and enacted long - delayed military reforms .

since the 1980s , guatemala has beenconsolidating its transition from a centuries - long tradition of mostly autocratic rule towardrepresentative government .

a democratic constitution was adopted in 1985 , and ademocratically - elected government was inaugurated in 1986 .

democratic institutions remain fragile .

a 36-year civil war ended in 1996 with the signing of the peace accords between the governmentand the left - wing guerrilla movement .

the accords not only ended the civil conflict but alsoconstituted a blueprint for profound political , economic , and social change to address the conflict'sroot causes .

they outline a profound restructuring of state institutions , with the goal of endinggovernment security forces' impunity from prosecution , and consolidating the rule of law ; a majorshift of government funding away from the military and into health , education , and other basicservices to reach the rural and indigenous poor ; and the full participation of the indigenouspopulation in local and national decision making processes .

berger has promised to make fulfillingthe peace accords a central theme of his administration .

berger has pursued corruption charges against his predecessor , alfonso portillo , of the guatemalan republican front ( frg ) , and other former frg officials .

his proposed economicreforms include new income tax rates and a temporary tax to fund programs related to the peaceprocess .

he says passing the free - trade agreement signed with the united states is a top priority andthat he plans to stimulate the economy by encouraging private investment .

the financial actiontask force , an international organization dedicated to enhancing international cooperation incombating money - laundering , removed guatemala from its list of non - cooperative countries in july2004 .

 ( 10 ) guatemala had been on the list of ninecountries - - the only one in the americas - - duringthe portillo administration .

 ( 11 ) the task forcewelcomed progress made by guatemala in enactingand implementing anti - money laundering legislation .

the united states has prohibited international military education and training ( imet ) and foreign military financing ( fmf ) to guatemala since 1990 because of human rights concerns .

theberger administration has lobbied washington to ease the military aid prohibition , noting thatwithin its first six months in office it had reduced the size of the military by half and developedproposals for other military reforms .

the government says it needs funds to modernize the militaryand provide equipment for border protection and counternarcotics efforts .

while applauding thereduction in forces , some human rights groups say that other reforms required by the peace accords,such as adopting a military doctrine limiting the military to external defense , have not yet beenenacted .

they also express concern about continued human rights abuses , impunity for suchoffenses , and corruption among current and former military officials .

furthermore , the proposed u.n. commission for the investigation of illegal armed groups and clandestine security organizations ( ciciacs ) has still not been formed .

ciciacs , which wouldinvestigate and prosecute clandestine groups , through which many military officers allegedly engagein human rights violations , drug trafficking , and organized crime , was approved by the portilloadministration and has yet to be approved by the guatemalan congress .

some human rights groups argue that the u.s. ban on military aid should not be lifted until these and other reforms are carried out , and others not until reparations are made to civilian victimsof the armed conflict .

 ( 12 ) the guatemalan congressauthorized reparations to former paramilitaries ( pacs ) on august 19 , 2004 , despite opposition from human rights groups and others saying thecongress should not bow to threats of violence from the pacs if the legislation were not passed .

regarding respect for human rights , guatemala has made enormous strides , but significant problems remain .

the armed conflict is definitively ended , the state policy of human rights abuseshas been ended , and civilian control over military forces has increased .

on the other hand , securityforces reportedly continue to commit gross violations of human rights with impunity , and guatemalamust still overcome a deep ly embedded legacy of racism and social inequality .

the u.n. , the oas,and the united states have all expressed concern that human rights violations have increased overthe past several years , and that the guatemalan government has taken insufficient steps to curb themor to implement the peace accords .

in august 2004 , the u.n. office of the high commissioner forhuman rights opened an office in guatemala .

it succeeds the u.n. verification mission inguatemala , which withdrew in december 2004 , after verifying compliance with the peace accordsfor ten years .

in september 2004 , u.n. secretary general kofi annan said that guatemala's politicalprocess had matured to the point where the country should now be able to deal peacefully with allof its unresolved issues .

from1997 through 2003 , u.s. assistance to guatemala focused on support of the peace process .

u.s. aid to guatemala no longer includes a project specifically in support of the peace process andhas been cut by more than a third in the past three years , declining from about $60 million in fy2002to $38 million requested for fy2005 .

congress criticized the administration's strategy of reducingstaffing and funding for guatemala for fy2004 in its conference report for the fy2004 omnibusappropriations bill ( h.rept .

108-401 ) , saying it would "limit the ability of the united states to beresponsive at this critical juncture in guatemala's history. .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l.108-447 ) continues to limit imet for guatemala to expanded - imet , or training for civilians , military justice reform , and respect forhuman rights .

fmf would continue to be prohibited .

up to $3.227 million in prior year "militaryassistance program" funds available for guatemala may be used for non - lethal defense items if thesecretary of state certifies that certain military reforms have been enacted .

these would include thelimitation both "in doctrine and practice" of military activities to those permitted by the 1996 peaceaccords and cooperation with civilian authorities in the investigation and prosecution of militarypersonnel implicated in human rights violations and other criminal activities .

the guatemalangovernment would have to carry out other prerequisites for the release of military assistance funds,including working with the u.n. to establish ciciacs ; continuing to make the military budgetprocess transparent and accessible to civilian authorities and the public ; facilitating the promptestablishment of a u.n. high commissioner for human rights office in guatemala ; and increasingefforts to combat narcotics trafficking and organized crime .

the act also earmarks for guatemala$6 million in economic support funds and $1 million in andean counternarcotics initiative funds .

the bill also stipulates that child survival and health , and development assistance funding levelsshould not be less than that provided in fy2004 , earmarking $22.5 million for guatemala .

themanagers' statement commended the guatemalan ( and nicaraguan ) anti - corruption office andrecommended $250,000 for the office .

long - term political conflict in haiti escalated until armed rebellions around the country led to the departure of president jean - bertrand aristide on february 29 , 2004 .

an interim government,headed by prime minister gerard latortue , has taken over , but ongoing violent protests by bothsides continue .

security conditions are so tenuous that some observers are expressing concerns thata civil war will break out or that haiti will become a "criminal state. .

aristide went into exile insouth africa on may 31 , 2004 .

some supporters maintain that he is still the democratically electedpresident and that the united states forced him from office , a charge the bush administration denies .

former soldiers have demanded restoration of the haitian army , which had a long history of human rights abuses and was disbanded by aristide in 1995 .

they have seized control of towns,assumed security responsibilities alongside local police , or expelled police officers in various partsof the country .

supporters of aristide , demanding his return to office , began violent protests onseptember 30 , 2004 , the anniversary of the coup that removed aristide from office in 1991 .

thesehave left at least 55 dead , including police officers who were decapitated .

the bush administrationcondemned the violent "systematic campaign to destabilize the interim government and disrupt theefforts of the international community to assist the haitian people" it says is being carried out bypro - aristide armed gangs .

 ( 13 ) both sides areheavily armed .

the haitian national police areunderstaffed and under - equipped to maintain order .

at the end of its initial six - month authorization , the u.n. stabilization mission in haiti had 6,060 personnel , still less than the full 8,000 troops and civilian police it was authorized to have , andis finding it difficult to carry out its mandate to establish law and order .

two u.n. peacekeepers havebeen wounded .

in addition , the mission's efforts were diverted by the need to help protect anddeliver emergency assistance following haiti's natural disasters in spring and fall 2004 .

congressional concerns relating to haiti include support for strengthening the transition to democracy ; the cost and effectiveness of u.s. assistance ; protection of human rights andimprovement of security conditions ; combating narcotics trafficking ; limiting illegal haitianmigration ; and addressing humanitarian needs .

beginning in 2000 , in response to an unresolved elections dispute , the clinton administration redirected u.s. humanitarian assistance through non - governmental organizations , rather than throughthe haitian government .

the bush administration continued this policy throughout the aristideadministration .

aid began to decrease at the end of the clinton administration and continued to doso for the first two years of the bush administration .

the bush administration launched aninitiative in 2003 to prevent the transmission of the hiv / aids virus from mothers to children ; haitiwas one of 14 countries included in the program .

according to usaid , between four and sixthousand haitian children are born with the virus each year .

the administration is providing aid tothe interim latortue government , and will reportedly consider requests from that government forweapons purchases , which would mean lifting the arms embargo against haiti that has been in placesince a military coup ousted aristide in 1991 .

 ( 14 ) the fy2004 foreign aid appropriations legislation ( p.l .

108-199 , division d ) continues to allow haiti to purchase defense articles and services for the haitian coast guard , prohibits the useof funds to issue a visa to any alien involved in extrajudicial and political killings in haiti , allocates$5 million to the oas special mission in haiti and $19 million in refugee and entrant assistancefunds to communities with large concentrations of haitian ( and cuban ) refugees of varying ages forhealthcare and education .

before the current unrest , haiti was going to receive an estimated $55million in u.s. foreign aid in fy2004 .

additional humanitarian and disaster assistance was madeavailable following floods in february and hurricanes in fall 2004 , which left thousands dead orhomeless .

more costs were incurred with the u.s. military forces in haiti .

the bushadministration has requested an additional $120 million in assistance to haiti , for a total of about$230 million for fy2004-fy2005 .

according to usaid , the aid will be distributed as follows: $22million for job creation ; $45 million for government infrastructure support ; $26 million for improvedsecurity through improved administration of justice ; $122 million for humanitarian aid , includinghealth care , nutrition , and education ; and $15 million for elections support .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 ) contains several provisions regarding haiti .

the law ( 1 ) makes international military education and training funds and foreignmilitary financing available only through regular notification procedures ; ( 2 ) appropriates $20million for child survival and health programs , $25 million for development assistance , includingagriculture , environment , and basic education programs ; $40 million in esf for judicial reform,police training , and national elections ; "sufficient funds" for the oas to help haiti hold electionsin 2005 , and $2 million to zanmi lasante for maternal and child health activities ; ( 3 ) allows haitito purchase defense articles and services for its coast guard ; ( 4 ) notes disappointment on the haitiangovernment's role in the trial and acquittal of louis jodel chamblain , and the deteriorating securityhuman rights situation ; ( 5 ) requires a report within 90 days on a multi - year assistance strategy ; ( 6 ) and encourages the administration to help haitian and ngo officials to devise a reforestationstrategy and to provide a report on that strategy within 180 days .

the conference report was agreedto in both houses on november 20 , 2004 .

the earlier senate version had made several findingsregarding improving security in haiti , concluding that "the failure to establish a secure and stableenvironment and to conduct credible and inclusive elections will likely result in haiti's completetransition from a failed state to a criminal state. .

on july 20 , 2004 , international donors pledged more than $1 billion over the next two years to help haiti rebuild its infrastructure , strengthen institutions , and improve basic services .

the interimgovernment signed an agreement with the u.n. and the oas on august 23 to hold presidential,parliamentary , and local elections in 2005 .

the u.n. established a trust fund for the elections,started with $9 million in u.s. funds , which they hope will reach $41 million .

members of formerpresident aristide's fanmi lavalas party have threatened to boycott the elections and claim to facepolitical persecution by the interim government .

several were arrested in october ; reportedly thecharges have not been made public .

honduras faced enormous challenges in the areas of crime ( especially youth gangs known as maras ) and human rights and improving overall economic and living conditions in one of thehemisphere's poorest countries .

inaugurated to a four - year term in january 2002 , current presidentricardo maduro is the 6th elected president since the country's return to civilian rule .

the unitedstates has a close relationship with honduras , characterized by significant foreign assistance , animportant trade partnership , a military presence in the country , and cooperation on a range oftransnational issues , including anti - narcotics efforts and more recently the fight against terrorism .

negotiations for a u.s. - central america free trade agreement ( cafta ) with five centralamerican countries concluded in december 2003 , which was signed on may 28 , 2004 ; subsequentlya combined u.s. - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) wassigned on august 5 , 2004 .

the bush administration views dr - cafta as a means of solidifyingdemocracy in honduras and promoting safeguards for environmental protection and labor rights inthe country ; critics fear that a cafta without strong environmental and labor provisions would donothing to spur reforms in the country .

as noted above ( u.s. - latin american trade relations ) ,congress did not consider implementing legislation for the dr - cafta by the end of the 108thcongress .

congressional interest in mexico generally focuses on trade , migration , drug trafficking andhuman rights issues , but more attention to migration was sparked by president bush's january 7,2004 immigration proposal .

the president called for an overhaul of the immigration system topermit the matching of willing foreign workers with willing u.s. employers when no americans canbe found to fill the jobs .

under his proposal , temporary legal status would be available to newforeign workers who have work offers in the united states and to undocumented workers alreadyemployed in the united states for a term of three years that could be renewed but would end at somepoint .

president fox welcomed the proposal when he met president bush on several occasions inearly 2004 , and he called for renewed attention to immigration matters when he called tocongratulate president bush on his re - election and when they met at an apec summit in november2004 .

the proposal was in keeping with fox - bush pledges in 2001 , subsequently stalled as a resultof terrorism concerns , to work to achieve more orderly and humane migration flows between thecountries .

the president's proposal supplemented other congressional proposals with guest workerprovisions , including s. 1461 ( mccain ) / h.r .

2899 ( kolbe ) , s. 1387 ( cornyn ) , s. 2010 ( hagel and daschle ) , s. 2381 ( kennedy ) / h.r .

4262 ( gutierrez ) , and s. 1645 ( craig ) / h.r .

3142 ( cannon ) .

in a related development , congress passed the intelligence reform and terrorismprevention act of 2004 ( s. 2845 / p.l .

108-458 ) in december 2004 , with provisions toincrease immigration law enforcement personnel and to adopt more stringent border control andidentity document standards .

on trade issues , mexico is the united states' second most important trading partner , with two - way trade tripling since 1994 under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , butthere are various disputes between the countries .

mexico has complained , for example , that theunited states is still failing to grant mexican trucks access to u.s. highways under the terms of thenafta pact , and the u.s. supreme court ruled against non - governmental plaintiffs in june 2004that an environmental impact statement is not required .

however , the transportation - treasuryappropriations for fy2005 , incorporated into the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 ( h.r .

4818 / p.l .

108-447 ) , contains a provision that prohibits implementation of anadministration rule allowing mexican and canadian truck owners and operators an additional twoyears to bring their trucks into compliance with u.s. safety provisions .

the united states hascomplained about mexico's 20% tax on soft drinks made with high fructose corn syrup ( hfcs ) thathas had a devastating impact on hfcs and corn sales from the united states , and , in september2004 , the united states and mexico selected the panelists for a wto dispute settlement panel toconsider the u.s. claims against mexico's hfcs tax , although producer groups are still hoping toachieve a negotiated settlement .

mexico banned beef imports from the united states in december2003 following the discovery of one cow infected with mad cow disease in washington state .

inmarch and april 2004 , following the earlier announcement of new u.s. procedures that wouldexclude unhealthy cattle from the food chain , mexico announced that it was resuming beef trade withthe united states , but was retaining the ban on live cattle imports .

on drug trafficking issues , the state department's march 2004 international narcotics control strategy report praised mexico for the capture of major drug cartel figures , for the seizure of largequantities of illicit drugs , and for unprecedented levels of cooperation with the united states incounter - narcotics efforts .

the state department reported in april 2004 , however that marijuanacultivation increased 70% and opium poppy cultivation increased 78% in mexico in 2003 , in partbecause of unusually favorable growing conditions .

in recent law enforcement actions withu.s. - mexico cooperation , efrain perez and jorge arellano felix , two alleged lieutenants of thearellano - felix drug cartel , were arrested in mexico on june 3 , 2004 , and ramiro hernandez , oneof the alleged leaders of the gulf cartel was arrested in mexico on august 10 , 2004 .

on october 19,2004 , dea officials announced the dismantling through operation money clip of a major mexicanmoney - laundering and drug trafficking organization .

on human rights issues , president fox has freed several critics from jail , and he has designated special prosecutors to prosecute those responsible for human rights abuses in the 1970s and 1980s .

although a number of suspects have been arrested for past abuses , human rights groups argue thatthe special prosecutors have failed to produce significant results .

in late january 2004 , president foxnamed a special prosecutor to coordinate the federal and state efforts to find and punish thoseresponsible for a decade of slayings of over 300 women in ciudad juarez , across the border from elpaso , texas .

the state department's march 2004 report on human rights conditions in mexiconotes that the government's efforts to improve the human rights situation appeared to stall , with afew exceptions .

on july 24 , 2004 , a mexican judge refused a special prosecutor's request for anarrest warrant against former president luis echeverria for involvement in a 1971 massacre , ongrounds that the statute of limitations had expired .

on december 10 , 2004 , president fox,responding to an analysis by the u.n. high commission for human rights , presented a series ofproposed reforms to discourage torture and to strengthen the rights of defendants in mexico .

panama has made notable political and economic progress since the 1989 u.s. military intervention that ousted the military regime of general manual antonio noriega from power .

sincethen , the country has had four successive civilian governments , with the current administration ofpresident martin torrijos of the democratic revolutionary party ( prd ) elected in may 2004 andinaugurated on september 1 , 2004 .

in the may 2 , 2004 , election , torrijos - - the son of formerpopulist leader general omar torrijos - - won a decisive victory with 47.5% of the vote in afour - man race .

his electoral alliance also won a majority of seats in the unicameral legislativeassembly .

torrijos succeeded president mireya moscoso of the arnulfista party ( pa ) who beenelected in may 1999 .

the most significant challenges facing the new government include dealingwith the funding deficits of the country's social security fund ( caja de seguro social ) , developingplans for the expansion of the panama canal , and combating poverty and unemployment .

president moscoso had been elected as a populist , with pledges to end government corruption and reduce poverty , but her campaign pledges proved difficult to fulfill amid high - profile corruptionscandals and poor economic conditions over the past several years .

as a result , the president'spopularity fell considerably in her last year in office .

in one of her last presidential acts , presidentmoscoso pardoned four anti - castro activists who had been sentenced in april 2004 to prisons termsranging from seven to eight years for involvement in an alleged plot to kill fidel castro .

one of thefour , luis posada carriles , was allegedly involved in the 1976 bombing of a cuban airliner .

cubaresponded to the pardon by breaking diplomatic relations with panama .

president torrijos criticizedthe pardons and vowed to begin the process of reestablishing relations with cuba .

before the december 1989 u.s. intervention , the panamanian economy had been severely damaged by two years of u.s. economic sanctions and economic disruption caused by the politicalcrisis .

since 1990 , the economy has rebounded , registering real growth annually , although the levelof annual growth has varied a lot and slowed considerably in 2001 and 2002 .

although the economyhas improved considerably since 1990 , poverty has worsened over the past three years because ofslow economic growth .

income distribution remains highly skewed and high unemployment hasbeen a persistent problem .

the united states has close relations with panama , stemming in large part from the extensive history of linkages developed when the panama canal was under u.s. control and panama hostedmajor u.s. military installations .

the current u.s. relationship with panama is characterized byextensive cooperation on counternarcotics efforts as well as u.s. assistance to help panama assurethe security of the canal and the security of its border with colombia .

u.s. assistance to panamahas increased in the past several years with the country receiving assistance under the bushadministration's andean regional initiative to help colombia and its neighbors combat drugtrafficking .

u.s. - panamanian negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement began in late april 2004 .

to date , six negotiating rounds have been held , with the most recent concluding in mid - december 2004.reportedly significant progress has been made and negotiators hope to conclude an agreement inearly 2005 .

the most sensitive issues in the talks are differences over market access for certainagricultural products ; for panama , potatoes , onions , and vegetable oils are sensitive products , whilesugar remains a sensitive product for the united states .

 ( 15 ) the next round of talks will take place theweek of january 10 , 2005 , in washington .

with panama wanting more access to the u.s. agricultural market , but fearing the full opening of its agricultural market to u.s. products .

 ( 16 ) panamais seeking an fta as a means of increasing u.s.investment in the country , while the bush administration has stressed that an fta with panama , inaddition to enhancing trade , would further u.s. efforts to strengthen support for democracy and therule of law .

since panama has a service - based economy , it traditionally has imported much morethan it exports to the united states .

in 2003 , the u.s. trade surplus with panama was $1.5 billion,with panama exporting $301 million in goods and importing $1.8 billion in merchandise .

the stockof u.s. foreign investment in panama was estimated at $20 billion in 2002 , surpassing the combinedu.s .

foreign investment in the five other central american nations .

peru under president alejandro toledo has been characterized by two seemingly contradictorytrends: high economic growth and extremely low popularity of the president .

president toledo hasbeen widely criticized as having weak leadership skills , his image has been damaged by personalissues , and his administration tarnished by corruption charges .

toledo's public support has remainedlow for two years , and was at 11% in october 2004 .

many peruvians wonder whether he will be ableto survive politically until the end of his term in 2006 .

toledo denies allegations of corruption , andsaid he would open his bank accounts to public scrutiny .

although the scandals are limited incomparison to the widespread corruption of the earlier fujimori administration , they have proveddamaging to toledo , who came to office as a reformer .

toledo has presided over 37 consecutive months of economic growth , in contrast to four years of stagnation under his predecessors .

peru has been more stable economically than its neighbors .

under toledo , peru has exhibited one of the highest growth rates in latin america , with anincreased economic output of over 4% for 2003 and 2004 .

the public is impatient , however , for arapid improvement in its standard of living: 54% of the population lives in poverty , and 43% areunderemployed .

responding to nearly constant , widespread protests by teachers , farmers , and othersfor higher wages , toledo has declared several states of emergency .

opposition in congress - - where no party holds a majority - - has also limited the president's ability to push through economicreforms .

in july 2004 , toledo was further weakened by his party's loss of the leadership of theunicameral congress .

peru is a major illicit drug - producing and transit country .

according to the state department's march 2004 international narcotics report , peru made progress in the preceding year on manycomponents of the u.s. - peru counternarcotics program , including the reduction of coca cultivationby 15% , and the signing of an extradition treaty .

the united states and peru signed a five - yearcooperative agreement for 2002-2007 that links alternative development to coca eradication moredirectly than past programs have .

after thousands of coca growers protested against forced cocaeradication , the government and growers signed an agreement calling for the "gradual and fixed"reduction of coca leaf cultivation and restricted forced eradication .

peru is the second largestbeneficiary , after colombia , of the andean counterdrug initiative .

for fy2004 , peru was allocated$66 million for interdiction , $50 million for alternative development , and $1.7 million in foreignmilitary financing ( fmf ) .

for fy2005 , the administration requested $62 million for interdiction,$50 million for alternative development , and $1 million in fmf .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 ) contained several provisions regarding peru .

under economic support funds , $8 million was earmarked for peru and $3 millionfor the peru - ecuador peace initiative .

under the andean counterdrug initiative , peru was allocateda total of $116.3 million: $62 million for interdiction and $54.3 million for alternative development .

the act continues to prohibit resumption of a peruvian air interdiction program until enhancedsafeguards are in effect , with a 30-day notification to congress before resumption .

peru was allotted$1 million for foreign military financing funds .

support for democracy and human rights also is a u.s. concern in peru .

u.s. initiatives include the provision of $50 million over five years to support consolidating democratic reform , $3.5 millionto support the truth and reconciliation commission in investigating past human rights abuses , andthe continued declassification and delivery of state department documents requested by peru'scongress to support its investigation into corruption and abuses under the fujimori government .

president alberto fujimori fled the country in the wake of scandals in 2000 .

vladimiro montesinos,fujimori's spy chief who had ties to u.s. agencies , continues to face trials on dozens of chargesranging from influence peddling to directing a death squad .

the case of lori berenson , an american jailed in peru , has been an ongoing issue in bilateral relations .

berenson's 1996 conviction by a secret military tribunal was overturned , but she wasconvicted again by a civilian court on charges of collaboration with terrorists .

the inter - americancourt of human rights agreed in september 2002 to consider her case .

hearings were held in mayand june 2004 .

many observers were surprised by the court's decision , announced on december3 , 2004 , which upheld her conviction .

the ruling represents a reversal of a 2002 inter - americancommission on human rights decision , which found peru responsible for violations of the right tojudicial guarantees and recommended peru make amends for violations of berenson's human rights .

her 20-year sentence will end in 2015 .

the $1.6 billion camisea natural gas project in peru , supported by u.s. investors , generated controversy in the 108th congress .

critics , including some members of congress , some u.s.officials , and international environmental groups , expressed concern about its negative impact onindigenous societies and the environment , including a pristine tropical rain forest and peru's onlymarine sanctuary for endangered birds and mammals .

supporters of the project say it will contributegreatly to peru's economy , including some $5.5 billion in tax revenues , and $100 million annuallyto affected communities , and will reduce pollution in lima .

two texas energy companies areinvolved in the project: hunt oil company , and the kellogg brown and root unit of halliburtoncompany .

in august 2003 , the u.s. export - import bank board rejected a request for about $214million in loan guarantees for the project based on concerns for the environment and indigenouspeople in the amazon .

the inter - american development bank ( idb ) approved $135 million inloans to the project in september ; the united states abstained .

according to the u.s. agency forinternational development , u.s. environmental laws required the treasury department to vote noon the loans because the required environmental studies had not been completed .

in august 2004,gas from camisea reached lima .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act also included $8million to implement a regional strategy for conservation in the amazon basin countries , includingprograms to improve the capacity of indigenous communities and local law enforcement agenciesin indigenous reserves .

an oil - exporting south american nation with a population of about 25 million , venezuela has been wracked by several years of political turmoil under the rule of president hugo chavez , who wasfirst elected in 1998 .

under chavez , venezuela has undergone enormous political changes , with anew constitution in place , a new unicameral legislature , and even a new name for the country , thebolivarian republic of venezuela .

chavez was re - elected president with a new six - year term in july2000 under the new constitution .

although president chavez remained widely popular untilmid - 2001 , his popularity has eroded considerably after that amid concerns that he was imposing aleftist agenda on the country and that his government was ineffective in improving living conditions .

in april 2002 , massive opposition protests and pressure by the military led to the ouster of chavezfrom power for a brief period .

however , the military ultimately restored him to power .

politicalopposition to chavez's rule has continued since his return to office .

from early december 2002until early february 2003 , the opposition orchestrated a general strike that severely curtailedvenezuela's oil exports and disrupted the economy but was unsuccessful in getting president chavezto agree to an early non - binding referendum on his rule or new elections .

after months of negotiations facilitated by the organization of american states ( oas ) and the carter center , the government of hugo chavez and the political opposition signed an agreement inmay 2003 that set forth mechanisms to resolve the political crisis .

this included holding apresidential recall referendum pursuant to constitutional provisions , which ultimately was held onaugust 15 , 2004 .

leading up to the referendum , public opinion polls conducted by various surveyfirms yielded significantly different results , with some favoring the opposition and some favoringchavez , but by early august 2004 a number of polls showed chavez with an advantage .

in the end,chavez convincingly won the overall vote by a margin of 59.3% to 40.7% .

the opposition claimedfraud and refused to accept the outcome , but both the oas and carter center concluded that the voteresults were accurate and conducted an additional audit of the vote to confirm the results .

the united states has traditionally had close relations with venezuela , but there has been friction in relations with the chavez government .

the bush administration expressed strong supportfor the work of the oas in resolving the crisis , welcomed the may 2003 political accord , andsupported its implementation .

after the recall referendum , the administration congratulated thevenezuelan people for their commitment to democracy and commended the work of the oas andcarter center .

at the same time , u.s. officials stressed the importance of reconciliation on the partof the government and the opposition in order to resolve their political differences peacefully .

adilemma for u.s. policymakers has been how to press the chavez government to adhere todemocratic principles without taking sides in venezuela's polarized political conflict .

sincevenezuela is a major supplier of foreign oil to the united states ( the fourth major foreign supplierin 2003 , after saudi arabia , canada , and mexico ) , a key u.s. interest has been ensuring thecontinued flow of oil exports at a reasonable and stable price .

