on july 12 , 2001 , president bush announced a medicare - endorsed prescription drug discount card program tohelp medicare beneficiaries reduce theirout - of - pocket drug costs .

the president stated that the discount card program was an interim measure that wouldprecede broader medicare reform measures,including a prescription drug benefit for seniors .

medicare does not cover most outpatient prescription drugs .

mostseniors have some form of supplementaryhealth insurance to cover expenses not met by medicare ; however , many of these plans do not offer drug coverageor offer limited protection for drug expenses .

 ( 1 ) the president's card program is controversial and immediately prompted criticism from the retail pharmacy industry , from some members of congress , and fromsome consumer groups .

critics of the plan have argued that the plan would not bring additional benefits for seniorsand that retail pharmacies would bear theburden of prescription drug cost reductions for seniors .

shortly after the card initiative was announced in 2001,pharmacy groups successfully filed a lawsuitagainst cms , asking a federal court to issue an injunction that would halt the card program on the grounds that theadministration had no statutory authority toestablish the program .

the administration proceeded with plans to modify the program and used a formalrulemaking process for a new proposal .

on march 6,2002 , cms issued a proposed rule for the card program with a 60-day comment period .

on august 30 , 2002 , cmsissued the final rule .

although pharmaciescontinued to assert that the administration lacked the authority to implement the initiative , cms proceeded withthe program .

on january 8 , 2003 , cms formallysolicited applications from parties interested in offering medicare prescription drug discount cards .

applicationswere due on march 7 , 2003 .

on january 29 , 2003 , a federal district court judge ruled against the medicare discount card initiative , stating that the administration did not have the statutoryauthority to implement the program .

cms withdrew its solicitation for applications and issued a statement sayingthat cms is evaluating the court decision andthe various options cms has , including a likely appeal .

 ( 2 ) the bushadministration has stated that it would include prescription drug coverage in its plan to revisemedicare , but it is unclear whether the prescription drug discount card would be included in the administration'sproposal .

in the 108th congress , legislation hasbeen introduced ( h.r .

513 ) to authorize the secretary of health and human services to endorse prescriptiondrug discount cards for use by medicarebeneficiaries .

currently , many private companies and membership organizations offer prescription discount cards for seniors .

the medicare discount card program would allowprivate companies to develop discount card plans for beneficiaries and apply for medicare endorsement of theirplans .

the president's proposed program would,in most respects , be similar to these other plans .

the major difference is that the discount cards offered under thepresident's plan would be medicare - endorsedand would provide consumers with comparative information on the formularies and prices offered within the cardprogram .

another key difference is thatbeneficiaries could have only one medicare - endorsed card plan .

this report will discuss prescription drug coverage gaps for seniors , private sector discount card programs , the discount card program the president originallyproposed in july , and the key differences in the final regulation issued in august 2002 .

implementation issues ofthe program , as well as asserted benefits andlimitations , will also be explored .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

in 1998 , an estimated 10 million elderly people , or 27% of medicare beneficiaries , did not have any form ofprescription drug coverage .

the remaining 28 millionmedicare beneficiaries had some form of drug coverage for at least part of the year .

however , coverage is notalways stable and access to drug benefits for seniorsis declining .

 ( 3 ) medicare beneficiaries are among the highest users ofprescription drugs .

they represent 14% of the total u.s. population , and account for 43% ofthe nation's total drug expenditures .

 ( 4 ) with national spending on prescriptiondrugs rising , medicare beneficiaries face increasing challenges in being able to payfor their prescription drug needs .

although most medicare beneficiaries have some form of prescription drug coverage , they still pay a portion of their total drug expenses out of pocket .

in 1998,beneficiaries with coverage paid approximately 33% of their total drug expenses out of pocket .

averageout - of - pocket drug expenditures for beneficiaries withcoverage was $325 in 1998 , while expenditures for those without coverage was $546 .

for those in poor health , theout - of - pocket expenditures for uncoveredbeneficiaries averaged $820 .

according to the 1998 medicare current beneficiary survey ( mcbs ) , coveredbeneficiaries paid a larger percentage of their totaldrug costs out of pocket in 1998 than in 1997 .

between 1997 and 1998 , out - of - pocket expenditures for coveredbeneficiaries increased by almost 18 percent,while beneficiaries with no coverage had no change in expenses .

 ( 5 ) .

prescription drug discount cards are widely available through some private companies and membershiporganizations , such as aarp ( formerly the americanassociation of retired persons ) .

these companies have set up buying clubs that offer savings on prescription drugsand other medical services to attractconsumers looking for a better price on these items .

the companies vary from internet mail order service companiesto pharmacy benefit managers ( pbms ) thatoffer discount card services , such as merck - medco and the aarp member choice program ( provided through theunited health group incorporated , with mailorder prescriptions filled by express scripts ) .

card plans usually require an annual membership fee that can rangefrom $15 to $50 per year and offer discountcards that are accepted by a network of drugstores and / or doctors .

 ( 6 ) the plansoffer a discount to card holders on their prescription drug purchases at retailpharmacies .

since the announcement of president bush's proposal , several pharmaceutical companies formed theirown senior discount card plans in early 2002 .

 ( some of these plans are described in the section below titled senior discount card plans ) .

the final regulation for the medicare - endorsed prescription drug initiative was announced by the centers formedicare and medicaid services ( cms ) on august30 , 2002 and published in the federal register on september 4 , 2002 .

 ( 17 ) it is not known when or if the program will be implemented because a federal districtcourt ruled on january 29 , 2003 that the administration did not have the authority to implement the card initiative .

the administration has said it is likely toappeal the court's decision .

if the administration decides to appeal the case , the outcome of the appeal woulddetermine whether or not the initiative will beimplemented .

the administration may also move forward with the initiative if congress grants legal authority tohhs to implement the program .

on january 31,2003 , representative mark foley introduced a bill ( h.r .

513 ) in the house to authorize hhs to endorseprescription drug discount cards for use bymedicare beneficiaries .

this section describes general features of the drug card initiative , a description of how theprogram would be administered , details of thefinal rule establishing the initiative , and pharmacy participation in the card programs .

the potential savings provided by the program are expected to come from the market leverage that card sponsorsobtain from the formulary and pharmacynetwork , and also from the "education attributes" of the program .

 ( 24 ) theeducational aspect , consisting of the informational material on drug prices , formularycontent , and the pharmacy network offered by the card program , is intended to improve the ability of consumers tocomparison shop and choose the plan thatmeets their needs at the lowest cost .

cms has estimated that seniors would be able to obtain a 10% to 13% , and possibly up to a 15% , discount on prescription drug retail purchases through themedicare - endorsed card program .

a fact sheet issued by cms states that it projects that the first year of the programwould provide medicare beneficiariesbetween $1.2 and $1.6 billion savings on their prescription drug purchases .

some observers have commented that the administration's proposed discount program would probably provide seniors with at least some savings on their overallprescription drug bill .

questions have been raised about the actual size of the discounts that would be available .

specific information is not available on thediscount amounts and formularies the potential card sponsors would offer .

the actual size of retail discounts maynot be known until after the first year ofprogram operation .

while it is possible to compare prices available through existing discount card programs tothose at individual retail pharmacies or internetpharmacies , one of the constraining factors in conducting this kind of analysis is the lack of widely available dataon retail drug prices .

the u.s. general accounting office ( gao ) completed a study in 2002 on prescription drug prices for seniors offered by drug discount card programs , localpharmacies , or over the internet .

 ( 25 ) the study included surveys on pricesavailable from five companies that administer large drug discount card programs , fiveinternet pharmacies , and several retail pharmacies in four different geographic areas ( washington , d.c. , chicago,seattle , and rural georgia ) .

prices listed in thestudy show that the discounts on brand name drugs offered by the card programs ranged from 6% to 32% on theaverage retail pharmacy prices .

the average sizeof the discount on all drugs was about 12% .

the internet pharmacy prices on the gao survey varied .

in some casesthe internet prices were up to 19% higherthan those available by discount card programs , while for other drugs , the prices were up to 12% lower .

the internetpharmacy prices were consistently lowerthan retail pharmacy prices .

the retail pharmacy prices obtained by gao demonstrated that prices may varyconsiderably in different geographic regions .

forexample , the average price for a 30-day supply of 10-mg tablets of lipitor was 13% higher in rural georgia thanin seattle , washington .

 ( 26 ) critics of president bush's program have disputed past statements made by the administration of potential discounts of up to 25% .

more recent announcementsby cms have stated that discounts would probably be within the range of 10% to13% , and possibly up to 15% .

 ( 27 ) retail pharmacy groups , consumer groups , andsome members of congress believe that the program is not likely to produce significant savings for seniors .

somemembers of congress argue that , based ontheir interpretation of data collected by gao , existing discount card programs do not work and provide no morethan 10% savings on retail prices .

 ( 28 ) they havestated that the bush proposal would not offer greater discounts for seniors than those already available in the market .

in a letter to the u.s. department of healthand human services ( hhs ) , six members of congress state that a medicare discount card program is unlikely toprovide significant discounts on brand namedrugs for seniors .

they cite the price study by gao and say that the study indicates that seniors already have accessto drug discount cards and that theseprograms offer little savings for seniors for commonly used brand name drugs .

they believe that the findings ofthe gao price study indicate that unless theproposed medicare discount card program requires a significant discount from the drug manufacturers that is passedon to seniors , the program would not provideadditional benefits for seniors .

 ( 29 ) .

president bush has emphasized that the discount card program would not be a substitute for a new prescriptiondrug benefit provision under medicare .

thediscount program was intended to be an interim solution that would provide some immediate cost relief for seniorswhile other options were under consideration .

cms highlighted several key elements that the administration believes would make the medicare - endorsed cards better than the current discount cards currentlyavailable in the market .

 ( 30 ) the first is that the exclusive enrollment feature,combined with the formulary , pharmacy network , and informational attributes of theprograms , would provide the card sponsors and their members with the necessary "market clout" to obtain largerrebates from pharmaceutical manufacturers andpass the rebate to the consumer .

 ( 31 ) cms has said that the market has shown that discount cards can obtain manufacturer rebates , but that these programs do not always pass the rebate back to theconsumer .

the administration believes that because the medicare - endorsed card initiative would require that cardsponsors pass the rebate to the pharmacy andthe consumer , medicare beneficiaries could obtain larger discounts than those in currently available card programs .

because the membership in themedicare - endorsed programs would consist entirely of seniors and some disabled persons , it seems likely that themedicare card program could provide cardsponsors with some market leverage in negotiating discounts with the drug manufacturers on the most commonlyprescribed senior drugs .

however , noinformation is publicly available on the amount of the proposed discounts or rebates , nor on the amount of therebates that would be passed on to medicarebeneficiaries .

second , the administration believes that the comparative price information feature of the medicare - endorsed card proposal would benefit seniors in that theywould have access to comparative price , formulary , and pharmacy network information on the various cardprograms and choose the best plan for their needs .

discount program participants would be able to switch from one card program to another at 6-month intervals,although this could result in additional one - timeper plan enrollment fees of up to $25 .

the informational feature is potentially one of the most valuable features of the president's discount program , because it would provide a single source ofinformation on drug prices , formularies , and pharmacy networks of all medicare - endorsed discount card programs .

some existing card programs individuallyprovide information on prices and formularies , but information on competing programs is not available in one easilyaccessible location .

for the many seniorswho do not have access to a computer or the internet , however , published information would continue to be the mostimportant vehicle for ensuring that programparticipants realize the informational benefits of the program .

the success of this aspect of the program woulddepend on the final details of the individual cardprograms and how well the companies manage the consortium and provide customer service for easy access to priceand pharmacy network information .

the publication of drug price information could eventually put pressure on pharmaceutical manufacturers , pharmacies and / or card sponsors to match lower pricesoffered by competitors .

although this could result in additional savings for seniors , the retail pharmacy industrybelieves that pharmacies would face reducedprofit margins if they were pressured to reduce prices without a change in what they pay the wholesalers or drugmanufacturers for the drugs , while the latter twogroups would benefit at the pharmacists' expense .

although the final rule requires that a portion of thepharmaceutical rebates or discounts be provided tobeneficiaries either directly or indirectly through pharmacies , the pharmacies argue that the rule does not specifythe amount of the discount that should go topharmacies .

another factor to consider is whether the card sponsor plans under the proposed medicare program include drug utilization review ( dur ) to determine whetherpatients are using therapeutically equivalent drugs .

patients sometimes use drugs prescribed by different doctorsto treat the same condition and are not aware ofit .

dur may prevent the duplicative use of drugs that fall within the same therapeutic category , thereby enhancingpatient safety while lowering prescription drugcosts .

dur can also identify harmful drug interactions that may occur when a patient with more than one medicalcondition treats those conditions with drugsthat , when taken together , are harmful .

the third item mentioned by cms is that the medicare drug card initiative would require card sponsors to offer broad access to retail pharmacies , and only offermail - order services as an option .

some existing drug card programs offer only mail - order services , and do notinclude a retail pharmacy network in their plan .

the medicare initiative would not endorse these types of plans .

pharmacy associations assert that , while mail - ordercard programs may provide lower prescriptiondrugs prices , these programs do not provide seniors with the personal help they may need from communitypharmacists .

pharmacy associations have also arguedthat the medicare drug card initiative could be an incentive for medicare beneficiaries to shift their prescription drugpurchases from retail pharmacies tomail - order services , and that this would come at a cost to retail pharmacies .

cms has stated that the networkpharmacy requirement in the medicare drug cardproposal would ensure that medicare beneficiaries continue to purchase their drugs from retail pharmacies .

the final point mentioned by cms is that medicare - endorsed card sponsors would be expected to provide clearand reliable educational information services tomedicare beneficiaries such as pharmacy counseling , generic substitution , and dur programs to monitor andprevent drug - drug interactions .

cms believes thatthis feature would assist seniors and people with disabilities select a quality discount card program .

 ( 32 ) as mentioned earlier , the informational aspects of themedicare initiative could be valuable in helping seniors lower their drug costs by choosing the card program mostappropriate for their needs .

much , however,would depend on the quality of service that card sponsors provide .

because the drug discount card initiative isintended only for medicare beneficiaries , featuresof the program such as customer service , marketing material , and included drugs would be geared toward medicarebeneficiaries .

the card program , it is argued,could result in more coordination among companies offering card discount programs and cms , which couldimprove the service and information seniors receivewhen shopping for their prescription drugs .

a consortium of card sponsors could lead to an improvement ofmarketing materials and drug price information forseniors .

however , because details of the card programs that would be proposed are not known at this time , it isdifficult to assess how much of an improvementthere would be over existing drug card programs .

the proposal for a medicare discount card program was presented as an interim attempt to meet an immediateneed .

on several occasions , the congress hasconsidered providing coverage for at least a portion of beneficiaries' drug costs .

the issue received renewedattention in the 106th and 107th congress .

however,there was no consensus on how the coverage should be structured .

in the 108th congress,representative mark foley introduced a bill ( h.r .

513 ) inthe house on january 31 , 2003 to authorize the secretary of hhs to endorse prescription drug discount cards foruse by medicare beneficiaries .

the bill wouldgive the administration legal authority to implement the medicare drug discount card initiative .

while it may not be essential that a senior drug benefit be administered through a pharmacy benefit manager ( pbm ) , it seems clear that pbms now play a majorrole in u.s. healthcare delivery .

according to a report prepared by pricewaterhousecoopers llp for the health carefinancing administration , "pbms managethe drug benefits of approximately 70% of the united states , including approximately 65% of our country'sseniors. .

 ( 46 ) in the debate over the administration'sdrug discount card plan , the central role of pbms has clearly emerged as an issue , especially for the retail pharmacysector .

the issues that retail pharmacies haveraised with pbms go well beyond president bush's medicare discount card proposal .

in fact , the 2001 drug topics'redbook characterized the relationship asfollows: ( 47 ) for congressional critics , discount cards are not seen as a solution to high costs of prescription drugs foruninsured or partially insured seniors .

they point to theexistence of numerous discount programs and argue that even with plans that possibly deliver a 10% to 25%discount , the problem of high drug prices remains aserious one .

the prices of pharmaceutical products charged by pharmaceutical manufacturers have been identifiedby some members of congress as a specialproblem requiring congressional action .

the complexity of drug pricing procedures makes it difficult to understandhow the system operates , let alone devisepolicies that make it possible to deliver prescription drugs to seniors at prices comparable to those paid by clientsof third - party purchasers ( pbms ) and theirsponsors ( employers , insurers , hmos , and drug discount card sponsors ) .

if the president's revised discount programproposal manages to resolve the issues raisedby the pharmacy industry , members of congress may still raise concerns about whether seniors will get prescriptionmedications at affordable prices .

discount drug programs may provide additional discounts to seniors , although it is possible that many of the covered drugs would still remain expensive for low - and middle - income seniors who do not have health insurance that covers prescription drugs .

nevertheless , thereis anecdotal evidence that suggests thatconsumers who are willing to comparison shop on the internet for prescription drugs can , in some cases , match orbeat discount card prices .

the difficulty that theadministration and congress face in developing a senior drug benefit will be to develop a policy that deliversnecessary medications to seniors , while providingpharmaceutical manufacturers , wholesalers , pbms , and pharmacists with incentives to continue to participate inthe marketplace .

in summary , a medicare - endorsed discount card program might provide some savings on prescription drugs for seniors , although the net overall effects are notclear because of the lack of details on the individual card programs .

the broad effect on the senior population woulddepend on the size of the discounts and theformularies that the plans offer .

the size of the discounts would depend on whether the card program would providesufficient market leverage for card sponsorsto negotiate higher manufacturer rebates from drug manufacturers .

seniors could benefit from certain features ofthe discount card program , such as more accessto information on drug prices and formularies offered by the different plans .

this information could enhanceseniors' abilities to comparison shop and savemoney by choosing the plan that would best fit their needs .

president bush's revised proposal could offer seniorssome savings on medications , depending on thefinal details of the various card plans .

as noted earlier in this report , critics of the bush plan believe that themedicare - endorsed discount cards would not bringadditional benefits for seniors .

they have argued that the benefit is very minimal and duplicates a service ( discountcards ) that the marketplace alreadyprovides .

 ( 48 ) the two most important concerns for pharmacists are related to ( 1 ) who bears the burden of the cost for the medicare - endorsed discount card proposal and ( 2 ) thefear that card sponsors would structure their programs in such a way that seniors are induced to switch from theirlocal pharmacies to mail order pharmacies fortheir prescription drug purchases .

the overall effect on pharmacies would likely depend on the potential agreementsthey reach with the card sponsors andwhether the card sponsors pass a portion of the drug manufacturer rebates to the pharmacies .

seniors are equally concerned that discounts are passed all the way through the system to the ultimate intended beneficiaries .

the effect on pharmacies would alsodepend on the response of seniors to the card program and whether they would continue shopping at retailpharmacies for their prescription drug purchases or usemore mail - order options to save money .

while seniors and others who must get a prescription filled quickly willcontinue to patronize their local pharmacies,deeper discounting by pbm - owned or operated mail order pharmacies could lead to behavioral changes among thoseseniors who have an ongoing need forprescription drugs to treat chronic conditions .

