ensuring the security of the nation's drinking water supplies poses a substantial challenge , partly because the number of water systems is very large and also because the responsibility for protecting drinking water safety is shared among federal , state and local governments , and public and privately owned utilities .

nationwide , there are some 155,000 public water systems , and these systems range greatly in size , serving from as few as 25 persons to more than 1 million persons .

roughly 52,000 of all public water systems are community water systems ( cwss ) that serve the same residences year - round .

these 52,000 systems provide water to approximately 292 million people .

some 400 community systems serve more than 100,000 people and provide water to nearly half of the total population served .

because water supplies support many uses ( from drinking water to fire suppression ) , their disruption could have significant impacts .

a 1996 executive order on critical infrastructure protection ( e.o .

13010 ) , included water supply systems as one of eight national infrastructures vital to the security of the united states .

in 1997 , the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection , created by the executive order , issued a report on the vulnerabilities of these infrastructure sectors and strategies for protecting them .

the commission identified three attributes crucial to water supply users: water must be available on demand , it must be delivered at sufficient pressure , and it must be safe for use .

actions affecting any of these factors could be debilitating for the infrastructure and also for the communities that depend on it .

major threats to water supplies include physical destruction of facilities or distribution systems , biological or chemical contamination of supplies , and cyber attacks .

the 1997 commission found that drinking water systems had inadequate protection against the threat of chemical or biological contamination , and that technology was insufficient to allow detection , identification , measurement , and treatment of highly toxic , waterborne contaminants .

water utilities were also found to be vulnerable to cyber attacks as they rely increasingly on computers to control water flow and pressure and treatment processes .

information sharing was identified as the most immediate need , although warning and analytical capabilities and research and development all were found to be insufficient .

presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 63 on critical infrastructure protection was issued in 1988 in response to these findings and related developments .

under this directive , a public / private partnership was established to put in place prevention , response , and recovery measures to ensure the security of the nation's critical infrastructures against criminal or terrorist attacks .

pdd - 63 designated the environmental protection agency ( epa ) as the lead federal agency for the water supply sector , and epa appointed the association of metropolitan water agencies ( amwa ) to coordinate the water sector .

however , before september 11 , 2001 , the main focus of pdd - 63 efforts for all critical infrastructure sectors was on cyber security .

subsequently , the breadth and depth of efforts to protect the nation's critical infrastructures have expanded significantly .

in 2003 , president bush issued homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hpsd - 7 ) , which affirmed epa as the lead federal agency for coordinating the protection of the nation's critical infrastructure for the water sector .

under this directive , epa is responsible for developing and providing tools and training on improving security to roughly 52,000 community water systems and 16,000 municipal wastewater treatment facilities .

to carry out its water sector responsibilities , epa established a water security division within the office of ground water and drinking water .

this division works with drinking water and wastewater utilities , states , tribes , and other stakeholders to improve the security of these utilities and improve their ability to respond to security threats and breaches .

among its responsibilities and activities , the water security division provides security and antiterrorism - related technical assistance and training to the water sector .

although the water security division was established in 2003 , the office of water had provided assistance to its stakeholders for a number of years .

security - related activities undertaken by epa and the water sector have fallen into five general categories , including ( 1 ) establishing an information center for drinking water alerts or incidents , ( 2 ) developing vulnerability assessment tools , ( 3 ) identifying actions to minimize vulnerabilities , ( 4 ) revising emergency operations plans , and ( 5 ) supporting research on biological and chemical contaminants considered to be potential weapons of mass destruction .

several key government and private sector efforts are reviewed below .

since 2001 , congress has provided funds annually to epa to improve the security of public water supplies .

the emergency supplemental appropriations act for fy2002 ( p.l .

107-117 ) provided epa with $175.6 million for emergency expenses to respond to the september 11 attacks and to support counterterrorism activities .

the conference report , h.rept .

107-350 , specified that approximately $90 million was for improving security at epa laboratories , performing drinking water vulnerability assessments , and anthrax decontamination activities .

another $5 million was for state grants for counterterrorism coordinators to work with epa and water utilities in assessing drinking water safety .

congress has continued to provide roughly $5 million for these state grants each year .

during fy2002 , epa allocated roughly $89 million of the amount provided in the emergency supplemental appropriation to support security enhancements at the nation's drinking water systems .

of this amount , epa targeted approximately $80 million to ( 1 ) provide grants to the largest drinking water systems to conduct vulnerability assessments and enhance emergency response plans ; ( 2 ) provide technical assistance on vulnerability assessments and emergency response plans to small and medium drinking water systems ; and ( 3 ) refine security - related detection , monitoring , and treatment tools .

another $4 million was used to accelerate the development and testing of counterterrorism tools , support vulnerability assessment training , provide technical assistance , and conduct and implement research on redesign and detection for collection and treatment systems .

epa also used funds to develop tools and provide training for medium and small drinking water systems to assess vulnerabilities and develop emergency response plans .

in addition , epa allocated $5 million to the states to support homeland security coordination work involving epa and drinking water utilities .

epa awarded approximately $51 million in water security grants to the community water systems that serve more than 100,000 individuals .

grants were made to roughly 400 publicly and privately owned community water systems for as much as $115,000 per grant .

utilities were able to use their grants to develop vulnerability assessments , emergency response plans , and security enhancement plans and designs .

utilities also could use grant funds for in - house or contractor support ; however , funds could not be used for physical improvements .

although these grants were made only to large systems , epa has worked with states and utilities to help meet the security needs of small and medium - sized drinking water systems .

epa provided roughly $20 million of fy2002 supplemental funds directly to the states for technical assistance and training for drinking water systems serving fewer than 100,000 people .

for fy2003 , epa requested $16.9 million to assist small and medium - sized systems with vulnerability assessments and emergency response plans , and $5 million in grants to states to support homeland security coordination .

the consolidated appropriations resolution for fy2003 ( p.l .

108-7 ) , provided this amount .

it also contained several drinking water security earmarks , including $2 million for the national rural water association to help small water systems conduct vulnerability assessments and $1 million for the american water works association for water security training activities .

as requested for fy2004 , epa received approximately $32 million for critical water infrastructure protection , including $5 million for state homeland security grants in p.l .

108-199 .

this funding supported states' efforts to work with water and wastewater systems to develop and enhance emergency operations plans ; conduct training in the implementation of remedial plans in small systems ; and develop detection , monitoring and treatment technology to enhance water security .

epa used funds to assist the nearly 8,000 community water systems that serve water to populations between 3,300 and 100,000 and are subject to the bioterrorism act .

p.l .

108-199 also included $2 million for the waterisac to gather , analyze , and disseminate sensitive security information to water and wastewater systems .

for fy2005 , epa requested $5 million for state water security grants and $6.1 million for other critical infrastructure protection efforts .

epa's budget justification explained that the $21.3 million reduction reflected a shift in priorities from assistance and training on vulnerability assessments .

 ( under the bioterrorism act , community water systems were required to complete vulnerability assessments by june 30 , 2004. ) .

congress provided the requested amount in the consolidated appropriations act , fy2005 ( p.l .

108-447 ) .

as in fy2004 , the appropriated amount included $2 million for the waterisac .

in the fy2006 budget request , the president again requested $5 million for state water security grants .

the president also requested $44 million to launch the water sentinel initiative , a demonstration project to develop a model contamination warning system , now called the water security initiative ( wsi ) .

epa initiated this project to meet agency responsibilities under homeland security presidential directive ( hspd ) 9 , which directed epa to develop a surveillance and monitoring program to provide early detection in the event of a terrorist attack contaminating water .

the goal of the initiative is to establish pilot early warning systems through intensive water monitoring and surveillance for certain chemical and biological contaminants in five cities .

further responding to hspd - 9 , epa proposed to form a laboratory network to support the monitoring and response requirements of the surveillance program .

in epa's fy2006 appropriations act ( p.l .

109-54 ) , congress provided $8.1 million ( after rescissions ) of the $44 million requested for the wsi .

in recommending a large reduction , the house appropriations committee recommended that epa develop clear goals for the initiative , seek the advice of the science advisory board , and justify the request more clearly in the budget request for fy2007 .

congress also provided $5 million ( $4.93 million after rescissions ) for state water security grants .

the fy2007 budget request included $4.95 million for state water security grants .

additionally , the request again included a significant amount , $41.7 million ( $33.6 million more than congress provided for fy2006 ) , for the wsi .

in its justification for the request , the agency noted that the program is an essential component of its water security activities , and explained that its purpose is to demonstrate an effective contamination warning system that could be used by drinking water utilities of various sizes .

the epa fy2007 funding bill , h.r .

5386 , as passed by the house , would have provided $16.7 million ( or $25 million less than requested ) for the wsi .

the senate appropriations committee ( s.rept .

109-275 ) recommended $18.13 million , which was $23.6 million less than requested but $10 million above the fy2006 enacted level .

the house appropriations committee report for h.r .

5386 ( h.rept .

109-465 ) stated that the committee's recommended funding level for the initiative included money for one additional wsi pilot project , which should be located in a metropolitan area that is highly vulnerable from a homeland security threat perspective .

congress did not complete action on this appropriations bill .

the final continuing appropriations resolution for fy2007 ( p.l .

110-5 , h.j.res .

20 ) generally funded epa at the fy2006 level , but epa used its discretion and allocated $27 million for the wsi .

for fy2008 , epa requested $25.6 million to support its water sector responsibilities to protect critical water infrastructure , including $21.88 million for the wsi .

the agency proposed to use the requested funds to support the existing pilot and to establish additional pilots , with a goal of having all planned pilots under way by 2008 .

epa also proposed to continue providing special assistance to high - priority water systems under the water alliance for threat reduction ( watr ) program .

the goal of this assistance is to ensure that water utilities have tools and information to prevent , detect , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks , other intentional acts , and natural disasters .

the request again included $4.95 million for state water security grants .

the committee report accompanying the house - passed epa appropriations bill , h.r .

2643 ( h.rept .

110-187 , p. 98 ) , recommended reducing the amount requested for the wsi by $3.88 million .

the house appropriations committee explained that late action on the 2007 budget had delayed the obligation of funds for pilot projects until fy2008 .

in the senate , the appropriations committee recommended a $10 million decrease for the initiative ( s. 1696 , s.rept .

110-91 , p. 52 ) , also noting that epa plans to carry forward a large balance of unobligated funds .

both the house and senate committees urged epa to be prepared to report to the committees on the status and accomplishments of the wsi pilot projects .

after applying the 1.56% rescission , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) provided $11.7 million for the wsi and $4.87 million for state grants .

for fy2009 , epa requested $21.4 million for the wsi , $1.3 million for the water alliance for threat reduction , and $4.9 million for state grants .

epa proposed to use wsi funds to support two new surveillance and monitoring pilots , bringing the total number of pilot projects to five .

in its budget justification , the agency explained that five projects would be sufficient to generate the range of data needed for the program to have broad application to a variety of utilities in high - risk cities nationwide .

additionally , epa planned to continue working with sector partners to establish the water laboratory alliance ( wla ) .

the wla is intended to provide a network of laboratories that would be able to help confirm and speed responses to intentional contamination events .

epa further proposed to use fy2009 funds to continue to support research to develop methods to detect chemical and biological contaminants and to evaluate event detection software ; the agency estimated that 90% of high - concern contaminants lack validated analytical methods .

again , congress did not pass specific epa appropriations , and the 2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) generally funded epa programs at fy2008 levels .

epa's fy2010 budget request proposed to eliminate the state homeland security grants for drinking water and wastewater systems .

the agency noted that actions required by the 2002 bioterrorism act ( i.e. , preparation of vulnerability assessments and emergency response plans ) have been completed , and demand for these funds had declined .

within the science and technology account , epa requested $22.4 million to complete funding for cooperative agreements supporting the fourth and fifth pilots in the wsi pilot program and to provide technical assistance to the other pilot projects .

epa also requested $1.3 million for the water alliance for threat reduction ( watr ) program to support additional training sessions for water systems that serve more than 100,000 people .

the request further proposed to support research evaluating chemical , biological , and radiological ( cbr ) analytical methods and detection software , and assist with outreach efforts to transfer knowledge gained from the pilot projects to the water sector .

the conference agreement for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-88 , h.rept .

111-316 ) , specifies that the law fully funds the remaining two wsi pilot projects .

the wsi received $18.6 million for fy2010 .

for fy 2011 , the president requested $11.6 million for the water security initiatives discussed above , including $10.4 million for the wsi and $1.2 million for watr .

the agency noted that the proposed $7 million reduction reflects completion of funding for establishing five full - scale contamination warning system demonstration pilots .

the requested fy2011 funding is primarily being used for wsi outreach , support , and evaluation activities .

the continuing appropriations and surface transportation extensions act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) , continues funding for epa programs at fy2010 levels through march 4 , 2011 .

thus far , congress has not provided funding in epa appropriations for grants to water systems specifically for making security improvements .

however , epa has identified numerous security measures that are eligible for funding through the state - administered drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) program .

eligible measures include making facility improvements , such as adding fencing , cameras , and lighting ; securing chemical and fuel storage ; hiring guards ; and adopting enhanced filtration and disinfection treatment .

congress has provided roughly $830 million annually for this program in recent years .

however , it is uncertain how readily funds might become available for security measures , as the key purpose of the dwsrf is to facilitate compliance with federal drinking water regulations , and competition for these funds can be considerable .

another potential source of funding for community water systems is the state homeland security grant program , administered by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

congress provided $950 million for each of fy2008 and fy2009 for this program , which provides assistance to states to detect , prevent , and respond to terrorist attacks .

states are required to allocate 80% of the grant funds received under this program to localities , in accordance with their approved homeland security plans .

funds may be used for homeland security - related training and for protecting critical infrastructure , including making physical security improvements .

local public works agencies , including water districts , are eligible to receive funding from the state ; however , most of these funds have been used to support first responders .

moreover , for fy2009 and fy2010 , congress specified that 25% must be used for law enforcement terrorism prevention activities and $60 million for border states to address illegal immigration , thus reducing the amount potentially available for water security purposes .

in 2002 , two major laws were enacted that address the security of the nation's critical infrastructure .

while the homeland security act of 2002 broadly addressed critical infrastructure protection , the bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 specifically aimed at improving the security of drinking water supplies .

title iv of the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 , 42 u.s.c .

300i ) amended the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) to require community water systems serving more than 3,300 individuals to conduct an assessment of their system's vulnerability to terrorist attacks or other intentional acts to disrupt the provision of a safe and reliable drinking water supply .

these water utilities were required to certify that they had conducted a vulnerability assessment and to submit a copy of the assessment to epa .

the act also required the utilities to prepare or revise emergency response plans incorporating the results of the vulnerability assessments no later than six months after completing them .

 ( table 1 outlines the schedule for the roughly 8,400 water systems that were required to submit vulnerability assessments to epa and complete emergency response plans. ) .

as required , epa issued guidance on conducting vulnerability assessments , preparing emergency response plans , and addressing threats to assist smaller water systems that were not covered by the bioterrorism act .

epa reports that the large - and medium - sized water systems achieved 100% compliance with the act's requirements , while smaller systems achieve nearly 100% compliance .

the act exempted the contents of the vulnerability assessments from disclosure under the freedom of information act ( except for information contained in the certification that identified the system and the date of the certification ) .

as required by the bioterrorism act , epa developed protocols to protect the vulnerability assessments from unauthorized disclosure .

the act provides for civil and criminal penalties for inappropriate disclosure of information by government officials .

the bioterrorism act authorized $160 million for fy2002 , and such sums as may be necessary for fy2003-fy2005 , to provide financial assistance to community water systems to conduct vulnerability assessments , to prepare response plans , and for expenses and contracts to address basic security enhancements and significant threats .

 ( security enhancements could include purchase and installation of intruder detection equipment and lighting , enhancing security of automated systems , personnel training and security screening of employees or contractors , etc .

funding could not be used for personnel costs , plant operations , monitoring or maintenance. ) .

for grants to states and water systems to assist in responding to emergency situations , the act authorized $35 million for fy2002 , and such sums as may be necessary thereafter .

finally , the act authorized $15 million for fy2002 , and such sums as may be necessary for fy2003 through fy2005 , for epa to review methods by which terrorists or others could disrupt the provision of safe water supplies , and methods for preventing , detecting , and responding to such disruptions .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) combined the functions of all or parts of 22 federal agencies and departments into a new department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the act gave key responsibility for critical infrastructure protection to dhs , but did not transfer epa water security functions to the new department .

with the establishment of dhs , which has overall responsibility for critical infrastructure vulnerability assessment and protection , the relative roles and responsibilities of epa and dhs were not clear .

in late 2003 , the white house issued homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) , which superseded pdd - 63 .

this directive established national policy and outlined the roles and responsibilities of federal departments and agencies regarding critical infrastructure protection .

it identified epa as the federal agency ( sector - specific agency ( ssa ) ) with lead responsibilities for ensuring the protection of the water infrastructure sector from terrorist attacks or sabotage .

under hspd - 7 , dhs is responsible for overall coordination and integration of national critical infrastructure protection efforts by federal , state , and local governments and the private sector , whereas epa is responsible for developing and providing water security tools and training for the nation's community water systems and municipal wastewater treatment facilities .

some additional articulation of epa's role was provided by hspd - 9 , which established a national policy to defend the nation's water , agriculture , and food systems against terrorist attacks , major disasters , and other emergencies .

this directive instructed epa to develop a comprehensive surveillance and monitoring program to provide early detection of contaminants in water systems .

hspd - 9 also directed epa to develop an integrated network of water quality laboratories to support the surveillance program .

epa has pursued these responsibilities through its water security initiative and water alliance for threat reduction program .

as both epa and dhs have responsibilities for protecting critical water infrastructure , the potential for overlap and duplication is perhaps unavoidable .

epa and dhs , for example , have separate communications and information - sharing networks , and have had different policy advisory groups .

in recognition of the need for a coordinating entity for the water sector , the major drinking water and wastewater organizations established the water sector coordinating council ( wscc ) in 2004 .

this council is associated primarily with dhs , but coordinates with both agencies .

in 2005 , epa and dhs facilitated the formation of a parallel water sector government coordinating council ( gcc ) to enable interagency and cross - jurisdictional coordination .

members include dhs , epa , the u.s. army corps of engineers , the bureau of reclamation , the federal energy regulatory commission , the centers for disease control and prevention , state water and wastewater associations , and others .

chaired by epa and co - chaired by dhs , the gcc coordinates strategies , activities , policies , and communication across government entities .

the wscc and gcc work together to coordinate critical infrastructure protection activities within the water sector .

a key requirement for dhs under hspd - 7 was to develop a national strategy to protect all critical infrastructure and key resources ( ci / kr ) .

issued by dhs in june 2006 and revised in january 2009 , the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) is intended to provide a unifying structure for integrating ci / kr protection efforts into one national program .

more specifically , it describes processes for ( 1 ) setting security goals ; ( 2 ) identifying key assets ; ( 3 ) assessing risks ; ( 4 ) prioritizing assets as a basis for allocating resources ; ( 5 ) implementing protection programs ; and ( 6 ) measuring the effectiveness of ci / kr protection efforts .

the nipp called for each sector's lead agency to work with its sector to develop sector specific plans ( ssps ) consistent with the nipp .

epa's water ssp is one of seven plans ( out of 17 ) that are publicly available .

taken together , the nipp and the ssp are intended to provide the structure necessary to coordinate and synchronize activities under various laws , presidential directives , strategies , and initiatives into a unified national approach to protecting critical infrastructure .

the goal of the water ssp is to develop the sector's strategy and programs to protect ci / kr assets , identify priorities based on risk analysis , describe the resources needed to protect ci / kr , track progress , identify gaps , establish research and development priorities , and work with dhs to continuously improve the nipp .

the ssp also helps define the roles and responsibilities of epa ( as the water sector ssa ) and other sector partners .

overall , the water ssp is intended to assist drinking water and wastewater utilities to be better prepared to prevent , detect , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks , other intentional acts , natural disasters , and other hazards .

the relative roles of epa and dhs with regard to water sector security have also been at issue in debates on legislation to impose security requirements at chemical facilities .

several such bills in recent years have proposed to include certain water utilities within the scope of chemical facilities subject to regulation by dhs .

this issue continues to receive attention and is discussed below .

a key water sector issue has involved the status and adequacy of public and private efforts to improve the security of public water systems .

because of actions on the part of drinking water utilities , epa , and congress , vulnerability assessment and planning efforts in the water sector proceeded more rapidly than those in certain other sectors ( such as chemical facilities ) .

additionally , numerous water utilities have implemented various practices to improve security at their facilities .

in a 2008 survey of water and wastewater utilities 98% of roughly 300 responding drinking water utilities reported that they have in place physical or procedural controls to safeguard hazardous chemicals .

however , the number of respondents was relatively small , and it is unclear how much has been done more broadly within the sector to implement security upgrades .

although the bioterrorism preparedness and response act required community water systems to conduct vulnerability assessments and prepare emergency response plans , it did not require systems to make security upgrades to address any identified vulnerabilities .

consequently , interest in water sector security issues has persisted .

an issue for the water sector that has received significant legislative attention for several years involves the security of chemical facilities , including certain drinking water and wastewater utilities that are located where a terrorist attack could cause harm to nearby populations .

for water utilities , the primary concern is the onsite storage of hazardous , gaseous chemicals ( particularly chlorine ) that pose potential risks to local communities if released .

bills to impose security planning and improvement requirements on such drinking water ( and wastewater ) facilities have been considered in past several years , but none has been enacted .

in the dhs fy2007 appropriations act ( p.l .

109-295 , section 550 ) , the 109 th congress authorized dhs to regulate , for three years , high - risk chemical facilities , excluding drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities and facilities in ports .

the act directed dhs to establish risk - based security performance standards for designated chemical facilities , and to require these facilities to prepare vulnerability assessments and security plans .

to implement this provision , dhs promulgated regulations in 2007 that established chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) .

these standards require chemical facilities to report the amounts and types of chemicals onsite so that dhs can determine whether a facility will be further regulated by cfats rules .

regulated facilities are placed into one of four tiers , based on risk and performance .

the facilities placed in the highest - risk tier are subject to the most stringent security requirements .

pursuant to p.l .

109-295 , the cfats regulations were scheduled to expire in october 2009 .

in both the dhs fy2010 and fy2011 budget justifications , the administration requested that the cfats regulations be extended for one year without change .

congress extended cfats authority through october 4 , 2010 , in the dhs appropriations bill for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-83 ) .

after several short term continuing resolutions for fy2011 , congress extended dhs authority to regulate chemical facilities through march 4 , 2011 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) .

also in the 111 th congress , the house passed h.r .

2868 , to revise and codify security requirements for chemical facilities and impose new security requirements on drinking water and wastewater utilities .

the bill would have given epa regulatory authority for administering water and wastewater utility security provisions .

the drinking water and wastewater facilities titles in h.r .

2868 essentially incorporated h.r .

3258 , the drinking water system security act of 2009 , which was reported by the house committee on energy and commerce .

in the senate , the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs reported h.r .

2868 , amended in the nature of a substitute , in december 2010 .

the senate bill would have extended the current dhs cfats program for three years and established voluntary security training programs , but did not address water utilities .

no further action occurred on these proposals .

 ( the bills are discussed in more detail under the " the 111 th congress " section below. ) .

water sector interests generally have argued that water utilities should remain exempt from dhs regulation of chemical facilities , as they already have been subject to several epa requirements under the bioterrorism act ( i.e. , vulnerability assessments and emergency response planning ) , and also to the risk management planning requirements of the clean air act .

 ( the risk management planning provisions apply to more than 2,800 of the largest water systems. ) .

these stakeholders note that epa has been designated the lead agency for water infrastructure security and already has an established water security program .

nonetheless , there is continued congressional interest in expanding security requirements for the chemical facility sector , and in including certain water utilities within the scope of such requirements .

moreover , epa and dhs officials have testified before subcommittees of the house energy and commerce committee , the house homeland security committee , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , and before the senate environment and public works committee in support of closing "the existing security gap" for drinking water and wastewater utilities by addressing their statutory exemption from cfats .

in march 2010 , testifying before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , the epa assistant administrator for water presented the administration's policy principles for regulating security at water sector facilities .

these principles are: epa should be the lead agency for chemical security for drinking water and wastewater systems , with dhs supporting epa's efforts ; to address chemical security in the water sector , epa would use , with modifications as appropriate considering statutory requirements and the uniqueness of the water sector , dhs's existing risk assessment tools and performance standards for chemical facilities ; dhs should be responsible for ensuring consistency of high - risk chemical facility security across all 18 infrastructure sectors ; and to enhance the security of high - risk chemical storing facilities , where possible , these facilities should use safer technology such as less toxic chemicals .

facilities posing the highest degree of risk should be required to implement ist methods if such methods enhance overall security , are feasible , and consider public health and environment requirements .

in addition to these principles , epa also supports legislative provisions that would provide states a key role in regulating chemical security at water systems , including a prominent state role in ist determinations and audits and inspections .

several bills in the 109 th congress targeted high - consequence facilities within the water sector .

s. 2855 proposed to amend the safe drinking water act to require community water systems to replace hazardous , gaseous chemicals with inherently safer technologies ( ist ) , for example , by switching from the use of chlorine gas to liquid chlorine .

s. 2855 also would have required epa to provide grants to high - consequence facilities for use in paying capital expenditures needed to make the transition to the use of ist .

s. 2781 and s. 1995 proposed to amend the clean water act to address security at wastewater treatment facilities .

the senate committee on environment and public works reported a wastewater treatment facilities bill , s. 2781 ( s.rept .

109-345 ) , which did not contain ist requirements but did authorize grants to wastewater treatment facilities for security - related efforts , including conducting vulnerability assessments , preparing site security plans , and making security upgrades .

an identical bill was offered in the 110 th congress ( s. 1303 ) .

broader chemical facility security bills also were offered in the 109 th congress that had implications for water utilities .

these bills generally would have authorized the secretary of the department of homeland security to regulate chemical facilities , including water treatment plants , that pose certain risks .

s. 2145 , as reported by the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee ( s.rept .

109-332 ) , and its companion bill , h.r .

4999 , proposed to require the secretary of dhs to issue rules designating which chemical facilities would be subject to regulation , and to establish security performance standards for such facilities .

under these bills , facilities would have been required to submit to dhs vulnerability assessments , security plans , and emergency response plans for terrorist incidents .

h.r .

5695 ( h.rept .

109-707 ) shared several similarities with s. 2145 , but would have exempted water facilities covered by the legislation from redundant requirements ( such as conducting vulnerability assessments ) , unless the dhs determined that more stringent security requirements were needed .

s. 2486 proposed to cover a wider range of facilities and establish a general duty to ensure that facilities would be designed , operated , and maintained in safe manner ; the bill prescribed this obligation to include use of ist to the maximum extent practicable .

h.r .

1562 would have required consultation between dhs and epa , and would have imposed stronger security and emergency planning measures , rather than requiring changes in technology .

h.r .

2237 would have expanded epa's existing authority to oversee chemical facilities but would have required consultation with dhs .

because of the scope and time limitation of dhs authority to regulate chemical facilities , as well as implementation issues , chemical facility security remained on the congressional agenda .

in particular , in the interim final rule , dhs stated that it might preempt future state and local chemical facility security regulations .

in response to this preemption language , the 110 th congress amended p.l .

109-295 in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) to establish a state's right to promulgate chemical facility security regulations that are at least as stringent as the federal chemical facility security regulations .

p.l .

110-161 further provided that state regulations would be preempted only in the case of an actual conflict between federal and state regulations .

several other bills were introduced to modify dhs authority to regulate chemical facilities .

perhaps of most interest to the water sector was h.r .

5577 ( h.rept .

110-550 ) , the chemical facility anti - terrorism act of 2008 .

reported , as amended , from the house committee on homeland security in march 2008 , h.r .

5577 would have revised , expanded , and made permanent dhs's authority to regulate chemical facility security .

as noted , water and wastewater facilities are explicitly exempt from p.l .

109-295 and related cfats regulations ; however , these utilities were not categorically exempt under h.r .

5577 .

this legislation would have directed the dhs secretary to maintain a list of covered chemical facilities determined to be of sufficient security risk , based on several criteria: ( 1 ) the likelihood that the facility would be the target of an attack ; ( 2 ) the potential extent and likelihood of death or injury , or harm to the environment , critical infrastructure , national security , or the economy that could result from an incident ; and ( 3 ) the proximity of the chemical facility to population centers .

the bill also would have authorized dhs to designate any chemical substance as a "substance of concern" and to establish and revise the threshold quantity for designated substances .

further , h.r .

5577 proposed to require owners and operators of covered facilities to conduct vulnerability assessments and to develop and implement dhs - approved security plans .

to address the possibility of redundant federal requirements , dhs would have been authorized to consider whether requirements under other laws ( such as the bioterrorism preparedness act ) satisfied these requirements .

another provision would have required owners and operators of affected facilities to complete an analysis of "methods to reduce the consequences of a terrorist attack" ( the bill did not use the term "inherently safer technologies" ) , and would have authorized the dhs secretary to require higher risk facilities to implement such methods or technologies under certain conditions .

as amended in markup , the secretary would not have been authorized to order drinking water or wastewater facilities to implement inherently safer technologies unless dhs provided funding to assist with the conversion .

also of relevance to the water sector was the provision authorizing dhs to order a facility assigned to the high - risk tier to cease operations if the facility failed to comply with a dhs compliance order .

as reported , h.r .

5577 would have authorized dhs to order the shut down of a water facility only if the facility's continued operation presented a clear danger to homeland security .

the house committee on energy and commerce , which traditionally has held jurisdiction over drinking water safety issues , was granted an extension for consideration of h.r .

5577 .

the bill was not referred to the house committee on transportation and infrastructure , which has key jurisdiction over wastewater utilities .

no further action occurred on this legislation .

congress again moved legislation to impose new security requirements on drinking water and wastewater utilities under broader chemical facility security legislation .

in november 2009 , the house of representatives passed , amended , h.r .

2868 , which broadly addressed security at chemical , drinking water , and wastewater facilities .

as passed , this legislation included provisions of h.r .

3258 ( the drinking water security act of 2009 ) and h.r .

2883 ( the wastewater treatment works security act of 2009 ) .

in july 2010 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ordered h.r .

2868 to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute ; the committee subsequently reported the bill in december 2010 .

in contrast to the extensive house - passed bill , the senate substitute amendment proposed to extend the current dhs chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) authority for three years beyond the expiration date of october , 4 , 2010 , and did not cover water or wastewater utilities .

a one - year cfats program extension was recommended in the senate's dhs appropriations bill for fy2011 ( s. 3607 , s.rept .

111-222 ) .

as an interim measure while deliberations proceeded , congress extended cfats authority through december 3 , 2010 , in p.l .

111-242 , providing continuing appropriations for fy2011 .

ultimately , no chemical facility security legislation was enacted .

after two additional short - term extensions , congress extended current cfats authority through march 4 , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) .

legislation that received action in the 111 th congress is discussed below .

in october 2009 , the house committee on energy and commerce reported the drinking water system security act of 2009 ( h.r .

3258 , h.rept .

111-313 ) .

this legislation proposed to replace sdwa section 1433 ( added by the bioterrorism preparedness act of 2002 ) and to subject covered drinking water systems to an array of new security requirements .

the bill defined a covered system as a community water system that serves a population greater than 3,300 or that the epa administrator determined presents a security risk .

under h.r .

3258 , epa would have been required to issue regulations to ( 1 ) establish tiered , risk - based performance standards for the security of covered systems ; ( 2 ) set requirements and deadlines for covered systems to conduct and update vulnerability assessments , and develop site security and emergency response plans ; and ( 3 ) provide annual training to system employees and contractor employees .

the epa administrator would have been authorized to designate any chemical substance as a substance of concern in issuing water system security standards .

in november 2009 , the house passed , as amended , h.r .

2868 ( h.rept .

111-205 ) , the chemical and water security act of 2009 .

this bill , initiated by the house committee on homeland security , essentially incorporated ( as title ii ) h.r .

3258 as reported by the house energy and commerce committee .

h.r .

2868 addressed chemical facilities in title i and wastewater treatment facilities in title iii .

as passed , the bill would have codified and expanded the scope of the existing cfats regulations ; increased the types of facilities potentially subject to regulation ; required , in certain cases , the adoption of methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from a terrorist attack ( i.e. , ist ) ; and established a citizen - suit process for chemical facilities ( citizen enforcement provisions already exist for drinking water systems under the safe drinking water act and for wastewater facilities under the clean water act ) .

as preferred by various water sector stakeholders , h.r .

2868 proposed to build on existing intergovernmental relationships and give epa lead regulatory authority for water and wastewater facilities , while keeping authority for chemical facilities with dhs .

under h.r .

2868 , the epa administrator would have been required to develop regulations establishing risk - based and performance - based standards for covered water systems , and would have assigned systems to one of four risk - based tiers , with tier 1 including the highest - risk systems .

epa would have been required to consult with states and dhs in developing and implementing the regulations , and would have had responsibility for reviewing and approving covered systems' vulnerability assessments and site security plans .

a provision , opposed by the water sector because of security concerns , proposed to require water utilities to include an employee - or contractor - bargaining agent in developing and revising vulnerability assessments , site security plans , and emergency response plans .

as with the house energy and commerce committee bill ( h.r .

3258 ) , h.r .

2868 would have required a covered system that possessed a substance of concern exceeding a threshold amount to assess methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release .

for those water systems that have threshold quantities of a substance of concern and are assigned to the two highest risk - based tiers , the state would have determined whether a system must implement such methods ( essentially inherently safe technology ) .

before requiring a system to implement consequence reduction methods , the state would have been required to determine whether the methods would significantly reduce risks of injury from a chemical release , would not increase the interim storage of hazardous substances , would not make the system unable to comply with drinking water regulations , and would be technologically and financially feasible .

additionally , the state would have been required to give the system an opportunity to appeal the determination .

the bill provided that , if a state failed to determine whether to require a system to implement methods , epa would have been authorized to make the determination and , also , to enforce a determination if a state failed to do so .

among other provisions , the house - passed version of h.r .

2868 specified that states and localities could enact more stringent security requirements for water systems .

the bill would have established criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of protected information , and authorized epa to make grants to systems to assist in preparing vulnerability assessments , site security plans , and emergency response plans , and assessing and implementing methods to reduce the consequences of a release .

the bill also would have authorized a worker - training grant program and required epa to report to congress on the threats to drinking water posed by an intentional act of contamination .

on december 16 , 2010 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs reported h.r .

2868 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute and with a new title ( the continuing chemical facilities antiterrorism security act of 2010 , s.rept .

111-370 ) .

the substitute language would have extended the authorization of the current cfats authority for three years , and established a voluntary training program and a best - practices clearinghouse for chemical facility security activities .

the senate version also would have authorized a dhs - administered , voluntary technical assistance program aimed at identifying and implementing methods to reduce the consequences of a terrorist attack .

water utilities were not addressed in the senate - reported bill .

in contrast , s. 3598 , the secure water facilities act , paralleled titles ii and iii of h.r .

2868 .

introduced in july 2010 , this bill proposed to authorize the epa administrator to regulate community water systems and wastewater treatment facilities for security purposes .

s. 3598 would have revised section 1433 of the safe drinking water act to direct epa to issue regulations establishing a tiered system of risk - based performance standards for covered water systems' site security plans , and would have authorized implementation of methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from an intentional act .

among other provisions , the bill would have required epa to promulgate regulations to prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of protected information , and would have authorized epa to provide grants or enter into cooperative agreements with states or covered systems to assist with compliance .

this bill was not reported .

several local government and water associations , including the american water works association ( awwa ) , have opposed legislation that would require water utilities to comply with inherently safer technology ( ist ) requirements ( for example , by switching from the use of chlorine gas to liquid chlorine ) without considering specific utility circumstances .

for example , many drinking water utilities have changed disinfection methods to comply with epa disinfection regulations or for other reasons , but awwa has cautioned that for other water utilities , chlorine gas remains the only viable form of disinfection to provide sufficient public health protection .

awwa has testified that new security rules would have to be reconciled with sdwa's public health requirements , and that any future regulations would need to maintain flexibility for utilities to make decisions based on factors including public health requirements , maintaining reliability of treatment , accounting for local water chemistry and environmental characteristics , and ensuring plant worker safety , as well as addressing security concerns .

others have argued that mandating the adoption of safer technologies is warranted because of the potential risk that hazardous chemicals , particularly gaseous chlorine , may pose to communities .

additionally , awwa has opposed chemical facility security provisions that would authorize the federal government to order closure of a noncompliant water utility , noting the critical importance of water supplies .

the administration has stated its support for consistent ist approaches for all high - risk chemical facilities , regardless of sector .

epa specifically supports requiring all high - risk chemical facilities ( tiers 1-4 ) to assess ist methods and requiring tiers 1 and 2 facilities to implement ist methods ( provided that such methods improve overall security , are feasible , and in the case of water sector facilities , take into consideration public health and environmental requirements ) .

also , epa has testified that any decisions on ist methods would need to involve the states .

another key issue has concerned the availability of funding for water systems to make security upgrades needed to address risks identified in their vulnerability assessments .

based on a limited assessment , epa reported in 2005 that community water systems would need more than $1 billion to make security improvements .

in a 2007 survey updating that assessment , epa reported that utilities would require an estimated $422 million for projects to address security needs ; however , epa concluded that security - related needs were underestimated , as many water systems incorporate these costs into the costs of broader construction projects rather than report them separately .

congress has not provided funding specifically for water systems to make security improvements .

although community water systems potentially are eligible to receive funding from the states through the dhs state homeland security grant program , competition for funds has been severe , and funds largely have gone to meet the needs of first responders .

in an effort to address one element of this funding issue , the conference report for the department of homeland security appropriations act for fy2005 ( p.l .

108-334 , h.rept .

108-774 ) modified the definition of "local unit of government" specifically to include water districts .

congress has provided $950 million annually for this grant program since fy2008 ; however , most of these funds have been used to support first responders , and the dhs appropriations acts have included specific spending directives that further reduce the availability of these funds for water security purposes .

water security bills in the 111 th congress proposed to authorize funding for security improvements at drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities , as well as chemical facilities .

house - passed h.r .

2868 , the chemical and water security act of 2009 , would have authorized epa to provide grants to drinking water and wastewater systems for security - related measures including vulnerability assessments , implementation of security enhancements , and developing or upgrading emergency response and site security plans .

for drinking water system security , h.r .

2868 would have authorized appropriations for fy2011 at a level of $315 million , of which up to $30 million would have been available to cover epa and state administrative costs , and $125 million for higher risk water systems to implement methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from an intentional act .

additionally , the bill would have authorized such sums as may be necessary for fy2012 through fy2015 .

similarly , s. 3598 , the secure water facilities act , proposed to authorize appropriations of $340 million for each of fy2011 through fy2015 , including $30 million for administrative costs and $225 million to implement methods to reduce the consequences of chemical releases from intentional acts at covered systems , with priority given to higher - risk systems .

an additional $200 million would have been authorized to be appropriated for each of fy2011 through fy2015 , for wastewater treatment works .

none of the water security bills were enacted , and , thus , no new appropriations were authorized to assist utilities in making security improvements .

the awwa reports that numerous utilities have made improvements to the security of their infrastructure , but it is not known how broadly the sector has done so .

given the substantial fiscal challenges facing policymakers , it is unclear whether such legislative proposals might be offered and taken up in the 112 th congress .

