on august 13 , president bush announced that he would not utilize $5.1 billion of contingentemergency spending congress had provided as part of a $28.9 billion fy2002 supplementalappropriation ( p.l .

107-206 ; h.r .

4775 ) .

the funding designated as contingent emergency spending was either not requested by the president or reflected higher levels for certain programs than in the administration's request .

underthe terms of p.l .

107-206 , the president had 30 days after enactment ( september 1 ) to decidewhether to designate all or none of the $5.1 billion as emergency funding .

if he chose to agree withcongress and use the $5.1 billion , he would have had to submit a budget amendment specifying theemergency designation .

the august 13 decision , however , has the effect , in terms used by the whitehouse , of a "pocket veto" by the president of the contingent emergency spending .

funds that willnot be used include about $500 million for dod funding , $275 million for veterans' medical care,and about $700 million for foreign assistance including $250 million in aid for israel and thepalestinians , and $200 million in hiv / aids funding .

white house officials said , however , that theadministration would seek about $1 billion of the $5.1 billion as an amended fy2003 appropriationrequest , including funds for israel , the palestinians , international hiv / aids , and thetransportation security agency .

 ( see table 4 below for a complete list of the affected programs. ) .

the president's decision not to use the contingency funds makes significant changes in the policy priorities endorsed by congress .

dod lost about $1 billion in contingency funds , butmaintained a 56% share of total funding in p.l .

107-206 compared with 50% in the bill as clearedby congress .

homeland security funds for preparedness activities had been allocated over $750million in the enacted appropriation but two - thirds of that amount was designated contingentemergency and will not be spent .

likewise , congress had included nearly $1.9 billion for securityof infrastructure and personnel in the enacted bill , two - thirds of which is contingent emergencymoney .

resources for preparedness and infrastructure / personnel security purposes had accountedfor 9% of the appropriation cleared by congress , but represent only 4% of funds that are nowavailable .

as a result of the president's august 13 decision not to utilize the contingent emergency funds , the size of the fy2002 supplemental appropriation drops from $28.9 billion to $23.9 billion .

thetotal includes $13.4 billion for defense , $1.2 billion in foreign aid and embassy security aimed atcombating terrorism aborad , $5.5 billion for new york , and $4.4 billion for homeland security .

funding for pell grants ( $1 billion ) and other , non - terrorism related activities , combined withrecessions and offsets , brings the total appropriation to $23.9 billion .

submitted on march 21 , 2002 as an emergency supplemental request to combat terrorism , mostof the administration's $28.4 billion request was not subject to the budget ceilings that apply tofy2002 .

the administration's request was split almost evenly between the department of defense ( dod ) ( $14 billion ) and other agencies ( $14.4 billion ) .

like the emergency terrorism response ( etr ) supplemental , the first supplemental to combat terrorism , the fy2002 request would provideadditional funding for the war in afghanistan , new york city , and airport security .

other policypriorities , such as bioterrorism and investigative activities , received less emphasis in this request.the administration also included new funding proposals and policy provisions in foreign assistance .

on the defense side , the request included $14 billion to continue support of the war in afghanistan , enhance security at defense installations , increase munition stockpiles , and upgradecommand , control , communications and intelligence .

over half of dod's request was related tocontinued prosecution of the war in afghanistan .

like the first supplemental to combat terrorism,the dod request included substantial funding for intelligence and classified programs .

the administration requested general provisions that would grant the department of defense new authorities to select the recipients and administer up to $580 million in funds that could be usedto support foreign governments who play a significant role in assisting the u.s. in the "global waron terrorism. .

 ( 1 ) these proposed authorities , whichwould set new precedents , generated somecontroversy on the hill .

on the non - defense side , the request provided $5.5 billion in additional aid for new york , whose needs were considered by some members of congress to have been shortchanged in the firstemergency supplemental .

the $5.5 billion included in the request is intended to fulfill thepresident's march 10 , 2002 pledge to the new mayor of new york , michael bloomberg , to providenew york city with a total of $21.5 billion to help it recover from the terrorist attacks .

 ( 2 ) the newyork aid would be dedicated to additional disaster recovery activities , rebuilding mass transit andutility infrastructure , and community development block grants .

finally , another potential arena for controversy was the administration's request for $4.4 billion for the newly established transportation security administration ( tsa ) to upgrade aviation securitywhere there remains considerable uncertainty about the extent of the funding needed , as well as thesize of the new federal workforce required to provided the augmented airport security .

of the $28.4 billion request by the administration , 49% would be provided to the departmentof defense ( dod ) with the remaining $14.4 billion split among non - defense agencies ( see table1 ) , including the administration's request of $1.3 billion for pell grants .

a variety of issues about both the amounts and the composition of the president's request foremergency supplemental spending of $28.4 billion , as well as the policy implications raised byseveral general provisions that were included in the request arose during congressional debate .

although there was broad support for defense requests , particularly now , last year congresssignificantly adjusted both the total amount as well as the types of spending requested by theadministration in the first supplemental's defense request .

 ( 6 ) several members offered amendments to add funding in several areas , and raise the debt ceiling as desired by the administration .

 ( 7 ) at the same time,the administration , as well as some membersof congress , repeatedly raised concerns about increases above the total requested .

 ( 8 ) .

the following 13 tables provide details of the $27.1 billion fy2002 emergency supplementalallocation , organized according to appropriation bills and accounts .

table a - 1 .

summary of all appropriations bills ( $s - millions , discretionary budget authority ) notes: a the administration included a request for $1.3 billion in supplemental funding for fy2002pellgrants in its fy2003 budget , with equal offsets from reductions in funds added by congress tolabor , hhs , and the department of education .

the house and the senate appropriationscommittees both provided $1 billion for pell grants and scored the offset as zero .

b does not include $1.1 billion in mandatory spending for veterans eligible for disabilitypayments,requested by the administration on may 15 , 2002 , and included in the senate and enactedversion .

c totals include emergency , contingent emergency spending , rescissions and offsets , andnon - emergency spending .

table a - 2 below lists the funding in the fy2002 supplemental that was requested by the administration and enacted by congress .

as enacted , h.r .

4775 provided that funding would be available for fy2002 unless designated otherwise .

 ( 100 ) the table below shows thoseaccounts where congress extended the availability offunds beyond fy2002 .

as shown in table a - 2 , which follows , congress also appropriated funds in several categories: emergency funds as designated by both the president and congress ( designatedby "e" ) ; contingent emergency funds to be designated as emergency funds if thepresident submits a budget request including that designation ( designated by"c" ) ; non - emergency funds ( designated by "n" ) ; and rescissions and offsets ( designated as "r" ) .

emergency funding is not counted against the statutory ceilings that are in effect for fy2002 as part of the 1997 budget enforcement in a general provision referred to as the "all or none"provision , h.r .

4775 stipulates that in order to spend any of the funding designated as "contingentemergency," the president must designate all funding in that category as an emergency .

 ( 101 ) about $5billion in h.r .

4775 is designated as contingent emergency funding .

the bill provides that thepresident had thirty days from passage of the bill to decide whether to submit a budget amendmentthat designates this $5 billion as emergency funding .

the $2.9 billion in non - emergency fundingprovided in h.r .

4775 is offset by rescissions or offsets so that no additional funding is scored infy2002 .

table a - 2 below notes the type of funding applying to individual appropriation accounts .

rescissions and offsets cancel out $2.9 billion of non - emergency spending .

the description of the purposes for the funding shown in table a - 2 below is based on conference action ( see h.rept .

107-593 ) .

the table also includes funding for comparable purposesthat was provided by the emergency terrorism response supplemental ( p.l .

107-38 ) , the emergencysupplemental passed on september 14 , 2001 , in the wake of the terrorist attacks .

table a - 2 codes spending in individual appropriation accounts by eleven broad policy priorities developed by crs .

those categories are described in the box on page 6 .

see figures 1 and 2 , and table 3 for the funding and share of the total for each category .

table a - 2 .

fy2002 supplemental: administration request andcongressional action by appropriationaccount ( millions of dollars ) notes: * = non - emergency spending .

a spending categories are described in box on page 6 above .

b defense emergency response fund is a transfer account , where dod can move moniesinto other appropriations without being subject to normalreprogramming requirements , which require that dod notify congress in advance of transfers betweenappropriations accounts or other changes .

c the administration requested a $1.276 billion increase in pell grants in fy2002 in its original fy2003 budget , and proposed that the funds be offsetby eliminating all congressional increases in the department of education that were passed by congress .

thesefunds were not requested in theemergency supplemental request submitted by the administration on march 21 , 2002 .

congressional scoring scoresthe administration's proposedoffset as zero .

d the house appropriations committee is proposing that funding for election reform beappropriated to omb to be transferred to other agencies onceauthorizing legislation that sets up programs to improve the administration of elections is enacted .

sources: letter of president george bush to speaker of the house , the honorable j. dennis hastert , transmitting the fy2002 emergency supplementalrequest , march 21 , 2002 .

see also http: / / w3.access.gpo.gov / usbudget / fy2003 / amndsup.html , houseappropriations committee tables , h.r .

4775 , houseappropriations committee , making supplemental appropriations for further recovery from and responseto terrorist attacks on the united states forthe fiscal year 2002 , and for other purposes , h.rept .

107-480 , and calculations by crs .

