child welfare programs are intended to prevent child abuse and neglect , and to protect and improve the lives of children who have experienced maltreatment .

as the u.s. constitution has been interpreted , states exercise the greatest responsibility for administering these services .

at the same time , the federal government plays a significant role in shaping these services by providing funding for services and by linking those federal funds to certain requirements .

for fy2007 , congress provided more than $7.6 billion in funding dedicated to child welfare purposes and the bulk of this federal child welfare funding ( 98% or $6.5 billion of the funds made available for fy2007 ) was provided for state child welfare agencies .

these funds are distributed based on the amount of eligible foster care or adoption assistance claims submitted by states ( under title iv - e of the social security act ) , or via statutory formula for child welfare - related activities , including screening and investigation of child abuse and neglect reports ; family support , preservation , and reunification services ; adoption promotion and support services ; and independent living services and other support for current and former foster care youths .

 ( a portion of the funds are also made available to the highest court in each state to fund improvements in the handling of child welfare - related court proceedings. ) .

child welfare funds distributed to all states are administered by the children's bureau , within the administration for children and families ( acf ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in addition to providing non - federal matching funds , states must meet a set of program requirements in order to receive these federal child welfare dollars .

viewed together , these statutory program requirements comprise federal child welfare policy , and are the fundamental basis on which state compliance with federal child welfare requirements rests .

state compliance with the majority of these requirements is checked as part of the child and family services review ( cfsr ) , which was designed by hhs to meet the conformity review requirements mandated by congress in 1994 ( p.l .

103-432 , as enacted at section 1123a of the social security act ) .

state plan requirements generally apply to the state , or the state administering / supervising agency , and usually are contained in the statute as a list of items that must be included in the state's program plan .

the plan requirements vary a great deal in their scope and kind and are difficult to categorize consistently .

in this report they are grouped within a specific program ( or section of the law ) and by a rough kind / subject division .

this division is somewhat arbitrary and not a part of federal statute .

however , it is used in this report as a way to group basic concerns of federal child welfare policy and to better understand what is required of states .

the kind / subject divisions used are: planning services: administration , organization and coordination —requirements that direct how the state must administer , coordinate , or organize the program ( eg , what state agency must administer the program , and with what other programs it must be coordinated ) .

data collection and reporting— requirements specifying the nature of data to be collected and / or reported to the federal government , and those related to cooperation with program evaluations or audits .

ensuring safe and appropriate placement options— requirements designed to ensure diversity of prospective foster and adoptive parents , prohibit discrimination in placements , allow for cross - jurisdictional placements and otherwise serve to ensure safe and appropriate placements for children .

child protections , services , and programs to be provided —requirements that specify treatment of each child , and services and programs to be provided .

this report lists state eligibility requirements for federally funded child welfare programs within these kind / subject divisions .

three of these programs are authorized under the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) : basic state grants , community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect , and children's justice act grants .

the remaining programs are a part of the social security act: child welfare services , the promoting safe and stable families program , foster care and adoption assistance , the john chafee foster care independence program , and education and training vouchers ( for youth who age out of or are expected to age out of foster care ) .

some of the state plan elements are simply given in the statute as requirements for the state to meet ( eg , describe services to be offered ) ; others ask that the state assure or provide the governor's certification that it is meeting a certain requirement ( eg , federal funds are not used to supplant existing non - federal funds for services with purpose similar to the federal program ) .

this report does not distinguish between these different forms of requirement .

federal funds for child welfare programs under the social security act and for capta's basic state grants and community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect are administered by the children's bureau within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the children's bureau at hhs also awards capta's children justice act grants but does so in consultation with the department of justice .

tables 1 , 2 , and 3 list elements required of states seeking basic state grants , children's justice act grants , or community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect under capta .

tables 4 , 5 , 6 , and 7 contain state plan requirements for child welfare programs authorized under the social security act .

finally , table 8 contains definitions critical to understanding state plan requirements for child welfare programs under the social security act .

for instance , a state is required to have a "case plan" for each child and to operate a "case review system. .

these and other related terms are given detailed definition in the law .

terms appearing in boldface in tables 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 are defined by the statute and the term , and its definition , are included in table 8 .

the information included in this report is intended as an accessible reference guide to state requirements , rather than a legal interpretation of those requirements .

requirements are believed to be current through changes made by the 109 th congress .

 table 4 lists requirements related to funding of child welfare services authorized under title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act .

the program provides matching grants to states ( 75% federal share ) for ( as amended by p.l .

109-288 ) five broad purposes: ( 1 ) to protect and promote the welfare of all children ; ( 2 ) to prevent the neglect , abuse , or exploitation of children ; ( 3 ) to support at - risk families through services which allow children , where appropriate to remain safely with their families or return to their families in a timely manner ; ( 4 ) to promote safety , permanence , and well - being of children in foster care and adoptive families ; and ( 5 ) to provide training , professional development and support to ensure a well - qualified child welfare workforce .

funds are authorized on a discretionary basis ( through fy2011 ) at $325 million annually .

fy2007 funding: $287 million .

 table 5 lists requirements for funding under title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act , the promoting safe and stable families program .

the program authorizes matching grants to states ( 75% federal share ) for four kinds of services: family preservation , family support , time - limited family reunification , and adoption promotion and support .

the statute also provides that certain amounts of the funds provided for this program are to be set aside each year to support tribal child and family services , grants to highest state courts to assess and improve their handling of child welfare proceedings , and funds for research , evaluation and technical assistance related to the service or activities funded by the program .

in addition , p.l .

109-288 stipulates that for each of six years ( fy2006-fy2011 ) $40 million of the funds are to be reserved for formula grants to states to support monthly caseworker visits of children in foster care and to provide discretionary grants to eligible applicants ( regional partnerships , which much include the state child welfare agency ) to respond to child welfare issues raised by parental / caretaker abuse of methamphetamine ( or other substances ) .

program funds are authorized both on a discretionary basis ( up to $200 million annually ) and as a capped entitlement ( $345 million annually ) through fy2011 .

fy2007 funding: $434 million .

 table 6 lists requirements under title iv - e of the social security act related to foster care maintenance payments and adoption assistance .

these programs are authorized as open - ended entitlements ; states may seek reimbursement for a specified percentage of the foster care maintenance payments , adoption assistance costs , and eligible administrative , training , and data collection costs for all eligible children .

fy2007 appropriations: $6.5 billion ( of which $4.5 billion is for foster care and $2.0 billion is for adoption assistance ) .

 table 7 lists requirements related to funding for foster care independence services authorized under title iv - e of the social security act .

these include a variety of services designed to enable youth who are expected to "age - out" of foster care and those who have recently aged out of foster care to make a successful transition from state foster care custody to independent living .

funds for a wide variety of services to these youth ( including education and training ) are authorized as a capped entitlement ; funds specifically provided for education and training vouchers only are authorized on a discretionary basis .

the federal government provides funds under these programs on a matching basis ( 80% federal share ) .

fy2007 cfcip: $140 million ; fy2007 vouchers: $46 million .

 table 8 includes definitions critical to understanding state responsibilities to children in its care .

most of these definitions are included in section 475 of the social security act and apply to both title iv - e and title iv - b child welfare programs .

for instance , children in state - supervised foster care , who are receiving services under title iv - b or title iv - e , must be part of a state operated case review system and have their own case plan .

these , and related terms , are given detailed definition in the statute .

please note that some of the terms included below are defined within the extensive definition given to case review system .

they are listed separately in table 8 for clarity and ease of reference .

