rasul v. bush , issued by the u.s. supreme court at the end of its 2003-2004 term , clarified that u.s. courts do have jurisdiction to hear petitions for habeas corpus on behalf of the approximately 550 persons detained at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , in connection with the war against terrorism , establishing a role for federal courts to play in determining the validity of the military commissions convened pursuant to president bush's military order ( m.o. ) .

of november 13 , 2001 .

after dozens of petitions for habeas corpus were filed in the federal district court for the district of columbia , congress passed the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) , revoking federal court jurisdiction over habeas claims , at least with respect to those not already pending , and created jurisdiction in the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to hear appeals of final decisions of military commissions .

the supreme court overturned a decision by the d.c .

circuit that had upheld the military commissions , hamdan v. rumsfeld , holding instead that although congress has authorized the use of military commissions , such commissions must follow procedural rules as similar as possible to courts - martial proceedings , in compliance with the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

salim ahmed hamdan , who was captured in afghanistan and is alleged to have worked for osama bin laden as a body guard and driver , brought this challenge to the lawfulness of the secretary of defense's plan to try him for alleged war crimes before a military commission , arguing that the military commission rules and procedures were inconsistent with the ucmj and that he had the right to be treated as a prisoner of war under the geneva conventions .

u.s. district judge robertson agreed , finding no inherent authority in the president as commander - in - chief of the armed forces to create such tribunals outside of the existing statutory authority , with which the military commission rules did not comply .

he also concluded that the geneva conventions apply to the whole of the conflict in afghanistan , including under their protections all persons detained in connection with the hostilities there , and that hamdan was thus entitled to be treated as a prisoner of war until his status was determined to be otherwise by a competent tribunal , in accordance with article 5 of the third geneva convention ( prisoners of war ) .

interpreting the ucmj in light of the geneva conventions , which permits the punishment of prisoners of war "only if the sentence has been pronounced by the same courts according to the same procedure as in the case of members of the armed forces of the detaining power," judge robertson found no congressional authority for hamdan's trial under the dod's rules for military commissions .

hamdan , he ruled , was not "an offender triable by military tribunal under the law of war" within the meaning of ucmj art 21 .

further , he found the rules established by dod to be fatally inconsistent with the ucmj , contrary to ucmj art .

36 because they give military authorities the power to exclude the accused from hearings and deny him access to evidence presented against him .

the government appealed , arguing that the district court should not have interfered in the military commission prior to its completion , that hamdan is not entitled to protection from the geneva conventions , and that the president has inherent authority to establish military commissions , which need not conform to statutes regulating military courts - martial .

the d.c .

circuit court of appeals rejected the government's argument that the federal courts had no jurisdiction to interfere in ongoing commission proceedings , but otherwise agreed with the government .

writing for a unanimous court , judge randolph reversed the lower court's finding , ruling that the geneva conventions are not judicially enforceable , that even if they were , hamdan is not entitled to their protections , and that in any event , the military commission would qualify as a "competent tribunal" where hamdan may challenge his non - pow status , within the meaning of u.s. army regulations implementing the conventions .

the appellate court did not accept the government's argument that the president has inherent authority to create military commissions without any authorization from congress , but found such authority in the authorization to use military force ( aumf ) , read together with ucmj arts .

21 and 36 .

the court interpreted art .

36 to mean that military commission rules have only to be consistent with those articles of the ucmj that refer specifically to military commissions , and not that congress meant to incorporate procedural rules for courts - martial into those applicable to military commissions .

however , because the procedural rules to be used by the military commissions did not , in its view , affect jurisdiction , the court found it unnecessary to resolve the issue at the interlocutory stage of the case .

with respect to the geneva conventions , the d.c .

circuit cited to a footnote from the world war ii eisentrager opinion that expresses doubt that the court could grant relief based directly on the 1929 geneva convention: we are not holding that these prisoners have no right which the military authorities are bound to respect .

the united states , by the geneva convention of july 27 , 1929 , 47 stat .

2021 , concluded ... an agreement upon the treatment to be accorded captives .

these prisoners claim to be and are entitled to its protection .

it is , however , the obvious scheme of the agreement that responsibility for observance and enforcement of these rights is upon political and military authorities .

rights of alien enemies are vindicated under it only through protests and intervention of protecting powers as the rights of our citizens against foreign governments are vindicated only by presidential intervention .

judge williams wrote a concurring opinion , agreeing with the government's conception of the conflict with al qaeda as separate from the conflict with the taliban but construing common article 3 to apply to any conflict with a non - state actor , without regard to the geographical confinement of such a conflict within the borders of a signatory state .

supreme court nominee john g. roberts concurred in the opinion without writing separately .

the supreme court granted review and reversed .

before reaching the merits of the case , the supreme court dispensed with the government's argument that congress had , by passing the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) , stripped the court of its jurisdiction to review habeas corpus challenges by or on behalf of guantanamo detainees whose petitions had already been filed .

the government's argument that the petitioner had no rights conferred by the geneva conventions that could be adjudicated in federal court likewise did not persuade the court to dismiss the case .

regardless of whether the geneva conventions provide rights that are enforceable in article iii courts , the court found that congress , by incorporating the "law of war" into ucmj art .

21 , brought the geneva conventions within the scope of law to be applied by courts .

the court disagreed that the eisentrager case requires another result , noting that the court there had decided the treaty question on the merits based on its interpretation of the geneva convention of 1929 and that the 1949 conventions were drafted to reject that interpretation .

justice scalia , joined by justices thomas and alito , dissented , arguing that the dta should be interpreted to preclude the court's review .

in response to the holding by the court below that hamdan , as a putative member of al qaeda , was not entitled to any of the protections accorded by the geneva conventions , the court concluded that at the very least , common article 3 of the geneva conventions applies , even to members of al qaeda , according to them a minimum baseline of protections , including protection from the "passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court , affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples. .

although recognizing that common article 3 "obviously tolerates a great degree of flexibility in trying individuals captured during armed conflict" and that "its requirements are general ones , crafted to accommodate a wide variety of legal systems," the court found that the military commissions under m.c.o .

no .

1 do not meet these criteria .

in particular , the military commissions are not "regularly constituted" because they deviate too far , in the court's view , from the rules that apply to courts - martial , without a satisfactory explanation of the need for such deviation .

with respect to the authority to create the military commissions , the court held that any power to create them must flow from the constitution and must be among those "powers granted jointly to the president and congress in time of war. .

it disagreed with the government's position that congress had authorized the commissions either when it passed the authorization to use military force ( aumf ) or the dta .

although the court assumed that the aumf activated the president's war powers , it did not view the aumf as expanding the president's powers beyond the authorization set forth in the ucmj .

the court also noted that the dta , while recognizing the existence of military commissions , does not specifically authorize them .

at most , these statutes "acknowledge a general presidential authority to convene military commissions in circumstances where justified under the 'constitution and laws,' including the law of war. .

in addition to limiting military commissions to trials of offenders and offenses that are by statute or by the law of war consigned to such tribunals , the ucmj provides limitations with respect to the procedural rules that may be employed .

article 36 ( 10 u.s.c .

§ 836 ) authorizes the president to prescribe rules for "pretrial , trial , and post - trial procedures , including modes of proof , for cases arising under this chapter triable in courts - martial , military commissions and other military tribunals. .

such rules are to "apply the principles of law and the rules of evidence generally recognized in the trial of criminal cases in the united states district courts" insofar as the president "considers practicable" but that "may not be contrary to or inconsistent" with the ucmj .

in addition , rules made pursuant to this authority "shall be uniform insofar as practicable. .

the president had determined with respect to the military commissions that "it is impracticable to apply the rules and principles of law that govern 'the trial of criminal cases in the united states district courts'" but made no determination with respect to the practicability of applying rules different from those that apply in courts - martial .

the court interpreted article 36 to provide the president discretion to determine which federal court rules need not be applied by various military tribunals due to their impracticability .

however , the court read the uniformity requirement as according less discretion to the president to determine what is practicable when providing different rules for courts - martial , military commissions , and other military tribunals .

unlike the requirement for rules to track closely with federal court rules , which the president need follow only insofar as he deems practicable , the court reasoned , the uniformity requirement applies unless its application is demonstrably impracticable .

thus , less deference was found owing , and the court found that the government had failed to demonstrate that circumstances make any courts - martial rules impracticable for use in military commissions .

further , the court found that some of the rules provided in the defense department rules set forth in military commission order no .

1 ( "m.c.o .

no .

1" ) , in particular the provision allowing the exclusion of the defendant from attending portions of his trial or hearing some of the evidence against him , deviated substantially from the procedures that apply in courts - martial in violation of ucmj article 36 .

m.c.o .

no .

1 sets forth procedural rules for the establishment and operation of military commissions convened pursuant to the november 13 , 2001 , m.o .

it addresses the jurisdiction and structure of the commissions , prescribes trial procedures , including standards for admissibility of evidence and procedural safeguards for the accused , and establishes a review process .

the hamdan court found the rules insufficient to meet ucmj standards and noted that the review process was not sufficiently independent of the armed services to warrant the court's abstention until the petitioner's case was finally decided .

m.c.o .

no .

1 also contains various mechanisms for safeguarding sensitive government information , which the court found problematic in that they could have permitted evidence to be withheld from the accused but nevertheless considered by the military commission .

the hamdan court left open the possibility that the rules established by m.c.o .

no .

1 would be valid if congress were to explicitly approve them .

other orders and instructions may also call for specific congressional approval to remain valid .

m.c.o .

no .

3 , "special administrative measures for certain communications subject to monitoring," establishes procedures for authorizing and controlling the monitoring of communications between detainees and their defense counsel for security or intelligence - gathering purposes .

m.c.o .

no .

2 and 4 designate appointing officials .

m.c.i .

no .

1 provides guidance for interpretation of the instructions as well as for issuing new instructions .

it states that the eight m.c.i .

apply to all dod personnel as well as prosecuting attorneys assigned by the justice department and all civilian attorneys who have been qualified as members of the pool .

failure on the part of any of these participants to comply with any instructions or other regulations "may be subject to the appropriate action by the appointing authority , the general counsel of the department of defense , or the presiding officer of a military commission. .

"appropriate action" is not further defined , nor is any statutory authority cited for the power .

m.c.i .

no .

1 also reiterates that none of the instructions is to be construed as creating any enforceable right or privilege .

the bush administration has presented to congress a proposal to be cited as the "military commissions act of 2006. .

senator frist introduced very similar legislation , the "bringing terrorists to justice act of 2006," as s. 3861 and as title i of s. 3886 , the "terrorist tracking , identification , and prosecution act of 2006. .

the senate armed services committee reported favorably a bill , "military commissions act of 2006" ( s. 3901 ) , which is in most respects similar to the administration's proposal , but varies with respect to jurisdiction and some rules of evidence .

the house armed services committee approved h.r .

6054 , also called the "military commissions act of 2006," which closely tracks the administration's proposal .

after reaching an agreement with the white house with respect to several provisions in s. 3901 , senator mcconnell introduced s. 3930 , also entitled the "military commissions act of 2006. .

all of these bills would authorize the trials of "alien unlawful combatants" by military commissions for a set of enumerated crimes and provide the accused with certain rights .

all of the bills would add a new chapter 47a after the ucmj in title 10 , u.s. code .

they leave intact the president's authority to establish military commissions under the ucmj , but the senate bills would seemingly expand that authority by removing the limitation of such trials to offenses and offenders triable by military commission pursuant to "statute or the law of war. .

all of the bills would amend article 36 , ucmj ( 10 u.s.c .

§ 836 ) to exclude military commissions from the need to comply to the extent the president deems practicable with the procedural rules that apply in federal district courts .

to various degrees , the bills clarify that the ucmj does not apply to military commissions .

s. 3901 and s. 3930 provide that "[e]xcept as otherwise provided [in the bill or in the ucmj] , the procedures and rules of evidence applicable in trials by general courts - martial of the united states shall apply in trials by military commission under this chapter. .

 ( proposed § 949a ( a ) ) .

however , they permit the secretary of defense , in consultation with the attorney general , to make such exceptions in the applicability in trials by military commission under this chapter from the procedures and rules of evidence otherwise applicable in general courts - martial as may be required by the unique circumstances of the conduct of military and intelligence operations during hostilities or by other practical need. .

 ( proposed § 949a ( b ) ) .

s. 3901 notes that some provisions of the ucmj do not apply by their terms , and that "[t]he judicial construction and application of chapter 47 of this title , while instructive , is therefore not of its own force binding on military commissions...." s. 3930 and the other bills provide that the judicial application and construction of the ucmj does not bind the interpretation of the new chapter .

 ( proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 948b ( b ) ) .

the bills each declare that the military commissions are "regularly constituted affording all the necessary 'judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples' for purposes of common article 3 of the geneva conventions. .

however , all of the bills provide that the geneva conventions may not be invoked as a source of rights in any u.s. court .

s. 3901 and s. 3930 define "unlawful enemy combatant" to mean "an individual engaged in hostilities against the united states who is not a lawful enemy combatant. .

 ( proposed § 948a ( 4 ) ) .

jurisdiction of military commissions would extend to any "alien unlawful enemy combatant engaged in hostilities or having supported hostilities against the united states. .

 ( proposed 948c ) .

aliens who have supported hostilities without having actually engaged in hostilities would not seem to fit within the definition of unlawful enemy combatant , and yet the jurisdiction section appears to contemplate their trial by military commission .

h.r .

6054 , s. 3861 , and s. 3886 define "unlawful enemy combatant" to mean an individual determined by the president or the secretary of defense ... to be part of or affiliated with a force or organization ... that is engaged in hostilities against the united states or its co - belligerents in violation of the law of war" ; or "to have committed a hostile act in aid of" or "to have supported hostilities in aid of such a force or organization so engaged. .

lawful combatants , such as prisoners of war , are excluded from the jurisdiction of military commissions in all three bills .

h.r .

6054 also excludes protected persons within the meaning of the fourth geneva convention from the jurisdiction of military commissions .

if the armed conflict is non - international in nature , as many interpret the supreme court's hamdan opinion to establish , then no person can qualify for pow status under the third geneva convention or "protected person" status within the meaning of article 4 of the fourth geneva convention .

all persons in captivity would be entitled to protected status within the meaning of common article 3 , however .

none of the bills defines "hostilities" or explains what conduct amounts to "supporting hostilities. .

to the extent that the jurisdiction is interpreted to include conduct that falls outside the accepted definition of participation in an armed conflict , the bills might run afoul of the courts' historical aversion to trying civilians before military tribunal when other courts are available .

it is unclear whether this constitutional principle applies to aliens captured and detained overseas , but the bills do not appear to exempt from military jurisdiction permanent resident aliens captured in the united states who might otherwise meet the definition of "unlawful enemy combatant. .

it is generally accepted that aliens within the united states are entitled to the same protections in criminal trials that apply to u.s. citizens .

therefore , to subject persons to trial by military commission who do not meet the exception carved out by the supreme court in ex parte quirin for unlawful belligerents , to the extent such persons enjoy constitutional protections , would likely raise significant constitutional questions .

all of the bills set forth a detailed list of crimes that may be tried by military commission when committed by alien unlawful combatants , provided , except in the case of h.r .

6054 , that the offense is committed "in the context of and associated with armed conflict. .

the bills ( except s. 3901 ) each declare that they merely codify offenses that have traditionally been triable by military commissions , implying that no retroactively punishable offenses are created in violation of the constitution's prohibition against ex post facto crimes and punishments or the analogous principle applicable under international law .

although many of the crimes seem to be well - established offenses against the law of war , at least in the context of an international armed conflict , a court might conclude that some of the listed crimes are new .

for example , a plurality of the supreme court in hamdan agreed that conspiracy is not a war crime under the traditional law of war .

the crime of "murder in violation of the law of war," which punishes persons who , as unprivileged belligerents , commit hostile acts that result in the death of any persons , including lawful combatants , may also be new .

while it appears to be well - established that a civilian who kills a lawful combatant is triable for murder and cannot invoke the defense of combatant immunity , it is not clear that the same principle applies in armed conflicts of a non - international nature , where combatant immunity does not apply .

the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia ( icty ) has found that war crimes in the context of non - international armed conflict include murder of civilians , but that the killing of a combatant is not a war crime .

all of the bills provide for the admission of evidence under rules that are more permissive than the military rules of evidence .

s. 3901 would provide for the admission of hearsay evidence that would not be permitted under the manual for courts - martial .

the hearsay evidence is admissible only if the proponent of the evidence notifies the adverse party sufficiently in advance of the intention to offer the evidence , as well as the "particulars of the evidence ( including information on the general circumstances under which the evidence was obtained ) ," and the military judge finds that "the totality of the circumstances render the evidence more probative on the point for which it is offered than other evidence which the proponent can procure through reasonable efforts , taking into consideration the unique circumstances of the conduct of military and intelligence operations during hostilities. .

 ( s. 3901 , proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949a ( b ) ( 3 ) ) .

s. 3930 eliminates the latter consideration , but provides that the evidence is inadmissible if the party opposing its admission "clearly demonstrates that the evidence is unreliable or lacking in probative value. .

h.r .

6054 , s. 3886 , and s. 3861 are similar to s. 3930 , providing that "hearsay evidence is admissible unless the military judge finds that the circumstances render the evidence unreliable or lacking in probative value .

however , such evidence may be admitted only if the proponent of the evidence makes the evidence known to the adverse party in advance of trial or hearing. .

the language does not indicate whether the any information about the source of the evidence must be provided .

all five bills prohibit the use of statements obtained through torture as evidence in a trial , except as proof of torture against a person accused of committing torture .

s. 3901 also provides for the exclusion of statements elicited through cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment , and the exclusion of statements elicited through coercive methods not rising to the level of cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment as defined in the detainee treatment act ( dta ) only if the military judge finds that the totality of circumstances render it reliable and probative , and the interests of justice would best be served by allowing the commission members to hear the evidence .

s. 3930 provides a different standard for the admissibility of statements obtained through coercion that does not amount to torture depending on whether the statement was obtained prior to or after the enactment of the dta .

statements elicited through such methods prior to the dta would be admissible if the military judge finds the "totality of circumstances under which the statement was made renders it reliable and possessing sufficient probative value" and "the interests of justice would best be served" by admission of the statement .

statements taken after passage of the dta would be admissible if , in addition to the two criteria above , the military judge finds that "the interrogation methods used to obtain the statement do not violate the cruel , unusual , or inhumane treatment or punishment prohibited by the fifth , eighth , and fourteenth amendments to the u.s .

constitution. .

h.r .

6054 , s. 3886 , and s. 3861 provide that "[a]n otherwise admissible statement , including a statement allegedly obtained by coercion , shall not be admitted in evidence in a military commission under this chapter if the military judge finds that the circumstances under which the statement was made render the statement unreliable or lacking in probative value. .

all of the bills under discussion include provisions for the protection of classified information , generally permitting the substitution of redacted documents , unclassified summaries of documents , or statements setting forth what the classified information would tend to prove .

s. 3901 contains procedures that are similar to those provided in military rule of evidence 505 for application at courts - martial .

classified information is to be protected during all stages of proceedings and is privileged from disclosure for national security purposes .

whenever the original classification authority or head of the agency concerned certifies in writing that particular evidence and its sources have been declassified to the maximum extent possible , the military judge may authorize , "to the extent practicable in accordance with the rules applicable in trials by court - martial," the "deletion of specified items of classified information from documents made available to the accused" ; the substitution of a "portion or summary of the information" ; or "the substitution of a statement admitting relevant facts that the classified information would tend to prove. .

the military judge must consider a claim of privilege and review any supporting materials in camera , and is not permitted to disclose the privileged information to the accused .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949d ( c ) ( 4 ) .

similar substitutions would be permissible in the context of discovery ( see infra ) .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949j ( c ) .

s. 3901 provides a guarantee that the accused must have the right to "examine and respond to all evidence considered by the military commission on the issue of guilt or innocence and for sentencing," and to "be present at all sessions of the military commission ( other than those for deliberations or voting ) , except when excluded under section 949d of this title. .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949a .

section 949d permits the exclusion of the accused only for disruptive behavior .

s. 3930 retains these provisions , and also includes a new subsection ( e ) to provide for the use of classified evidence at trial , to replace the provisions for classified information under proposed § 949 ( c ) in s. 3901 .

under the procedures outlined , the government would be permitted to claim a privilege with respect to information if the head of an executive or military department or agency asserts the information is properly classified and disclosure would be detrimental to the national security , without requiring a certification that such information had been declassified to the maximum extent possible .

when the government claims such a privilege , the military judge may authorize , "to the extent practicable," the "deletion of specified items of classified information from documents made available to the accused" ; the substitution of a "portion or summary of the information" ; or "the substitution of a statement admitting relevant facts that the classified information would tend to prove. .

proposed § 949d ( e ) ( 2 ) .

the provision specifically allows the introduction of such alternative evidence to protect classified "sources , methods , or activities by which the united states acquired the evidence" as long as the evidence is "reliable. .

the military judge may require that the defense and the commission members be permitted to view an unclassified summary of the sources , methods , or activities , to the extent practicable and consistent with national security .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949d ( e ) ( 2 ) .

it does not appear that the defense counsel or the accused is permitted to present arguments to the military judge in opposition to the government's claim of privilege .

h.r .

6054 , s. 3886 , and s. 3861 provide for the exclusion of the accused from portions of his trial in order to allow classified information to be presented to panel members but not disclosed to the accused .

under these bills , the military judge would have authority to prevent the accused from attending a portion of the trial only after specifically finding that the exclusion of the accused is necessary to prevent "identifiable damage to the national security , including [by disclosing] intelligence or law enforcement sources , methods , or activities" ; or is "necessary to ensure the physical safety of individuals" ; or is necessary "to prevent disruption of the proceedings by the accused" ; and that the exclusion of the accused "is no broader than necessary" ; and "will not deprive the accused of a full and fair trial. .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949d ( e ) .

each of the bills provides that defense counsel is to be afforded a reasonable opportunity to obtain witnesses and other evidence , including evidence in the possession of the united states , as specified in regulations prescribed by the secretary of defense .

the military commission is authorized to compel witnesses under u.s. jurisdiction to appear .

the military judge may authorize discovery in accordance with rules prescribed by the secretary of defense to redact classified information or to provide an unclassified summary or statement describing the evidence .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949j .

under h.r .

6054 , s. 3861 and s. 3886 , the trial counsel is obligated to disclose exculpatory evidence of which he is aware to the defense , but such information , if classified , is available to the accused only in a redacted or summary form , and only if making the information available is possible without compromising intelligence sources , methods , or activities , or other national security interests .

classified information is to be provided to military defense counsel , but civilian counsel is to have access only if he or she has the appropriate security clearance and such access is consistent with any procedures the secretary of defense implements for the protection of classified information .

defense counsel would not be able to share such information with the accused , which many observers assert could impair the defense's ability to refute any such evidence .

s. 3901 requires trial counsel to make available to the defense not only exculpatory information , but also any that would tend to "reduce the degree of guilt of the accused. .

it further provides that the military judge may authorize substitutions for classified information pursuant to rules similar to the rules that apply in courts - martial , to the extent practicable .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949j .

s. 3930 provides for the mandatory provision of exculpatory information only ( defined as exculpatory evidence that the prosecution would be required to disclose in a general court - martial ) , and does not permit defense counsel or the accused to view classified information .

the military judge would be authorized to permit substitute information , including when trial counsel moves to withhold information pertaining to the sources , methods , or activities by which the information was acquired .

the military judge may ( but need not ) require that the defense and the commission members be permitted to view an unclassified summary of the sources , methods , or activities , to the extent practicable and consistent with national security .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 949j .

the dta introduced an appellate mechanism for limited review of combatant status review tribunal ( csrt ) determinations and final decisions of military commissions .

s. 3901 would modify the dta so that appeals would be heard in the court of appeals for the armed forces ( caaf ) rather than the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 950f .

the caaf would have the authority to review appeals of final decisions by the accused or interlocutory appeals by the government of military commission rulings that terminate proceedings of the military commission , exclude material evidence , or relate to the closure of hearings , the exclusion of the accused from proceedings , or the provision of substitute evidence to protect classified information .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§ 950d .

the defense would not have an opportunity to submit an interlocutory appeal in the event of rulings that are unfavorable to the accused .

the government would not be permitted to appeal any ruling of a military commission that amounts to a finding of not guilty of any charge or specification .

the scope of review would be limited to matters of law , and decisions could only be overturned if an error of law "materially prejudices the substantial rights of the accused. .

proposed 10 u.s.c .

§§ 950a and 950f .

s. 3930 , s. 3861 , s. 3886 , and h.r .

6054 would provide for similar appellate rules , but would route appeals through the court of military commission review ( cmcr ) , a new body to be established by the secretary of defense , who would have the authority to promulgate procedural rules governing its operation .

the cmcr would be comprised of appellate military judges who meet the same qualifications as military judges or comparable qualifications for civilian judges .

once the cmcr has approved the final decision of a military commission , the accused would have the right to petition for a determination by the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) , pursuant to the section 1005 ( e ) ( 3 ) of the dta .

the government would be permitted to submit interlocutory appeals to the cmcr of adverse rulings pertaining to the admission of evidence or that terminates commission proceedings with respect to a charge or specification ( except for a ruling that amounts to a finding of not guilty ) , and in the event of an adverse ruling by the cmcr , would be permitted to appeal to the d.c .

circuit .

the accused would not be permitted to appeal an adverse interlocutory ruling .

the following charts provide a comparison of the proposed military tribunals under the regulations issued by the department of defense , standard procedures for general courts - martial under the manual for courts - martial , and military tribunals as proposed by h.r .

6054 and s. 3886 , and s. 3901 .

table 1 compares the legal authorities for establishing military tribunals , the jurisdiction over persons and offenses , and the structures of the tribunals .

table 2 , which compares procedural safeguards incorporated in the dod regulations and the ucmj , follows the same order and format used in crs report rl31262 , selected procedural safeguards in federal , military , and international courts , in order to facilitate comparison of the proposed legislation to safeguards provided in federal court , the international military tribunals that tried world war ii crimes at nuremberg and tokyo , and contemporary ad hoc tribunals set up by the un security council to try crimes associated with hostilities in the former yugoslavia and rwanda .

