although al - jazeera has received much attention for its coverage of the war in iraq , someobservers suggest that , despite its popularity , it should not be treated as a barometer for measuringthe arab media as a whole .

currently , there are other television stations , like the new 24-hour newsnetwork al - arabiya , and many pan - arab newspapers , some of which are published in westerncapitals , which reach a wide audience on a daily basis .

according to media analyst david hoffman,"most americans have heard of only al - jazeera," ( 38 ) but in reality , arabs get their news from a varietyof sources , many of which are "far worse" than al - jazeera .

indeed , in november 2002 , an egyptiantelevision station , which is partially government - owned , broadcast a series entitled "horsemanwithout a horse. .

the story was a chronicle of the arab struggle against colonial rule and againstthe establishment of the state of israel ; however , it included a sub - plot involving a forged document - the protocols of the elders of zion - describing an alleged jewish plot for world domination , whichwas used by the nazis as a pretext for the holocaust .

 ( 39 ) al - jazeera's impact on the middle eastern media as a whole remains unclear .

some variety satellite networks have slightly altered their formats to include more debate - style talk shows .

aspreviously mentioned , a new competitor news network , al - arabiya , has started operating in dubai'smedia city in the united arab emirates .

al - arabiya reportedly has received a great deal of financialbacking from more conservative sources , which may be reflected in its reporting style .

arab mediawatchers have observed that , as popular as al - jazeera has become , many viewers still desire localnews coverage , making al - jazeera only one of several news sources for the average viewer in themiddle east .

 ( 40 ) some suggest that al - jazeera,because of its high subscription cost , is equally aspopular outside of the middle east as within .

in the united states , subscribers can order al - jazeerathrough satellite dish companies , which package al - jazeera with several other channels at a priceof several hundred dollars a year .

al - jazeera's ability to cover breaking news , to promote its slick , entertaining format , and toproject subtly its pan - arab , pan - islamist approach to covering the news has sparked some u.s.officials and analysts to suggest ways of promoting a response to its distinctive influence .

othershave dismissed calls for policy responses .

some experts warn that any overt u.s. action could beviewed as heavy handed in a region which has traditionally been sensitive to outside involvementin regional or local affairs .

al - jazeera claims that u.s. steps intended to promote a more balancedmedia in the arab world will backfire , because arabs will consider it a propaganda effort of the u.s.government .

a range of possible actions has been proposed .

in one category are actions that activelypromote u.s. policy .

they include: create an alternative arabic language television network .

in the emergency supplemental appropriations bill of april 16 , 2003 ( p.l .

108-11 ) , congress designated $30.5 millionfor the middle east television network ( metn ) .

 ( 41 ) according to norman pattiz , the founder andchairman of westwood one radio network and a member of the u.s. broadcasting board ofgovernors ( bbg ) , "as most people in the region get their news and information from tv , we needto be on tv so we can explain america and its policies , its people , and its culture from our own lipsrather than have it described by the indigenous media. .

 ( 42 ) the exact scope and style of metn hasyet to be determined .

the bbg already sponsors radio sawa , an arabic radio station , whichcombines popular music with news headlines .

tie foreign aid to media reform .

some analysts contend that this technique , which has worked for some human rights cases , might be applied to the media as well .

buy commercial air time on arab networks .

during the last two years , the state department office of public diplomacy has been implementing the "shared values program," a $15million effort to promote positive images of muslim life in america .

tv advertisements depictingamerican muslims ran for 5 weeks in late 2003 in pakistan , kuwait , malaysia , and on somepan - arab channels , but not al - jazeera .

 ( 43 ) althoughthe overall campaign continues , the statedepartment stopped running the commercials after the governments of jordan , egypt , and lebanonrefused to carry them on state - run television .

other policy experts have suggested more indirect ways of influencing the arab media , including the following actions: have u.s. officials engage the arab media more actively .

as previously mentioned , top united states cabinet officials have appeared on al - jazeera television for interviews.proponents of this strategy believe that more appearances by u.s. officials , particularly those fluentin arabic , would convey confidence in u.s. foreign policy .

skeptics of this strategy believe thatal - jazeera and other channels could skew the pre and post - interview analysis against the u.s.position .

favor the more moderate arab satellite networks .

with almost a dozen different arab satellite channels , some analysts believe that u.s. interests would be better served ifu.s .

officials appeared on less sensationalist arab networks in order to foster competitors toal - jazeera .

some even suggest encouraging u.s. companies to advertise on these types of stations .

encourage more privatization of media .

under the auspices of the state department's middle east partnership initiative ( mepi ) , there have been plans to fund media reformprograms in some arab states .

as mepi is just starting to take shape , the initiative could fund mediatraining for aspiring journalists , as well as programs that promote freedom of thepress .

 ( 44 ) one argument , which is widely circulated in arab intellectual circles , is that the best way to combat the coverage of channels such as al - jazeera would be to focus u.s. foreign policy on solvingthe arab - israeli conflict .

others argue that biased coverage will continue no matter what directionthe united states takes its policy in the middle east .

with the united states heavily engaged in iraq,afghanistan , and elsewhere , al - jazeera will continue to play a role in reporting and interpreting u.s.foreign policy to the arab world .

