u.s. laws provide a variety of avenues for u.s. industries , including agricultural producers , to seek relief when they believe they have been injured by the effects of trade .

trade remedies , the primary means of such relief , are designed to counter the economic effects on u.s. producers of imports sold in the united states at unfairly low prices or of exports that benefit from a foreign government's domestic or export subsidies .

they might also be sought to reduce the impacts of surges in fairly - traded imports .

the use of trade remedies has grown along with increased u.s. involvement in trade agreements .

trade relief is viewed as a cushion against the potentially negative impacts of trade liberalization on import - sensitive products – a number of them agricultural – thus helping to build broader political support for trade agreements .

u.s. trade remedy laws generally reflect and are subject to international trade rules , notably those under the world trade organization ( wto ) multilateral agreements and the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

on the one hand , other countries , utilizing various wto and nafta rules and procedures , can and do challenge the legality of some u.s. actions taken under its trade remedy laws .

on the other hand , when such u.s. laws are applied in conformity with the international trade rules , wto and nafta dispute settlement procedures can serve to validate and strengthen any u.s. actions taken .

in addition , u.s. producers , working through u.s. trade officials , might also tap wto and nafta to resolve trade issues on a consultative or other lower - profile basis before they escalate into more costly , contentious cases involving hearing panels , appeals , sanctions , and the like .

 ( appendix a describes provisions and procedures on dispute settlement under the wto and nafta. ) .

some prominent examples where segments of u.s. agriculture have formally sought import relief in recent years include cattle imports from canada and mexico ; wheat imports from canada ; lamb meat imports primarily from australia and new zealand ; wheat gluten from europe ; and apple juice and honey from china , among others .

as u.s. producers of these items have found , the procedures for pursuing trade remedies are somewhat complex , resource - intensive , and time consuming .

winning a case is even more difficult .

currently , federal law provides for four primary trade remedies .

three address import concerns: safeguards ( or escape clause ) , antidumping duties ( ad ) , and countervailing duties ( cvd ) .

the fourth , commonly called section 301 , is the principal tool to challenge unfair foreign trade practices that affect u.s. commerce generally , including exports to other countries .

agricultural industries have some latitude in determining which remedy for import relief to pursue .

factors involved in the choice of remedy include the causation and injury standards to be met , the procedures involved , and the manner by which the remedy is treated in trade agreements .

the causation and injury standards applied in safeguard determinations are higher than those applied in cvd or ad cases .

section 201 requires that imports be a "substantial" cause of or threat of "serious injury. .

"substantial cause" is defined in the statute as "a cause which is important and not less than any other cause. .

"serious injury" is injury that is a significant , overall impairment to the position of the domestic industry .

in contrast , cvd and ad statutes require the determination of "material injury," defined as injury which is "not inconsequential , immaterial or unimportant. .

cvd and ad statutes require that the injury occur "by reason of" the subsidized or dumped imports , a less precise and lower causation standard than under the safeguard statute .

in addition to stricter causation and injury standards , procedures for safeguard relief entail decisions with respect to import relief that are made at a higher policy level – the president and possibly congress – than in ad and cvd procedures .

the president has wide discretion , including taking no action at all , in deciding what , if any , safeguard relief to implement .

congress also may have a role in the process if the president does not follow the recommendation of the itc .

in contrast , no such discretion exists in cvd and ad cases .

relief as determined by the doc is implemented by a doc antidumping or countervailing duty order without presidential or congressional involvement .

the higher injury standards and more demanding procedures for safeguard relief reflect the fact that the statute involves fairly traded imports from all sources .

in addition , the president , in deciding on the actions to be taken , must take into account factors related to national economic and security interests .

foreign countries whose trade will be affected by safeguard actions will seek to encourage the president to refrain from imposing , or otherwise to moderate , the safeguards .

the stricter standards and procedures are probably a significant reason why u.s. industries , including agriculture , have sought and received relief much more often from ad and cvd procedures than from safeguards ( see below ) .

also , recent experience with wto dispute settlement involving u.s. imposition of safeguard actions , particularly in regard to wheat gluten and lamb imports ( discussed below ) , may discourage parties who claim import - related injury from using section 201 .

in both cases , the wto questioned the methodology used by u.s. itc in determining injury caused by imports and overturned the remedy invoked by the president .

u.s. agricultural cvd and ad decisions have faced much less scrutiny in wto dispute settlement .

a variety of measures have been passed or proposed in recent years aimed at improving u.s. producers' ability to obtain relief from what they view as unfair import pricing and / or barriers to their own exports .

in some cases , these measures have been offered primarily in response to concerns raised by u.s. agriculture .

often , they have been fueled by the trade problems experienced by other u.s. industries , but nonetheless are or would be applicable across the economy , including agriculture .

some argue that agriculture deserves special treatment under u.s. trade policy in general and trade remedy legislation in particular due to its unique characteristics .

characteristics often cited as in support of special agricultural treatment include the highly perishable and cyclical nature of agricultural products and the importance of a financially healthy farm sector in ensuring adequate food at reasonable prices .

however , a counter - argument could be made that modern u.s. agriculture has become far more integrated into , and similar to , much of the rest of the u.s. economy , making special treatment unnecessary .

besides , it could be argued , the sector already is supported – far more than other industries – through an array of extensive and costly price and income supports , export programs , and other government spending that helps to cushion and insulate farmers from trade problems .

this section surveys a number of legislative and trade policy developments with potential implications for agricultural producers .

as agricultural trade grows , u.s. producers are exposed not only to new sales opportunities overseas , but also to stronger price competition at home as food and farm imports from other countries increase .

often , certain groups of commodity producers perceive such imports as a threat to their livelihoods , and seek relief from the government , either under existing statutes as described above , or through new legislative proposals , some of which have attracted congressional interest .

generally , trade remedy legislation receives the most support from industries – whether agricultural or non - agricultural ( eg , steel , textiles , etc. ) .

 – that appear to be the most sensitive to foreign competition .

however , opposition to such legislation often is found among other domestic interests , notably u.s. businesses that rely on imports , and consumers who face potentially higher prices due to import restrictions .

other possible costs of trade remedies are the extent , if any , to which they might sustain economically inefficient u.s. producers , heighten international trade tensions , and / or increase government outlays .

trade remedy laws already have come under scrutiny and challenge by the united states' major trading partners , and by the wto itself .

noting that the united states has continued to make use of ad and cvd measures , the wto recently stated: "initiations of investigations may have a chilling effect on trade , with preliminary duties applied in most cases. .

turning to the continued dumping and subsidy offset act ( the byrd amendment ) , the wto quoted president clinton as saying it would "provide select u.s. industries with a subsidy above and beyond the protection level needed to counteract foreign subsidies , while providing no comparable subsidy to other u.s. industries or to u.s. consumers , who are forced to pay higher prices on industrial inputs or consumer goods as a result of the anti - dumping and countervailing duties. .

however , the wto also has pointed out that the united states is not alone in its use of various import protections for agriculture and other products .

regarding "special" agricultural safeguards in particular , the wto reported that 38 of its member countries currently have reserved the right to use a combined total of 6,072 of them , which it defines as "contingency restrictions on imports taken temporarily to deal with special circumstances such as a sudden surge in imports. .

these are permitted generally under the ur safeguards agreement .

with the united states in mind , the european union and japan , for example , have called for a review of the antidumping practices of wto countries in the new round of multilateral trade negotiations , which are now getting under way .

the united states had opposed such a review .

however , u.s. negotiators subsequently agreed to language – in the november 2001 doha declaration that began a new round of multilateral trade negotiations – that calls for "simplification and clarification" of countries' laws on antidumping and safeguard laws .

ustr zoellick recently told the senate finance committee that the language is intended to encourage developing countries to bring their own trade relief measures up to u.s. standards ( and to replace language that potentially would have been more unfavorable to the united states ) .

however , several committee members sharply criticized the ustr for exposing the u.s. trade relief laws to potential weakening in the multilateral negotiations .

meanwhile , the u.s. position continues to be for further reductions in agricultural trade barriers .

some foreign governments might suggest that this position is inconsistent with the u.s. opposition to examining anti - dumping practices .

still , u.s. producers are likely to resist changes in u.s. law , and possibly to push for stronger protections , so long as they perceive foreign competitors engaging in unfair subsidization of their own agricultural producers .

appendix a .

dispute settlement in trade agreements wto uruguay round agreements understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes the uruguay round agreements include a dispute settlement understanding that sets out rules and timetables for resolving disputes .

disputes arise when one country adopts a trade policy measure or takes some action that one or more wto members considers a violation of a wto agreement or to be a failure to live up to obligations .

a third group of countries can declare their interest in the case and enjoy some rights as well .

settling disputes is the responsibility of the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) .

the first stage in dispute settlement is consultation between the governments concerned .

 ( consultation is always a possibility even in later stages of dispute settlement. ) .

consultation can take up to 60 days .

if consultations fail , the complaining country can ask for the appointment of a panel ( up to 45 days ) .

the other country can block the creation of a panel once , but when the dsb meets a second time , the panel can no longer be blocked .

the panel reports to the parties within 6 months and makes a final report to all wto members within 3 weeks .

the dsb adopts the report within 60 days .

if there is no appeal , the process should take about 1 year .

either side , however , can appeal the panel's ruling on points of law .

appeals are heard by three members of a permanent seven - member appellate body .

appeals should not last more than 60 days , with a maximum of 90 days .

the dsb has to accept or reject ( by consensus ) the appeals report within 30 days .

with appeal , the process should take about 1 year and 3 months .

the losing country must follow the recommendations of the panel or appeals report and state its intention to do so within 30 days of the report's adoption .

countries can be given a reasonable period of time to comply .

if a country fails to act within this period , it has to enter into negotiations to determine mutually acceptable compensation .

if after 20 days , no satisfactory compensation is agreed , the complaining country may ask the dsb for permission to impose trade sanctions which the dsb should grant within 30 days or the expiration of the "reasonable period of time. .

north american free trade agreement chapter 20 dispute settlement disputes arise when one nafta country complains that another nafta country has taken , or is proposing to take , action inconsistent with the agreement or that nullifies or impairs benefits that the complaining country thinks would accrue under the agreement .

complaints arising under both nafta and the wto may be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining party ( with some exceptions ) .

consultation which can take from 15 to 45 days is the first stage of dispute settlement .

if disputing parties cannot resolve the complaint , normally within 30 days , after consultations have begun , a country may refer the issue to the nafta commission for resolution .

the commission must convene within 10 days to consider the issue .

if the commission is unable to resolve the dispute within 30 days , any country that participated in the dispute may convene an arbitral panel .

panel members normally are selected from rosters maintained by each nafta country .

roster members must be experts in law , international trade , or matters covered by nafta or in dispute resolution .

 ( selection procedures are intended to ensure that nafta members can select experts in particular subject matters of a dispute to serve on panels. ) .

a five - member panel is chosen by "reverse selection. .

a chairman is chosen by agreement or by lot .

then each "side" in the dispute selects two panelists from among citizens of the other "side. .

experts or scientific review boards may be used where disputes require their advice , as for example , in matters concerning sanitary and phytosanitary or other scientific or technical matters .

panels must make their initial report , including findings and recommendations for resolution of the dispute , within 90 days of the selection of the last panelist .

disputing parties have 14 days to provide written comments on the panel's report .

the panel has 30 days then to make its final report to the disputing parties .

when the disputing parties receive the final report , they must attempt to resolve the dispute according to the panel's recommendations .

if no agreement is reached , the parties must agree on trade compensation for the complaining party .

if a panel has found that a measure is inconsistent with nafta and no settlement has been reached within 30 days or an agreed period , the complaining party may suspend the application to the other party of nafta benefits .

suspension of benefits may remain in effect until the parties have resolved the dispute .

settlement in anti - dumping and countervailing duty cases each nafta country retains its national antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) laws and can amend them .

in the case of amendments , nafta parties should notify and consult with the affected party in advance and also specify application to the goods of the other party where this is intended .

nafta governments may invoke a procedure whereby independent panels of experts ( preferably judges or attorneys ) review antidumping and countervailing duty determinations by the relevant administrative agencies in the nafta countries when those determinations concern products of a nafta country .

governments have agreed to seek review when interested persons wish to challenge an agency ad / cvd determination and who otherwise would have standing to challenge such a determination in court .

the panels apply exclusively the national law and standards of judicial review of the country whose ad or cvd determinations are under review .

panels are chosen from rosters maintained by each country in a manner similar to chapter 20 dispute settlement procedures .

nafta governments may appeal a panel decision to a three - member extraordinary challenge committee ( ecc ) whose members are selected from rosters of judges maintained by nafta countries .

if the ecc finds serious ethical violation , or serious legal or procedural error , and if it finds that such actions threaten the integrity of the binational panel process , then the ecc could vacate or remand the panel decision .

appendix b. antidumping and countervailing duty cases for food and agricultural products initiated since january 1 , 198 .

