the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) , signed into law on january 8 , 2002 , contains a number of new requirements related to student assessments for states and local educational agencies ( leas ) participating in title i - a ( education for the disadvantaged ) of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

these assessment requirements expand upon an earlier series of requirements for participating states to adopt curriculum content standards , academic achievement standards , and assessments linked to these at three grade levels , which were adopted under the improving america's schools act ( iasa ) of 1994 ( p.l .

103-382 ) .

the authorization for esea programs expired at the end of fy2008 , and the 111 th congress is expected to consider whether to amend and extend the esea .

this report provides background information on state student assessment programs and policies , a description of the esea title i - a assessment requirements as expanded by the nclb , a review of the implementation status of these requirements , and an analysis of related issues likely to be addressed by the 111 th congress .

this report will be updated regularly to reflect major legislative developments and available information .

the following section of this report describes the major student assessment - related provisions of the esea as amended by the nclb .

this report concludes with a review of major potential benefits and costs of the expanded student assessment requirements of esea title i - a .

the primary benefit from annual administration of a consistent series of standards - based tests would be the provision of timely information on the performance of students , schools , and leas , throughout most of the elementary and middle school grades .

while a majority of students have already been taking assessments in many of grades 3-8 , these have been typically a mix of crts and nrts , state - mandated and locally selected tests , with no provision that most of these are either equivalent statewide or aligned to state content and achievement standards .

even under the broadest interpretation of ed's draft policy guidance , which would allow states to use modified nrts in addition to crts , and locally varying tests which are deemed to be equivalent , the resulting state assessment systems would be more coherent , consistent , and well articulated than the current systems in most states .

the availability of such consistent , annual assessment results would be of value for both diagnostic and accountability purposes .

the resulting assessment systems would also continuously emphasize the importance of meeting state standards as embodied by the assessments .

these expanded requirements regarding student assessments — and school , lea , and state accountability based on performance on the assessments — have been enacted in the context of a broader strategy , also initiated in the 1994 esea amendments and expanded by the nclb , which involves increased state and local flexibility in the use of federal education assistance funds .

under this strategy , accountability for appropriate use of federal aid funds is to be established more on the basis of student performance outcomes , and less on prescribed procedures or targeting of resources , than in the past .

such a strategy implicitly relies heavily on high quality , current , detailed , and widely disseminated information on student achievement as a basis for outcome accountability policies and procedures .

it is desirable that achievement data be as comparable and current as possible while not compromising the primacy of states and leas in setting k - 12 education policy .

according to the ed publication , "testing for results , helping families , schools and communities understand and improve student achievement," annual standards - based assessments "will empower parents , citizens , educators , administrators and policymakers with data ... in annual report cards on school performance and on statewide progress. .

further: the tests will give teachers and principals information about how each child is performing and help them to diagnose and meet the needs of each student .

they will also give policymakers and leaders at the state and local levels critical information about which schools and school districts are succeeding and why , so this success may be expanded and any failures addressed.... a good evaluation system provides invaluable information that can inform instruction and curriculum , help diagnose achievement problems and inform decision making in the classroom , the school , the district and the home .

testing is about providing useful information and it can change the way schools operate. .

at the same time , the expanded title i - a assessment requirements might lead to a variety of costs , or unintended consequences , in both financial and other forms .

one such "cost" is expanded federal influence on state and local education policies .

assuming that states will continue to implement them in order to maintain title i - a eligibility , then assessment requirements attached to an aid program focused on disadvantaged student s are broadly influencing policies regarding standards , assessments , and accountability affecting all student s in the participating states .

this represents a substantial increase in federal influence in the assessment and accountability aspects of k - 12 education policy .

in the majority of states that did not previously mandate standards - based assessments in each of grades 3-8 , their policies may have resulted primarily from cost or time constraints , or the states may have determined that annual testing of this sort is not educationally appropriate , or at least that its benefits are not equal to the relevant costs .

these costs may include not only the direct costs of test development , administration , scoring , reporting , etc. , not all of which may be paid through federal assessment grants , but also an increased risk of "over - emphasis" on preparation for the tests , especially if the tests do not adequately assess the full range of knowledge and skills which schools are expected to impart .

the authors of a recent study of the effects of high - stakes assessment policies in 18 states have posited an "uncertainty principle," which may be relevant to such concerns: "the more important that any quantitative social indicator becomes in social decision - making , the more likely it will be to distort and corrupt the social process it is intended to monitor. .

at the least , annual testing of students in grades 3-8 would increase the importance of having tests that are well designed and closely linked to state content and achievement standards which are truly challenging .

nevertheless , even within the specific realm of standards and assessments , federal influence remains limited in several important respects .

with the exception of the limited role of state naep tests , the standards and assessments are totally selected by the states .

ed is not authorized by the nclb to review the substance of any state standards , and no state plan may be disapproved by ed on the basis of specific content or achievement standards or test items or instruments .

ultimately , whether increased federal influence in certain respects , combined with less federal control over certain other aspects of state and local use of federal aid funds , is a "balanced tradeoff" is a subjective political judgment .

the key analytical point is that the increase in federal influence is constrained , and is balanced by a decrease of federal influence in certain other respects .

