u.s. farmers are widely adopting biotechnology , growing genetically engineered ( ge ) crops - - mainly corn , soybean , and cotton varieties - - to lower production costs and reduce laborrequirements .

 ( 1 ) in 2002 , 66% of an estimated 145million acres planted to ge crops worldwide werein the united states , according to the international service for the acquisition of agri - biotechapplications ( isaaa ) .

 ( 2 ) u.s. crops where ge varieties are common are highly dependent upon export markets .

according to usda , approximately 40% of all u.s. soybeans , 20% of all corn , and 45% of allupland cotton production is exported .

these crops and their major products accounted for more thana fourth ( $13.3 billion ) of the total annual average annual value of $52.6 billion for all u.s.agricultural exports during calendar years ( cy ) 2000 to 2002 .

not all of these soy , corn , and cottonexports were ge varieties , but the u.s. marketing and regulatory systems do not distinguish between ( approved ) ge and non - ge varieties .

commingling bulk commodity shipments provides animportant cost competitive advantage for u.s. handlers in domestic and world markets , accordingto industry analysts .

these analysts observe that u.s. adoption of agricultural biotechnology has been facilitated bythe current u.s. regulatory system .

the basic federal guidance for regulating biotechnology productsis the coordinated framework for regulation of biotechnology ( 51 fed .

reg .

23302 ) published in1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

one of its keyprinciples is that genetically engineered products should continue to be regulated according to theircharacteristics and unique features - - not according to their method of production .

thus , if a foodproduct produced through biotechnology is determined to be substantially equivalent to oneproduced by more conventional means , that food is subject to no additional ( or no different ) regulatory processes .

once approved , food products do not have to be labeled as to whether or notthey contain any genetically modified organisms ( gmos ) , except to the extent a ge food issubstantially different ( eg , contains an allergen or has a changed nutritional content ) .

however,marketers are free to make such claims , one way or the other , so long as the labeling is truthful .

theframework maintains that new biotechnology products are regulated under existing federal statutoryauthorities , all of which were conceived and enacted before the advent of commercial agriculturalbiotechnology .

 ( 3 ) the problem for u.s. agriculture is that many countries remain wary of agricultural biotechnology , including those in the european union ( eu ) , where consumer and environmentalorganizations have been vocal in expressing concerns about the safety of ge crops and animals .

theeu and other important u.s. trading partners have adopted widely divergent approaches toregulating biotechnology .

as a result , u.s. exporters are encountering barriers to their products inthese markets .

for example , since 1998 , the eu , the fourth largest foreign market for u.s. agricultural products , has maintained a de facto moratorium on approvals of new ge crop varieties .

in may2003 , the united states , canada , and argentina began a formal challenge of the eu policy in theworld trade organization ( wto ) , contending that it violates international trade agreements and alsohas fueled unwarranted concerns about the safety of agricultural biotechnology throughout the world ( see page 9 ) .

the eu counters that it must protect its consumers by exercising the so - calledprecautionary approach , which says that if scientific evidence is insufficient or inconclusiveregarding a practice's or product's potential dangers to human or environmental health , it should bemore vigorously regulated or even prohibited if there are reasonable grounds for concern , thusproviding a safeguard against future unforeseen problems .

under this approach - - which is alsobeing emulated somewhat in other important u.s. markets such as japan and south korea , forexample - - the products of biotechnology are deemed to be inherently different than theirconventional counterparts .

even some countries that grow ge crops are imposing their own approval and labeling regulations for gmos .

for example , china is planting its own ge cotton and other crops , but hasimposed a temporary gmo import regime while it develops permanent new rules for approval andlabeling of gmo farm products .

this has created uncertainty about continuing access to thisimportant u.s. export market .

some u.s. producers , who otherwise generally have supported biotechnology , have expressed trepidation about expansion to more ge varieties due to such foreign market uncertainties .

theirconcerns have been evident as biotechnology companies work toward government approvals of gewheat .

although some growers are eager to plant the new varieties when they become available,others do not want commercialization approvals until there is wider global acceptance .

 ( 4 ) wheatgrowers , too , depend heavily on exports ; usda reports that 56% of production is exported .

theaverage annual value of u.s. wheat exports was $3.6 billion ( 7% of all agricultural exports ) incy2000-2002 .

u.s. officials say they are actively engaged multilaterally and bilaterally toensure that any national or international standards are consistent , transparent , basedon scientific principles , and compliant with international trade rules ( eg , thoseadministered through the wto ) .

however , they face difficulties in reconciling thecurrent u.s. approach with the opposing perspectives of other influential countrieslike those in the eu and elsewhere .

following are discussions of selected issues inthe international arena which have challenged u.s. supporters of agriculturalbiotechnology .

members of the house and senate agriculture , house ways and means , housescience , and senate finance committees are among those in the 108th congress whoare closely monitoring biotechnology developments in the international arena , as wellas the administration's response .

if this congress follows the lead of itspredecessors , it is more likely to be supportive of agricultural biotechnology ininternational trade than to seek constraints on ge commodities traded internationallyand domestically .

for example , the senate on may 23 , 2003 , passed , by unanimousconsent , a resolution ( s.res .

154 ) supporting the u.s. action against theeu ; a similar house measure ( h.res .

252 ) was passed june 10 , 2003,by a suspension vote of 339-80 .

separately , h.r .

2447 , introduced june12 , 2003 , would establish a federal interagency task force , composed of senioradministration officials , to promote the benefits , safety , and uses of agriculturalbiotechnology the house agriculture committee held a hearing on march 26 , 2003 , where the theme was the eu's moratorium on gmo approvals and its possible influence ondecisions by developing african countries to reject or delay u.s. food aid .

 ( 20 ) thehouse science subcommittee on research held a hearing on june 12 , 2003 , toexamine plant biotechnology research and development challenges and opportunitiesin africa .

earlier , the 107th congress included biotechnology provisions in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) including: a biotechnology and agricultural trade program , aimedat barriers to the export of u.s. products produced through biotechnology ( section3204 ) ; competitive grants for biotechnology risk assessment research ( section 7210 ) ; agricultural biotechnology research and development for developing countries ( section 7505 ) ; and a program of public education on the use of biotechnology inproducing food for human consumption ( section 10802 ) .

in addition , legislation thatgives the president trade promotion or "fast track" authority ( p.l .

107-210 ) containslanguage providing that u.s. trade negotiators should seek to negotiate rules anddispute settlement procedures that will eliminate unjustified restrictions andrequirements , including labeling , of biotechnology products .

bills also were introduced in the 107th congress that took other approaches to regulating agricultural biotechnology , and some could reappear in the 108th .

theyincluded h.r .

4814 , which called for mandatory labeling of ge foods ; and other bills in the 107th ( h.r .

4812 , h.r .

4813 , and h.r .

4816 ) which dealt respectively with legal issues raised bycross - pollination with ge plants , a study of the safety of ge foods , and liability forinjury caused by ge organisms .

no comparable bills had been introduced as of earlyjune 2003 .

responsibility for biotechnology trade issues and activities is shared by numerous federal agencies and departments .

officials who deal with them on aday - to - day basis say they communicate often , either individually or in workinggroups , to share information , resolve jurisdictional questions , and coordinate efforts .

as more difficult or controversial trade - related issues arise , officials from relevant agencies may meet at successively higher levels to discuss how to formulateand implement a policy response .

according to u.s. officials , years of experience - - along with established statutory authorities and the 1986 coordinated framework - - have provided them with a strong , if somewhat tacit , understanding on how theywill handle any given problem , including which agency should take the lead role .

such experience has fostered an increasingly coordinated , if not yetwidely - enunciated , formal approach to biotechnology trade policy , several u.s.officials argued .

nonetheless , some agencies are more prominent than others .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) is generally regarded as the lead agency onbiotechnology trade issues as part of its overall mandate to coordinate u.s. tradepolicy , including negotiating trade agreements and dealing with major disputes .

ustr leads the u.s. delegation of agency representatives at quarterly sps and tbtmeetings convened by the wto , where biotechnology matters generally are covered.back home , biotechnology questions pass through the ustr staff - level offices thathandle agricultural , sps , and tbt matters .

ustr convenes and coordinates aninteragency sps trade policy staff committee consisting of representatives fromagencies throughout government .

this committee meets frequently , but on an"as - needed" basis , on biotechnology trade issues , some of which may arise fromongoing bilateral or multilateral negotiations , and others from disputes with tradingpartners .

ustr also convenes a higher - level sps trade policy review group,composed of more senior agency officials , to discuss and resolve more controversialsps questions , including those on biotechnology .

 ( 22 ) however , other agencies take the lead on specific biotechnology issues .

the state department , for example , is at the forefront in dealing with countriesimplementing the cartagena biosafety protocol .

fda , supported by usda's foodsafety and inspection service ( fsis ) , leads on codex matters ( see table 1 ) .

on occasion , particularly thorny issues and / or jurisdictional disputes must be resolved at the white house level , which ultimately decides overall u.s.biotechnology policy with input from its office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

the president's special assistant for agricultural trade and food aid , anda biotechnology working group composed of high - level officials under the aegis ofthe white house national economic council ( nec ) , periodically may be calledupon to discuss or referee such issues .

the national security council also has beeninvolved in discussions , eg , those concerning whether to challenge formally the euover its de facto moratorium on new gmo approvals .

some critics assert that the u.s. response to biotechnology remains largely reactive , ad hoc , and not well coordinated .

thus , on any issue , jurisdictionaldiscussions may precede substantive action , they contend , arguing that a morecomprehensive long - term strategy is needed .

the biotechnology industryorganization ( bio ) has reported on its website that ustr has circulated amonginterested agencies a draft paper spelling out such a strategy .

however , as of earlyjune 2003 , the paper had not emerged publicly .

 ( 23 ) .

biotechnology issues and activities , including international ones , are addressed both at the departmental level ( across agencies ) and within the various agenciesthemselves .

usda's biotechnology coordinating committee is a staff - levelinteragency group that has met periodically to share information and work onbiotechnology issues of mutual concern ( both domestic regulatory as well astrade - related matters ) .

a higher - level biotechnology policy group is convened atleast several times monthly by the secretary of agriculture's special counsel on tradeto discuss policy , receive updates , and map plans for upcoming interdepartmental andinternational meetings .

secretary of agriculture ann veneman , on april 8 , 2003,named 18 people to a new advisory committee on biotechnology and 21st centuryagriculture ( authority for a previous advisory committee expired in 2001 ) .

elevenof the members represent agribusiness companies or agricultural producer groups ; the rest are from academia or consumer advocacy organizations .

section 3204 of the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) created a new biotechnology and trade program to provide grants for public and private sector projects that willaddress nontariff barriers to u.s. agricultural exports involving biotechnology , foodsafety , disease , or other sps concerns ; or that will develop , through bilateralnegotiations , protocols on animal health , grain quality , and gmos .

the measureauthorizes appropriations of up to $6 million annually through fy2007 .

usda's fy2004 budget proposal recommends new funding of $6.6 million and 20 new staff positions "to support a number of important cross - cutting , trade - relatedand biotechnology activities of the department and to ensure that adequate funds areavailable to address them effectively. .

of this amount , $2.1 million would bespecifically for work on gmo trade issues , presumably approximately a third of theauthorized funding under section 3204 .

of this amount , $600,000 would be for theforeign agricultural service's new biotechnology unit ( see below ) , and the other$1.5 million for u.s. activities in other countries , according to a departmentofficial .

 ( 24 ) ( congress had not yet acted on thefy2004 usda appropriation bymid - june 2003. ) .

the budget documents note that usda "faces a growing array ofchallenges related to biotechnology , including a rapidly expanding number ofregulatory , market access , and trade barrier issues. .

the funds would be appropriateddirectly to the secretary to provide her with flexibility in allocating them amongvarious agencies .

at the agency level , the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) facilitates and promotes agricultural trade , including trade in the products of biotechnology .

fasactivities include education , training , technical assistance , and issue resolution .

inrecent years , fas attention has been shifting increasingly from biotechnologycapacity building ( eg , technical assistance on the science and application ofbiotechnology in agriculture ) , to monitoring and dealing with foreign regulatorypolicies and restrictions on trade in gmo products .

fas programs include: ( 25 ) an overseas biotech training / education program involving seminars , symposia , and educational materials on various biotechnology issues aimedat foreign educators , public officials , and others ; cochran fellowship program biotechnology training , offeringshort - term u.s. training for foreign scientists , regulators , journalists , andpolicymakers , to provide information about the technology's benefits and about u.s.regulation ; biotechnology short courses , a new series of quarterly,two - week programs in the united states for foreign participants intended primarilyto impart "biotechnology's relationship to market access and trade in agriculturalproducts , and the factors influencing that relationship" ; capacity building for the seed trade industry to expand seedtrade with eastern europe , africa , and asia ; biotechnology research capacity building , supporting thedevelopment of science - based research and regulatory programs and promotingglobal food security , particularly in developing and newly emergenteconomies ; biotechnology activities with international organizations,utilizing a variety of approaches like briefings staged at multinational meetings ( eg,at codex and at the rome world food summit in 2002 ) and at regionalworkshops .

fas generally convenes a usda interagency team weekly to review sps and tbt problems in agricultural trade , including those in ge products ; is involved indeveloping policy on matters requiring higher - level decisions ; and leads oraccompanies other agency officials on overseas missions to discuss and resolveissues .

fas staff have long been engaged in biotechnology trade issues , but generally not on a full - time basis .

seeking to improve its focus and work , the agency in 2002established a new biotechnology office reporting to the administrator and associateadministrator .

the office hopes to have 10 full - time staffers on board by august2003 organized around four teams devoted exclusively to biotechnology work:bilateral relations in asia and the americas ; bilateral relations in europe , the middleeast , and africa ; international organization work ( eg , with wto , fao , etc .

 ) ; andone devoted to technical assistance , capacity building , and outreach .

usda's animal & plant health inspection service ( aphis ) regulates the movement , testing , and commercialization of new ge crop varieties ( and geveterinary biologics ) in the united states .

in addition , as the lead federal agencyregulating commodity imports and exports , aphis works to minimize tradedisruptions caused by animal and plant health issues , including those related tobiotechnology .

aphis staff participate , and sometimes take the lead , in u.s.negotiations with trading partners and in multinational forums to resolve sps - relateddisputes and to harmonize international standards , to ensure that such issues are notused as unfair barriers to trade .

an increasing share of aphis harmonization work revolves around trade in ge products .

the agency has sought both to ensure that international biotechnologypolicies are science - based , and to promote the global credibility of the u.s. geregulatory process .

it is involved in codex , ippc , oie , the cartagena protocol , andthe oecd , among other organizations , and is in ongoing negotiations with canadaon harmonization , which led recently to a draft bilateral agreement on environmentalassessment criteria for transgenic plants .

in fy2002 , aphis consolidated itsbiotechnology personnel under a single new office , biotechnology regulatoryservices , covering both domestic regulatory activities ; and international trade , policy,and capacity building .

the office was assigned 46 staff slots in fy2002 .

 ( 26 ) the federal grain inspection service of usda's grain inspection , packers & stockyards administration ( gipsa ) spells out official grain quality standards,establishes standard testing methodologies , and , for a fee , tests grain ( a requirementfor most exports ) to ensure they meet such standards .

gipsa has articulated abiotechnology program in response to the "emergence of value - enhanced grains andoilseeds , development of niche markets for non - biotech commodities , andestablishment of new regulatory requirements by u.s. trading partners [which] hascreated a need for greater product differentiation in the marketplace. .

 ( 27 ) gipsa has been evaluating the performance of tests to detect the presence of gmos in grains and oilseeds and offering a proficiency program for organizationstesting for biotechnology - derived grains and oilseeds to improve reliability .

theagency also has developed sampling guidelines for the industry , among otherservices .

gipsa itself has not been testing for gmos in shipments , except for thepresence of starlink tm corn , as a voluntary fee - based service .

 ( 28 ) .

