afghanistan has begun the slow process of reconstruction .

according to many observers , themost serious challenge facing afghans and afghanistan today remains the lack of security .

whilethe taliban regime fell and the new government has celebrated its first anniversary , afghanistan isstill in a peacebuilding process , an essential part of which is reconstruction .

most observers agreeon the need for substantial , long - term reconstruction and the need for international support , butquestions are raised about the funds required , the priorities , and the coordination necessary for thisprocess .

this report examines u.s. foreign aid to afghanistan in the context of the internationaleffort and explores the major issues for congress .

to understand the reconstruction process in afghanistan , it is useful to be familiar with thedifferent institutions involved in the process and their own particular institutional mechanisms forconducting and coordinating post - conflict reconstruction .

many of these mechanisms were put intoplace during earlier reconstruction attempts in afghanistan or were a result of lessons learned fromother post - conflict countries .

building on these initiatives , the international community seesafghanistan as a test case for new forms of donor coordination .

as a result , not only is afghanistanthe beneficiary of past practices , but also the international community , including the united states,has invested itself in the success of afghan reconstruction .

the afghan government and the international community are seeking to move more quicklyto reconstruction .

as already stated , reconstruction must cope with the destruction of 23 years of warand with the distortions in the afghan economy , in which the war and drugs compete to thedetriment of agriculture and other economic activities .

the afghan government faces a dauntingtask .

reconstruction is seen as the single most important factor in sustaining peace .

 ( 51 ) according tomany observers , successful reconstruction will stop disillusionment with the new system inafghanistan and will keep afghanistan from again becoming a haven for terrorists .

it is importantto remember that , while afghans signed the bonn accord in december 2001 , afghanistan is still ina crucial peace - building stage .

some point out that the collapse of law and order in the 1990s wasa key factor behind the taliban's military successes in subsequent years .

 ( 52 ) quick - impact programs ( with a time frame of four to six months ) initiated the post - emergency transition toward reconstruction and constituted the initial part of more long - term programs ineducation , health , poppy eradication , and other areas .

these projects also provide an important basisfor further reconstruction .

 ( 53 ) numeroussmall - scale and some large longer - term , mostly road , projectsare underway .

there are several issues of concern for the international community , the afghan government , and observers beyond the funding challenges discussed above .

first , the lack of security hasthreatened the progress of reconstruction .

second , not much obvious progress has been made onreconstruction because there have been many small programs and few large programs .

accordingto some observers , afghans have become frustrated with what they perceive as little evidence ofreconstruction .

there are many possible explanations for the perceived lack of progress: lack ofsecurity , lack of human and physical capacity to implement substantial reconstruction , inadequatefunding levels , and funding predominately going towards the continuing humanitarian crisis andtowards the administrative costs of the international donor community , rather than towardsreconstruction projects .

both security and progress on reconstruction are necessary in order tomaintain international donor interest in afghan reconstruction , encourage private investment inafghanistan , and maintain afghans' hope in improvement in their country and their own lives .

what should be the goals of reconstruction in afghanistan where humanitarian assistance , reconstruction , and development initiatives overlap ? .

not only did afghanistan experience a decadeslong war , it also was a developing country before the war .

therefore , reconstruction anddevelopment blend in the case of afghanistan .

there are several issues that congress couldconsider .

for the united states , is the goal merely "aid - induced pacification" ( giving funds toafghanistan in order to pacify the population and reduce possible security threats fromafghanistan ) ? .

 ( 80 ) or is the goal some form ofdevelopment , providing incentives for livelihoodsoutside the drug and war economies ? .

how much development should the united states fund underthe aegis of reconstruction , leaving other areas to formal development agencies like undp ? .

in addition to the administration , some in congress have talked about developing a marshall plan for afghanistan .

so far the calls for a marshall plan seems to mean only a sustained , long - termcommitment to reconstruction , which in the case of afghanistan , includes nation building .

themarshall plan for europe was substantially different from what is evident in afghanistan .

first , theeuropean marshall plan would have been $103 billion in today's money spread out over four years,which is much more than the amount currently provided by the united states , even including themilitary assistance .

second , the european marshall plan was also a regional strategy for westerneurope , as opposed to a national strategy .

third , afghanistan is much less developed than westerneurope was at the time , which means that reconstruction will entail much more development .

senator biden proposed a kind of marshall plan for central and south asia , providing a regional approach to afghan reconstruction and drawing in its neighbors .

 ( 81 ) afghanistan's neighbors andother countries have repeatedly supported the decades - long civil war .

pakistan , iran , russia , thecentral asian countries , india , and the united states sought to influence the war's outcome .

fromexperiences in other similar situations in rwanda , somalia , and kosovo , scholars have argued thatpeace processes are most threatened in countries with intervening neighbors .

as a result , thesescholars have argued for reconstruction efforts in afghanistan to be coordinated with relevantofficials in neighboring countries , so that conflicting programs do not provide opposing incentivesand negative consequences .

the congress took steps in this direction with the afghanistan andcentral asian republics sustainable food production trust fund act of 2001 ( h.r .

3566 ) , but the last action on this bill was in january 2002 when it was referred to the housesubcommittee on international monetary policy and trade .

furthermore , on december 22 , 2002,afghanistan and its six neighbors signed the kabul declaration on good neighborly relations , anon - aggression pact .

 ( 82 ) .

security is a top priority in afghanistan .

plans for the u.s. military to be a part of provincial reconstruction teams stands in contrast to the sense of congress put forth in the afghanistanfreedom support act , which calls for the expansion of isaf .

with the provincial reconstructionteams now being put together , how does congress view isaf ? .

demobilization of local militia could be further encouraged through employment generation programs .

these programs could also provide incentives for economic activities beyond the drugand war economies .

employment generation is also a priority area for the afghan government .

 ( 83 ) the afghan government and others are calling for a mass cash - for - work program to combat both thehigh levels of unemployment and the "cash famine. .

 ( 84 ) this mass program might resemble the u.s.civilian conservation corps , established in the 1930s to cope with unemployment from the greatdepression .

it employed about three million young men to work full - time for cash on a variety ofprojects .

 ( 85 ) the contribution of food aid by the united states and other countries is also an issue for congress .

on the one hand , food aid can undermine market prices and provide disincentives foragricultural production and thus some parts of reconstruction .

other forms of assistance , such ascash - for - work programs , could help afghanistan reduce its dependence on international assistance .

on the other hand , food aid and humanitarian assistance are considered essential in some parts ofafghanistan .

the form of assistance is a significant issue for congress .

in march 2003 , the next major donor conference for afghanistan will take place .

the pledges at the first donor conference in tokyo in january 2002 nearly met the first year needs assessmentconducted by the world bank , undp , and adb .

however , these pledges were primarily used forhumanitarian assistance .

furthermore , reconstruction is just now slowly beginning , and there isconcern about maintaining donor interest in afghan reconstruction .

therefore , the pledges at themarch conference are particularly important .

in regard to u.s. funding , the administration's request for fy2004 for afghanistan totals $531 million , not including disaster assistance .

 ( 86 ) somemembers of congress believe the amounts shouldbe greater with fewer constraints .

the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-327 ) authorizes $3.3 billion over four years .

in addition , if a marshall plan were to be planned forafghanistan , then much more money is likely to be necessary .

in any case , the amount of the u.s.contribution , and the framework under which it will be provided , remain key questions for congress .

in addition to concerns about the necessary u.s. aid levels , congress and others have been concerned about burden sharing .

the donor conferences have often not produced the necessaryamounts of funds in a timely manner .

late in 2002 , the united states had to play a role infundraising .

what level of funding should the united states and other countries provide ? .

shouldother countries be encouraged to contribute more ? .

how can interest in afghanistan from the donorcommunity be sustained ? .

many inside and outside the afghan government have criticized donors for not following through on their pledges .

however , donor conferences in general exhibit problems , such as slowdisbursement of funds , weak mechanisms for pledging and mobilizing assistance , inadequate devicesfor tracking aid flows , inappropriate forms of aid conditionality , poor articulation between relief anddevelopment efforts , and weak coordination within the donor community .

 ( 87 ) donors over - pledge,pledge already allocated funds , and slowly or never fulfill their pledges .

in the case of afghanistan,the international community has sought to avoid some of these problems , such as through thecreation of the aaca aid database , which has made pledging , tracking , and monitoring moretransparent .

whether donor conferences and trust funds are the best way to fund reconstruction hasbeen questioned by some observers who also ask if the united states should give more money to thetrust funds .

if not , then other potential methods must be examined .

as of this fall , the pentagon announced that it was transforming its strategy from military to security and reconstruction goals .

dod has been providing humanitarian assistance to afghanistansince oef began , and it seems that this role in a reconstruction framework will increase .

in general,militaries worldwide are increasingly providing such assistance because humanitarian agenciesincreasingly work in war - torn areas .

however , many ngos have argued that the provision ofhumanitarian assistance by militaries comes at a high cost .

military provision of this assistanceassociates humanitarian agencies and actors , as well as refugees and other victims , with militaryobjectives and activities , even with particular sides in the war .

it is argued that this association mayput these agencies and actors in danger .

on the other hand , security remains a key factor in thedistribution of aid itself and often requires a military presence for it to be effective .

it would beuseful to examine the costs and benefits of the increased humanitarian programs conducted by dodin afghanistan and elsewhere to understand better the impact of the military on non - militaryassistance programs .

there is a consensus that afghanistan requires long - term international attention in order to receive adequate donor funds , have successful reconstruction , and avoid another civil war .

someargue that afghanistan's situation is precarious .

however , discussions and attention have turned toiraq with the possibility of war there .

while a war in iraq is projected to cost many billions ofdollars , president bush has stated that the united states will continue to fund and organizereconstruction in afghanistan .

how will the congress seek to reconcile these two costly programswith the rest of the foreign aid budget and the general budget ? .

some , including the internationalcommunity , have raised doubts about the u.s. commitment to afghanistan as the united statesfocuses on iraq and visa versa .

can the united states manage maintain a central focus onafghanistan at the same time that it takes on iraq ? .

appendix - afghanistan assistance donor funds committed anddisbursed by country as of february 10 , 2003 source: aaca donor assistance database , feb. 10 , 2003 , http: / / aacadad.undp.org .

