this report outlines the purpose and legislative background of providing benefits to the surviving dependents of a deceased member / retiree of the uniformed services .

in certain cases , individuals other than dependents can be designated recipients of survivor benefits .

this report describes the categories of beneficiaries eligible for survivor benefits under the military survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) , the formulas used in computing the income level ( including the integration of sbp benefits with other federal benefits ) , and the costs of sbp participation incurred by the retiree and / or the beneficiary .

under the sbp , a military retiree can have a portion of his or her monthly retired pay withheld in order to provide , after his or her death , a monthly survivor benefit ( 55% of base amount of military retired pay at the time of the retiree's death ) to a surviving spouse or other eligible recipient ( s ) .

the cost of this protection is shared by the retiree ( in the form of reductions from monthly military retired pay after retirement ) , the government , and possibly the beneficiary ( under certain types of coverage ) .

the original intended purpose of the sbp ( and its antecedents ) is to "insure that the surviving dependents of military personnel who die in retirement or after becoming eligible for retirement will continue to have a reasonable level of income. .

coverage was later expanded to active duty personnel as well .

the survivor benefit plan was created by legislation enacted on september 21 , 1972 , and has been modified by later legislation .

the sbp replaced the retired serviceman's family protection plan ( rsfpp ) .

the rsfpp was replaced because it had a number of unpopular features that made it unattractive .

the rsfpp could be expensive for the retiree ; the cost was approximately $0.23 of deducted retired pay per dollar of survivor benefits for a retired member age 45 who elected to provide coverage for a spouse who was 5 full years younger .

the rsfpp was intended to be actuarially neutral in terms of costs — in other words , the cost of this program was fully paid for by its participants .

the decision to elect rsfpp coverage had to be made by the prospective military retiree before his or her 18 th year of military service .

furthermore , the methods used in computing the rsfpp's cost and benefit could change between the time at which the servicemember elected to provide coverage and the time at which the member actually retired .

thus , the costs and benefits remained an unknown quantity , limiting the ability of the retiree to make future financial plans .

during its 19-year history , participation in the rsfpp never exceeded more than 15% of eligible military retirees .

it was expected — and has largely been proven — that the sbp would be a significant improvement over the rsfpp , in terms of participation rates , costs to the retiree , and benefits for the survivors .

it also entails higher costs to taxpayers because the sbp costs are shared with the government in most cases .

prior to 2004 , sbp benefits were either "offset" in part by the receipt of social security benefits earned as a result of the military members service ( aka the social security offset ) , or subjected to a two - tier benefit structure .

both reduced sbp benefits when the recipient turned age 62 .

many congressional constituents expressed confusion and dissatisfaction with these provisions .

the fy2005 national defense authorization act contained language that made a substantial change in the computation of the sbp benefit for those age 62 and over .

simply stated , this law phased out the two - tier and social security offset formulas discussed above .

this change substantially increased the survivors' benefits but was criticized as a form of "double dipping" since it allowed the beneficiary to receive overlapping federally supported payments from social security and sbp based on the same career .

department of veterans affairs ( va ) dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) was established in 1956 by the servicemen's and veteran's survivor benefit act .

"under this act , as amended , dic is paid to the survivors ... of servicemen or veterans who died on or after january 1 , 1957 , from: ( 1 ) a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty while on active duty or active duty training ; or ( 2 ) an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty while on inactive duty training ; or ( 3 ) a disability compensable under laws administered by the va." a service member can , for example , ( 1 ) contract a disease or incur an injury during active duty or active duty training , ( 2 ) recover and return to active duty , ( 3 ) retire from an active duty or reserve component military career and participate in the sbp , and ( 4 ) subsequently die because of complications resulting from the original service - related disease or injury .

the surviving spouse or former spouse of the retiree is then entitled to dic payments from the va .

in this situation , however , the surviving spouse or former spouse of the retiree is not entitled to receive the combined total of full sbp and dic benefits .

instead , the sbp benefit is offset by the amount of dic received ( with certain limitations ) .

this offset occurs regardless of the retiree's enrollment in the sbp supplemental .

the total of dic and offset sbp payments combined is , at least , equal to the full sbp benefit .

a surviving spouse or former spouse who remarries loses his or her entitlement to dependency and indemnity compensation payments .

upon losing dependency and indemnity compensation , however , the remarried spouse or former spouse has his or her full sbp benefit restored , provided the remarriage — in accordance with sbp restrictions — occurs after age 60 or age 55 if the remarriage occurs after november 14 , 1986 .

also , if the dic is paid to an sbp - eligible surviving spouse or former spouse , a percentage of the deceased retiree's original contributions to the sbp offset by dic will be returned to the surviving spouse or former spouse .

in other words , if the sbp is offset by dic , that proportion of deductions from the deceased retiree's retired pay which financed the offset portion of the sbp will be refunded to the surviving spouse or former spouse .

sbp payments can be restored , if the beneficiary becomes ineligible for dic and remains eligible for sbp , provided that the refunded sbp payments are returned .

as noted above , effective january 1 , 2004 , sbp - dic offset surviving spouses who remarry after attaining the age of 57 are eligible to receive both the full sbp and dic .

this concurrent receipt benefit for those remarrying after attaining age 57 is called the "special rule concerning dic offset. .

as noted above , the cost of the sbp is shared by the government and the retirees .

the amount paid by a particular retiree varies depending on level of coverage , years of payments , years the survivor receives an annuity , etc .

for active duty personnel who make no contributions , the benefit is essentially free .

certain retirees and organizations representing their interests have claimed that , as originally structured , withholdings from retired pay for sbp were expected , on average , 40% of the cost of this benefit .

further it is claimed that since retirees are living longer and since the government has manipulated the withholdings formula , the retirees' share has increased to more than 73% .

these claims are made in an effort to increase government payments into the sbp in hopes of increasing benefits ( particularly with regard to the apparently successful effort of eliminating the reduction in benefits that occurs when the surviving spouse reaches age 62 ) .

in reviewing these claims , a number of points may be considered .

first , as noted , there is no legal mandate for any ratio of retiree to government contributions .

second , such claims of a shift in the retiree / government share appear to be based on a selective use of retiree data .

third , the claim that retirees are living longer and paying more ignores the obvious point that survivors , too , are living longer and collecting more .

fourth , the above history of this benefit shows that congress has expanded eligibility ( including "free" benefits to "forgotten widows" and active duty survivors ) , increased benefits , reduced costs , will eliminate withholdings under the "paid - up provision" afforded supplemental coverage , etc .

at no time did congress reduce the benefit .

as such , the claims that the government's contribution to sbp have been reduced are unreliable .

nor do such claims rationalize the increase of benefits at age 62 for surviving spouses ( a change that arguably creates a superior benefit relative to those available to the survivors of other federal employees ) .

it is noteworthy that after the sbp was introduced , the fy1973 cost to retirees was $36,145,000 with a fiscal year payment to families of only $5,700,000 .

this is due to the relatively small number of participants who died shortly after signing up .

ten years later , as more retirees signed up and more died , the fy1983 cost to retirees grew to $652,536,000 while the payment to families grew to $406,887,000 .

in fy1993 , as participant deaths increased , the cost to retirees was $822,955,000 with payments to families reaching $1,177,185,000 .

finally , in fy2005 , costs to retirees were reported to be $1,099,363,000 while payments to families surged to $2,253,728,000 .

from 1973 through 2005 , the cumulative cost to retirees was $22,597,064,000 while cumulative payments to families was $30,923,249,000 .

considering the cumulative payments by retirees and to military families , the government paid $8,326,185,000 more in benefits to families than it received .

the cost to retiree / family payment gap will grow as the age 62 reduction is phased out and the "paid - up provision" is implemented .

from this perspective , if the cost / benefit share has shifted , the shift has been in the favor of recipients with taxpayers assuming an increasing cost of the program .

in fy2009 , 874,613 were making payments into sbp with a cumulative cost to retirees of $27,340,043,000 and cumulative payments of $43,084,459,000 .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 directed comptroller general to report on the actuarial soundness of the survivor benefit plan .

on july 26 , 2006 , the government accountability office issued its report .

the following is verbatim from that report: results in brief the significant statutory sbp program changes implemented within the past 7 fiscal years that we reviewed have resulted in increased dod normal cost payments and annual treasury amortization payments to the fund in order to maintain the actuarial soundness of the fund .

when changes are made to sbp coverage or benefits , the dod ooa [office of the actuary] calculates the necessary dod and treasury contributions to ensure that sufficient moneys are available to make all benefit payments to eligible recipients each year , and that sufficient fund assets will be available in the future to liquidate all current unfunded liabilities .

according to the dod ooa estimates , the significant sbp program changes we reviewed have resulted in the following: – eliminating the reduction in surviving spouses' sbp benefits when such spouses are also eligible for social security benefits at age 62 and thereafter increased the sbp liability by an estimated $25.2 billion as of september 30 , 2004 .

of this amount , treasury and dod will be responsible for an estimated $23.7 billion and $1.5 billion , respectively .

dod's $1.5 billion liability includes $1.3 billion in normal costs for current active duty and full - time reservists ( full - time employees ) and $0.2 billion in normal costs for current part - time reservists ( part - time employees ) .

 – periodically , congress has allowed an open season for sbp enrollment , the most current one being during fiscal year 2006 .

although the total effects of the sbp open season cannot be fully estimable for at least 2 years , the estimated increase in the sbp liability will likely range from $31 million to $86 million .

 – eliminating further sbp premiums to be paid by retirees who are aged 70 or older and who have paid such premiums for 30 years increased the sbp liability by an estimated $2.5 billion .

of this amount , treasury will be responsible for an estimated $2.4 billion , and dod will be responsible for $0.1 billion in normal costs related to current full - time employees .

 – extending sbp surviving spouse or child benefits for all personnel who are killed in the line of duty and are not eligible for retirement at the time of their deaths increased the sbp liability by an estimated $72 million as of september 30 , 2001 .

of this amount , treasury will be responsible for an estimated $28 million , and dod will be responsible for $44 million in normal costs related to current full - time employees .

the two potential changes to sbp benefits mentioned in section 666 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 would likely also result in increases to the dod normal cost payments and the annual treasury amortization payments to the fund as follows .

 – currently , an unmarried dod retiree without dependent children may elect to have another person with an insurable interest as the sbp beneficiary ; however , if that beneficiary dies , designation of another insurable interest is not allowed .

using conservative assumptions , the dod ooa calculated that the sbp liability would increase by an estimated $2.2 million if retirees were allowed the option of choosing a second insurable interest .

of this increase , treasury would be responsible for $2 million and dod for $231,000 .

of dod's $231,000 , $211,000 would be for normal costs related to current full - time employees and $20,000 for normal costs related to current part - time employees .

 – the survivors of veterans who die because of complications resulting from a service - connected disease or injury are entitled to dic benefits from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

under current law , sbp benefits for survivors of retired veterans are offset by any dic payments received .

the dod ooa calculated that eliminating the current offset requirement would increase the sbp liability by an estimated $12.9 billion .

of this amount , treasury and dod would be responsible for $12.3 billion and $645 million , respectively .

of dod's $645 million , $617 million would be for normal costs related to current full - time employees and $28 million for normal costs related to current part - time employees .

enactment of these legislative changes would require the board of actuaries and the dod ooa to adjust dod and treasury payments , subject to future appropriations , by amounts necessary to offset any increased costs related to expanded benefits ; for this reason , enactment of these changes should not negatively affect the actuarial soundness of the fund .

in responding to a draft of this report , dod did not have any objections or substantive comments .

dod separately provided some technical suggestions , which we incorporated as appropriate .

