global climate change is a widespread and growing concern that has led to extensive international discussions and negotiations .

responses to this concern have focused on reducing emissions of greenhouse gases , especially carbon dioxide , and on measuring carbon absorbed by and stored in forests , soils , and oceans .

one option for slowing the rise of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere , and thus possible climate change , is to increase the amount of carbon removed by and stored in forests .

as congress debates climate change and options for addressing the issue , ideas for increasing carbon sequestration in forests are likely to be discussed .

this report examines basic questions concerning carbon sequestration in forests .

the first section provides a brief background on congressional interest in forest carbon sequestration .

the second describes the basic carbon cycle in forests , with an overview of how carbon cycling and storage vary among different types of forests .

the third section then addresses how forest carbon is considered in the global climate change debate .

this third section begins with an overview of accounting for forest carbon , then discusses the carbon consequences of forest management practices , the effects of changes in land use , and "leakage. .

the section then concludes with a summary of existing federal programs that could affect forest carbon sequestration .

the widespread and growing concern over global climate change has led to extensive international negotiations .

in 1992 , at the earth summit in rio de janeiro , the united nations framework convention on climate change ( which included voluntary pledges to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ) was opened for signature .

president george h. w. bush signed this treaty , which was then ratified by the u.s. senate .

subsequent negotiations led to the 1997 kyoto protocol , under which the developed nations agreed to specified reductions in their emissions of greenhouse gases .

president clinton signed the kyoto protocol , but did not submit it to the senate for ratification .

early in 2001 , the george w. bush administration decided to reject the kyoto protocol , and withdrew from active participation in negotiations on the issues that remain to be resolved .

although enough other parties have ratified the protocol to bring it into force , the lack of u.s. involvement means that the united states will not participate in the emissions trading or other elements of the kyoto protocol activities that might relate to carbon sequestration .

the most voluminous greenhouse gas produced by humans is carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

in calculating overall carbon emissions , the protocol allows certain removals of carbon by a nation's forests and soils — "carbon sinks" — to be counted and deducted from emissions .

thus , one option for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions — and thus possible climate change — is to increase the amount of carbon stored in forests .

carbon sequestration , and the extent to which it can be counted as a reduction in a nation's carbon emissions , have been the focus of substantial controversy in international negotiations subsequent to the kyoto protocol .

the united states , with its extensive forests , argued that the carbon absorbed by them should be allowed to offset emissions , with no quantitative limit to the amounts that can be counted in this way .

the european union argued strongly in negotiations prior to 2001 that there should be fairly strict limits on how much carbon absorbed by "sinks" such as forests could be counted against emissions .

in final negotiations during 2001 on rules to implement the kyoto protocol , after the united states had withdrawn from the negotiations , a compromise was reached that allows significant credit for carbon sinks ( removals and storage of carbon ) .

the members of congress attending the negotiations prior to 2001 followed this debate with interest , and were aware of the potential impacts of the various possible results of the negotiations .

in particular , if emissions trading were to begin under the kyoto protocol , forest owners and managers in countries that were parties to the treaty might be able to receive credits and participate in the trading regime .

administration and congressional interest in carbon sequestration continues , but u.s. participation in the kyoto process is moot at this time .

it is not clear whether a domestic forest carbon program might be established , although options have been discussed in legislative proposals .

protecting forests in developing countries , which might earn credits under the kyoto protocol , is already supported under the tropical forest conservation act ( p.l .

105-214 ; 22 u.s.c .

§§2341 , et seq. ) .

mitigating climate change by enhancing forest carbon sequestration may be a relatively low - cost option and would likely yield other environmental benefits .

however , forest carbon sequestration faces challenges: measuring the additional carbon stored ( over and above what would occur naturally ) ; monitoring and verifying the results ; and preventing leakage .

numerous issues regarding the carbon cycle in forests , monitoring the levels and changes in forest carbon , and the scientific uncertainties about the relationships among forests , carbon , and climate change are likely to be the subject of ongoing federal research efforts , with funding and oversight by the congress .

photosynthesis is the chemical process by which plants use sunlight to convert nutrients into sugars and carbohydrates .

carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) is one of the nutrients essential to building the organic chemicals that comprise leaves , roots , and stems .

all parts of a plant — the stem , limbs and leaves , and roots — contain carbon , but the proportion in each part varies enormously , depending on the plant species and the individual specimen's age and growth pattern .

nonetheless , as more photosynthesis occurs , more co 2 is converted into biomass , reducing carbon in the atmosphere and sequestering ( storing ) it in plant tissue ( vegetation ) above and below ground .

plants also respire , using oxygen to maintain life and emitting co 2 in the process .

at times ( eg , at night and during winter seasons in non - tropical climates ) , living , growing forests are net emitters of co 2 , although they are generally net carbon sinks over the life of the forest .

when vegetation dies , carbon is released to the atmosphere .

this can occur quickly , as in a fire , or slowly , as fallen trees , leaves , and other detritus decompose .

for herbaceous plants , the above - ground biomass dies annually and begins to decompose right away , but for woody plants , some of the above - ground biomass continues to store carbon until the plant dies and decomposes .

this is the essence of the carbon cycle in forests — net carbon accumulation ( sequestration ) with vegetative growth , and release of carbon when the vegetation dies .

thus , the amount of carbon sequestered in a forest is constantly changing with growth , death , and decomposition of vegetation .

in addition to being sequestered in vegetation , carbon is also sequestered in forest soils .

carbon is the organic content of the soil , generally in the partially decomposed vegetation ( humus ) on the surface and in the upper soil layers , in the organisms that decompose vegetation ( decomposers ) , and in the fine roots .

the amount of carbon in soils varies widely , depending on the environment and the history of the site .

soil carbon accumulates as dead vegetation is added to the surface and decomposers respond .

carbon is also "injected" into the soil as roots grow ( root biomass increases ) .

soil carbon is also slowly released to the atmosphere as the vegetation decomposes .

scientific understanding of the rates of soil carbon accumulation and decomposition is currently not sufficient for predicting changes in the amount of carbon sequestered in forest soils .

aside from the questions of whether climate change is occurring and whether human activities are the cause , the role of forestry and land use in mitigating climate change has been quite controversial .

the disputes are largely the result of the scientific uncertainties in measuring changing carbon levels in forests , changing land uses , and changing demand for products .

this section summarizes forest carbon accounting concerns , possible consequences of changes in land use and of forest management events and practices , "leakage," and existing federal programs related to these concerns .

forests store substantial amounts of carbon .

the amount stored , however , changes over time as forests grow and die .

land use changes and forestry practices alter the level and rates of carbon storage , while "leakage" ( shifting production ) may offset some of the increases in forest carbon sequestration .

whether and how to account for this carbon sequestration in policies and programs to mitigate climate change has been controversial .

under the 1997 kyoto protocol of the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , many developed nations agreed to specified reductions in their emissions of greenhouse gases , especially carbon dioxide .

the protocol allows some carbon sequestration as a way of meeting the specified reductions .

the bush administration rejected the protocol and withdrew from the continuing activities under the protocol .

nonetheless , accounting for the carbon absorbed by forests and soils ( and how much credit is due ) continues to be discussed internationally ; and the u.s. congress has held hearings on forest carbon sequestration .

the role of forestry and land use in mitigating climate change has been controversial .

forests are enormously variable , with a broad array of plant species ( both trees and understory vegetation ) and substantial differences in the diversity of plant ( and animal ) species they contain .

the myriad permutations of forest plants and soils present formidable obstacles for estimating existing carbon stocks and the carbon sequestration and release that result from forestry activities .

the carbon consequences of timber harvesting have been particularly controversial .

because of the scientific uncertainties , as well as differences in the types and extent of forests among nations , reaching agreement on ways to account for carbon sequestration in forests has been difficult .

some argue for a broadly inclusive accounting , others for a more conservative approach .

"land - based" or "activity - based" models are generally proposed for estimating changes in carbon storage .

however , the ambiguous language and terminology used by proponents contribute to the inherent difficulties of measuring baseline carbon stocks , land uses , the carbon impacts of various activities , and "leakage" ( shifting land or product uses ) .

furthermore , the enormous diversity of forest types and widespread disputes over the carbon consequences of various practices ( which result at least partly from the diversity of forests ) make it difficult to generalize about the opportunities to mitigate global climate change through forest carbon sequestration .

it is likely that research to reduce some of these ambiguities and uncertainties will be an ongoing element in the efforts of nations to deal with carbon sequestration — and with concerns about climate change .

