at times , it appears that a major segment of the drug industry cannot avoid being the center of controversy .

firms that develop , produce , and sell brand - name or patented drugs have been praised for their successes in developing safer or more effective versions of existing medicines and new medicines that advance the treatment of a variety of diseases .

yet these same firms have been rebuked for selling the same drugs at higher prices in the united states than in many other developed countries ; their attempts to minimize competition from cheaper generic drugs ; their relatively high profitability ; and spending as much or more on advertising and product promotion than research and development ( r&d ) .

framing these contrasting sentiments is a continuing debate among lawmakers over the best way to improve access to medicines for americans of all ages and income levels , without establishing costly new federal entitlement programs or undermining key incentives for new drug development .

an important issue in this debate is the likely impact of initiatives of this sort on the commercial development of new medicines .

some initiatives would entail significant changes in one or more of the federal policies affecting new drug development .

the federal government plays a varied and far - reaching role in that process .

this role encompasses a variety of laws and programs , including direct federal funding of drug - related research and development ( r&d ) , federal regulation of the safety and efficacy of new medicines and the use and promotion of approved medicines , federal patent protection for prescription drugs , federal support of biomedical research and education in universities , federal financing of drug purchases through medicaid and medicare , and federal tax subsidies for research and the purchase of health insurance and medicines .

this report examines one of the federal policies influencing the domestic climate for new drug development: federal taxation of firms that develop , produce , and sell drugs as a main line of business .

as will be seen , the federal tax code affects the incentive to invest in new drug development in several ways .

the net result of these interactions forms the core of the report .

more specifically , the report analyses the drug industry's federal tax burden from 1995 to 2006 , the most recent year for which federal corporate tax return data are available .

this burden refers to the federal income taxes paid by drugmakers as a percentage of their taxable income ; tax returns with and without net income are used to compute the industry's federal tax burden .

depending on its size , this burden has the potential to constrain the incentives for business investment in new drug development .

the report begins with an examination of the distinguishing traits of the drug industry , then identifies the tax provisions that have the biggest impact on the industry's return on investment , and concludes with an assessment of the effects of federal taxation of the industry on the incentives to invest in new drug development .

as discussed in this report , the drug industry encompasses a varied collection of corporations , all of whom derive the largest share of their income from one or more of the following commercial activities: ( 1 ) manufacturing biological and medicinal products ; ( 2 ) processing botanical drugs and herbs ; ( 3 ) isolating active medicinal ingredients from botanical drugs and herbs ; and ( 4 ) producing pharmaceutical products intended for internal and external use in such forms as tablets , capsules , powders , ointments , and solutions .

this group of firms includes both large , traditional pharmaceutical firms that tend to concentrate on developing small - molecule drugs from chemicals , makers of generic versions of such drugs , and small , fledgling biotechnology firms that focus on developing biologics , which are large - molecule drugs derived from living cells .

in the period examined here , the vast majority of drug firms had no net income , and thus no tax liability .

but drug firms with net income accounted for most of the industry's assets and gross income .

it is unclear from available business tax data if the drug firms with losses were primarily producers of pharmaceuticals or biologics .

excluded from the group of drug firms discussed here are firms organized as non - corporate entities , such as partnerships and limited liability companies .

it is not known how much these firms contribute to total income , assets , employment , or tax liability for the drug industry .

but their shares are unlikely to be substantial , since the drug firms ( eg , glaxosmithkline , merck , pfizer , lilly , amgen ) that account for most industry profits and taxes are all organized as corporations .

the information presented here may be of use to the 111 th congress as it weighs the advantages and disadvantages of proposals to modify how health care is financed and delivered in the united states .

many industries have distinctive traits , which can be thought of as defining features tied to the goods and services they sell , the technologies used to produce them , and the main forces driving competitive success and long - term growth in employment and output .

the drug industry is one of these industries .

what arguably distinguishes firms that develop , produce , promote , and sell patented or branded drugs is their propensity to invest heavily in r&d and advertising , a focus on certain therapeutic categories to the exclusion of others , a strong reliance on patents to generate profits and bolster competitiveness , and an extensive network of foreign subsidiaries .

as this report shows , several of these traits have important implications for the industry's federal tax burden .

federal income taxes paid from 1990 to 2006 by corporations that derive the largest share of their income from the manufacture and sale of drugs are shown in table 1 .

the figures in the table are taken from tax returns filed by corporations with and without net income and include any corporate alternative minimum taxes owed by drug firms .

in collecting and publishing corporate tax data by industry , the irs defines the drug industry in the same manner as the north american industry classification system .

according to that definition , the industry consists of firms that derive the largest share of their revenue from one or more of the following sources: manufacturing biological and medicinal products ; processing botanical drugs and herbs ; isolating active medicinal ingredients from botanical drugs and herbs ; and manufacturing pharmaceutical products for internal and external use in forms such as tablets , capsules , vials , powders , and solutions .

the industry's taxable income shown in table 1 combines domestic income earned by u.s. - based corporations and u.s. affiliates of foreign - based firms and a portion of the income earned by foreign branches and subsidiaries of u.s. - based corporations .

such a mix is appropriate because the united states , unlike many other developed countries , taxes business income on the basis of residence , not according to territorial source .

consequently , corporations chartered in the united states owe taxes to the federal government on their worldwide income .

u.s. - based firms also pay income taxes to foreign governments on much of the income earned by their foreign affiliates .

to avoid double taxation of this income , u.s. tax law permits u.s. - based firms to claim a credit for foreign income tax payments that cannot exceed their u.s. tax liability on the foreign - source income .

in addition , u.s. affiliates of corporations chartered in other countries are required to pay federal income taxes on any income they earn in the united states .

federal tax law permits u.s. - based firms to defer the payment of federal income taxes on profits earned by their foreign subsidiaries until those profits have been repatriated to the u.s. parent .

it is clear from the figures in the table that the industry benefitted from existing business tax credits ( excluding the foreign tax credit ) : from 1990 to 2006 , its average tax liability after credits was 86% of its average tax liability before credits .

 ( the reason for excluding the foreign tax credit from these calculations is explained below. ) .

at the same time , it is clear that the combined value of these credits trended downward from 1990 to 2000 and then reversed course .

the primary force behind this decline was a phase - out of the possessions tax credit that commenced in late 1997 and stretched through the end of 2005 .

in addition , the relatively high levels of taxable income in 2005 and 2006 were due to the billions of dollars in foreign earnings drug firms repatriated from overseas subsidiaries under the temporary repatriation tax holiday established by the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( see pp .

19-20 ) .

the main tax credits claimed by the drug industry are shown in table 2 .

their impact on the industry's federal tax burden is discussed below .

generally , the federal tax burden on an industry refers to how the tax code affects its return on past investment .

this effect emerges through the definition of taxable income , adjustments to taxable income ( eg , deductions and exemptions ) , tax rates , and adjustments to tax liability ( eg , tax credits and minimum tax payments ) .

for the most part , these provisions serve the dual purpose of raising the revenue needed to fund government operations and programs and offering firms meaningful incentives to engage in or eschew certain activities .

the tax credit for increasing research expenditures obviously exemplifies the second purpose .

expressed in its simplest terms , an industry's federal tax burden indicates how much of its profits it must surrender to comply with current tax law .

as this burden expands and all other things being equal , firms have fewer funds than they otherwise would to use as they wish .

economists define a firm's tax burden as its share of real pre - tax economic income paid in taxes .

but it is difficult to determine a firm's economic income from business tax return data , as certain provisions in the tax code drive a wedge between a business taxpayer's economic income and its taxable income .

so another approach must be taken to measure business tax burdens .

one option is to substitute taxable income as determined under current federal tax law for pre - tax economic income .

this approach is used here .

a widely used measure of an industry's federal tax burden is its average effective tax rate , which is the ratio of its federal income tax liability after credits to its taxable income , expressed as a percentage .

as such , the ratio reveals the net effect of the federal tax code on the industry's pre - tax returns on previous investments .

some economists construe this effect as the extent to which the tax code penalizes or rewards the economic activities of the firms making up the industry .

there are some limitations to the usefulness of the average effective tax rate as a measure of an industry's federal tax burden .

one limitation is that the rate reflects the impact of the tax code on the returns to an industry's previous investments ; thus it may be an unreliable indicator of the federal tax burden on current or future investments .

in addition , average effective tax rates do not provide a comprehensive measure of the federal tax burden for an industry because they cannot capture the influence of provisions in the tax code that accelerate the timing of tax deductions or delay the recognition of income for tax purposes .

a better measure would be the marginal effective tax rate for an industry , which would capture the effect of all relevant tax provisions on its pre - tax returns on new investment .

but it is difficult to compute such a rate for most industries because the value of some widely used tax benefits ( eg , expensing of r&d costs ) cannot be estimated using available financial or tax return data , and not all firms in an industry invest the same amount in the same mix of assets in a given tax year .

nonetheless , if average effective tax rates are applied consistently across industries and over time , they can shed light whether their federal tax burdens differ , and if so , to what extent .

table 3 shows the average effective federal tax rates for the drug industry and all major u.s. industries from 2001 to 2006 .

as noted above , the rates compare the industries' federal income tax liability after all credits except the foreign tax credit with their worldwide taxable income ( as reported on their federal income tax returns ) .

as such , they address neither the domestic tax burden on domestic income nor the worldwide tax burden on worldwide income for the industries .

instead , the rates represent something of a hybrid of the two measures: the federal tax burden on domestic income plus foreign income that has been recognized for federal tax purposes .

as noted earlier , the foreign tax credit should be excluded from an industry's net tax liability because the credit is intended to prevent the double taxation of foreign - source income .

including it would understate the federal tax burden on the industries , in some cases by a significant margin .

the data in the table indicate that the drug industry's federal tax burden in 2001 to 2006 was similar to the average tax burden for all industries .

such a finding may come as a surprise to those who have the impression that the industry long has benefitted unfairly or disproportionately from certain business tax preferences .

though the table does not show this , the industry's tax burden did rise in the late 1990s , driven by a phase - out of the possessions tax credit that began in 1997 and lasted through 2005 .

if marginal effective federal tax rates could be computed for typical investments made by the industries shown in table 3 , it is likely that the rate for the drug industry would be among the lower ones .

this is because the effects of some tax preferences that tend to benefit drug firms more than other firms are not fully reflected in average effective tax rates .

these preferences involve both the deferral of federal income taxes and accelerated depreciation .

three tax preferences in particular are likely to yield significant tax savings for u.s. - based drug firms and thus warrant further examination: ( 1 ) the deferral of federal income taxes on net income retained by foreign subsidiaries of u.s. - based corporations ; ( 2 ) the expensing ( or deduction as a current cost ) of qualified research spending ; and ( 3 ) the expensing of advertising and promotional costs .

tax policy is one of many channels through which the federal government influences the domestic climate for new drug development .

business taxation helps shape this climate through its impact on a firm's user cost of capital for r&d investment and its supply of internal funds ( or retained earnings ) .

the user cost of capital is the cost a firm incurs as a result of owning a tangible or intangible asset .

it embraces both the opportunity cost of forgoing other investments and the direct costs of ownership , such as depreciation , the acquisition cost of the asset , and taxes .

in general , the user cost of capital indicates the rate of return an investment project must earn in order to break even .

as a firm's user cost of capital declines , the number of investment projects it can profitably undertake increases , all other things being equal .

there is considerable evidence that business investment responds to changes in the user cost of capital , although the magnitude and duration of the response over the business cycle are matters of ongoing debate and research among economists .

one factor affecting the user cost of capital is the tax burden on the returns to an investment .

generally , as this burden decreases , so does the cost of capital .

a widely used measure of this burden is the marginal effective tax rate .

this rate , which is calculated by subtracting the after - tax rate of return on a new investment from the pre - tax rate of return and dividing by the pretax rate of return , reflects the statutory income tax rate faced by a firm , as modified by any tax provisions that subsidize or penalize the investment .

under current law , the federal tax burden on the returns to r&d investment is relatively low because of two research tax subsidies discussed earlier: ( 1 ) the tax credit for increases in research spending above a base amount under irc section 41 , and ( 2 ) the option to deduct qualified research expenditures as a current expense under irc section 174 .

in combination , they have the potential to push the cost of capital for r&d investments below that of most other investments a firm might make , such as purchases of plant or equipment or instituting a new training program for employees .

according to an analysis by economist bill cox , the credit and expensing allowance have the combined effect of taxing the returns to r&d investment at a negative rate , which is to say that after - tax rates of return exceed pre - tax rates of return .

the same two tax subsidies can also boost r&d investment by increasing a firm's cash flow or supply of internal funds .

some firms base their annual r&d budgets on the amount of money they expect to have on hand after paying all expenses in a given year .

for them , the cost of internal funds may be significantly lower than the cost of external funds , such as capital raised through borrowing or issuing new shares of stock .

small start - up biotechnology firms are especially likely to find themselves in this position , as potential investors or lenders may lack the needed information to evaluate their long - term prospects for commercial success .

a firm's supply of internal funds depends in part on how much it earns in profits and how much of those profits it must set aside to cover its anticipated income tax liability .

in the short run , firms that rely heavily on retained earnings to finance new r&d investments can invest more as their tax liabilities fall , all other things being equal .

of course , a firm could use any increase in cash flow for other purposes , including hiring new employees , training current employees , or paying higher dividends to shareholders or owners .

in addition , the opportunity under federal tax law to move profits to subsidiaries located in low - tax countries through the transfer of drug patents to those subsidiaries and the deft use of transfer pricing can make it possible for major u.s. - based pharmaceutical firms to reduce their worldwide tax burden .

an indicator of the effect of tax policy on new drug development is the drug industry's federal tax burden , as measured by average effective tax rates .

from 2000 to 2006 , the industry's rate was nearly the same as the average rate for all industries .

yet in the same period , the average drug firm devoted a much higher percentage of its revenue to r&d than the average firm .

so while the average drug firm pays about the same amount of federal income tax per dollar of taxable income as the average firm , the former spends a larger share of each dollar of gross income on the development of new technology .

this difference suggests that new drug development is driven by forces other than federal tax subsidies .

among the key ones are the opportunities for novel drug compounds opened up through advances in basic research , the regulatory requirements for the drug approval process , the competitive strategies of drug firms , and the potential earnings from investing in the development of new drugs .

it is also worth noting that not all drug firms are affected equally by federal taxation .

the typical pharmaceutical firm has profits and thus can take advantage of the research and orphan drug tax credits , the expensing of advertising and research expenditures , and the deferral of profits earned by foreign subsidiaries to lower its tax burden and boost its after - tax rate of return on equity .

by contrast , the typical biotech firm has a net operating loss and thus can take advantage of none of those tax incentives in the short run .

the typical generic drug firm has a tax profile that more closely resembles that of the pharmaceutical firm , with the exception that the former spends a fraction of what the latter spends on drug discovery , drug testing and clinical trials , and advertising and promotion .

