since the anthrax mailings of 2001 , policymakers have been implementing programs todecrease the vulnerability of the united states to terrorist use of biological weapons .

this reportdiscusses high - threat biological agents , focusing on the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) definition for category a pathogens ( bacteria and viruses ) , their treatment and detection,current policies , and possible future approaches to reducing their threat .

terrorist use of biologicalagents would be a low probability , but potentially high consequence , event .

while there is stilldebate over whether terrorist groups have the ability to effectively use biological weapons as aweapon of mass destruction , the anthrax mailings of 2001 highlighted their potential as a terrorweapon .

policy approaches for reducing vulnerability to biological terrorism involve bothaddressing biological agents as a group , and focusing on specific agents perceived as posing thegreatest threat .

treatments for exposed victims vary depending on the nature of the pathogen andexperience in treatment of these diseases is limited , due to the rarity of naturally occurring cases .

biological agents , for the purposes of this report , are pathogens which can infect and causeserious illness in humans .

 ( 1 ) the level of threat abiological agent may constitute is open tointerpretation .

depending on what aspects of a pathogen are considered priorities , differentbiological agents are likely to be identified as high threat .

for example , the national institute ofjustice provides an extensive list of biological agents of concern in their handbook on purchasingprotective equipment .

 ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) in comparison , handbooks regarding battlefieldtreatment of biologicalweapon casualties contain a shorter list of agents .

 ( 4 ) the cdc identifies a number of differentcategories of biological agents , and rank the various biological agents into categories .

category a diseases - - anthrax , plague , smallpox , tularemia , and viral hemorrhagic fevers - - are of the highest threat .

 ( 5 ) the cdc views categorya pathogens as easily disseminated ortransmitted from person to person ; resulting in high mortality rates ; having the potential for majorpublic health impact ; potentially causing public panic and social disruption ; and requiring specialaction for public health preparedness .

this is in contrast to the category b agents which lack suchpotential .

 ( 6 ) the category a pathogens will bediscussed in this report .

protection against biological agents may be achieved through either physical or medical means .

personal physical measures limit exposure by protecting the eyes , lungs , and / or skin from biologicalcontact and preventing contact with insect vectors .

medical protection may be effective when thebiological agent responds to drug treatment or when an available , effective vaccine exists .

the detection of pathogens , especially in the case of a covert release , is a complicated process .

when victims of a release are hospitalized , identification of the causal pathogen may quickly occur,as the combination of symptomatic patients and ready access to large amounts of the pathogenprovide much information towards its identification .

 ( 25 ) but , in the instance of suspected , small - scalereleases , identification , and even detection , of a pathogen release may be difficult .

biological agentsare difficult to quickly detect , generally requiring laboratory work - up to detect and identifypathogens .

it may require several hours , at the minimum , to detect and definitively identify specificpathogens .

on the other hand , these laboratory - based , molecular biology techniques are extremelysensitive and can detect very small amounts of pathogen .

the methods used to detect pathogensinvolve analysis of the pathogen's genetic sequence or enzymatic reaction .

scientists are workingto develop faster techniques for both detection and analysis .

the likelihood of terrorist use of biological agents as a weapon of mass destruction is an areaof great debate .

biological agents have not been used to cause mass casualties in modern times , andare incapable of destroying physical infrastructure .

this raises questions about the claim that theywould be effective weapons of mass destruction .

the technical feasability of terrorist groupsdisseminating biological agents is also open to question .

some believe that the techniques andtechnologies required for processing and disseminating biological agents are beyond the capabilitiesof a terrorist group , while others believe that terrorist groups wishing to use biological weaponscould easily do so .

in contrast to chemical agents , few biological agents are commercially availablein large quantity , and so are not readily available for purchase or theft .

on the other hand , biologicalagents are naturally occurring and self - replicating , which may ease the difficulties of acquiring andmanufacturing sizeable quantities .

because pathogens are self - replicating , very small amounts can cause infection .

large quantities are not required to cause mass casualties .

it has been estimated that approximately 100lbs .

of anthrax spores efficiently and uniformly disseminated by airplane under ideal conditions ina metropolitan area could cause 150,000 casualties .

 ( 38 ) terrorist groups have shown interest in biological weapons , but few examples of their successful use , and none as a weapon of mass destruction , exist .

one well - known example ofbiological - weapon use within the united states was by the rajneeshee cult in 1984 .

there,salmonella bacteria was disseminated through intentional contamination of salad bars .

severalhundred people were made ill over a number of weeks .

 ( 39 ) the aum shinrikyo cult also attemptedto develop biological weapons .

while more well - known for their chemical weapon attack in thetokyo subway system in 1995 , they cultured and attempted to disseminate bacillus anthracis byaerosolizing a liquid slurry of anthrax culture .

the anthrax disseminated was an avirulent strain andconsequently no casualties occurred .

 ( 40 ) whether terrorist groups would choose biological weapons is unclear .

some have asserted that such use would be incompatible with political goals that terrorist groups have , e.g .

formation of anation - state .

others claim that a new stage of superterrorism has begun , with the attacks ofseptember 11th being indicative of a greater willingness of terrorist groups to intentionally causemass casualties .

for more information on the motivation of terrorist groups with respect tobiological and chemical weapons , see crs report rl31831 , terrorist motivations for chemicaland biological weapons use: placing the threat in context by [author name scrubbed] .

weapons of terror , in contrast to weapons of mass destruction , may cause few casualties but rather instill panic because of frightening aspects of their use .

some argue that the use of biologicalagents as weapons of terror would require little infrastructure and be an effective use of even limitedsupplies of pathogen .

they claim that release of small amounts of biological agent might cause alevel of panic disproportionate to the actual amount released , and point to the anxieties raised afterthe mailings of the anthrax letters of 2001 as emblematic of the type of response that can begenerated by small - scale use of biological weapons .

others assert that the significant investment oftime , money , and trained personnel which would be required to develop even small amounts ofpathogen provides a serious disincentive to terrorist groups .

they state that terrorist groups are muchmore likely to use conventional weapons than any weapon of mass destruction .

the anthrax mailings of 2001 highlighted the vulnerability of the united states to biological attack , and reignited public interest in bioterrorism and domestic preparedness .

a series of letterscontaining freeze - dried anthrax of varying coarseness were sent through the u.s .

postal service totwo u.s .

senators and two news outlets .

the anthrax spores contaminated postal equipment duringmail processing and subsequently infected postal workers with inhalation anthrax .

questionsregarding the identity of the mailer , the motivations of the mailer , and the origin of the anthraxspores remain unanswered .

for more information on the anthrax mailings and the us postalservices response , see crs report rl31280 ( pdf ) , the u.s .

postal service response to the threat ofbioterrorism through the mail by [author name scrubbed] .

current federal policy regarding biological weapons is a combination of nation - state levelcontrols , increased domestic regulation , and accelerated research and development of medicines,vaccines , and detectors .

additionally , professional societies have increased self - monitoring actions .

crs report rl31059 ( pdf ) , biological weapons: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21288 , smallpox: technical background on the disease and its potential role in terrorism , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31694 , smallpox vaccine stockpile and vaccination policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31793 , vaccine policy issues for the 108th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31475 , first responder initiative: policy issues and options , by ben canada .

crs report rl31791 , emergency management funding for the department of homeland security: information and issues for fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] , coordinator , rob buschmann , ben canada,wayne morrissey , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31263 , public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act ( p.l .

107-188 ) : provisions and changes to preexisting law , by [author name scrubbed] , donnau .

vogt , and mary e. tiemann .

crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of bioterrorism ,by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31853 , food safety issues in the 108th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31831 , terrorist motivations for chemical and biological weapons use: placing the threat in context , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30169 , export administration act of 1979 reauthorization , coordinated by ian f.fergusson .

