the u.s. supreme court decided at the end of its 2003-2004 term that u.s. courts have jurisdiction to hear challenges on behalf the approximately 550 persons who were detained at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , in connection with the war against terrorism .

the decision overturned the holding of the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit , which had accepted the administration's argument that no u.s. court has jurisdiction to hear petitions for habeas corpus by or on behalf of the detainees because they are aliens and are detained outside the sovereign territory of the united states .

in response to the court's ruling , the department of defense ( dod ) instituted a new form of tribunal at guantanamo bay to allow detainees an opportunity to contest their designation as "enemy combatants," similar to the planned administrative review procedure dod had announced that would review the necessity of individuals' continued detention .

congress approved the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta , or graham - levin amendment ) to establish standards for interrogation and to deny detainees access to federal courts to file habeas petitions but allow limited appeals of status determinations and final decisions of military commissions in the d.c .

circuit court of appeals .

more than a hundred petitions for habeas corpus were already pending in the d.c .

circuit .

in the case of accused driver and bodyguard for osama bin laden , salim ahmed hamdan , a federal judge held the petitioner's ongoing trial by military commission to be illegal , leading the government to suspend temporarily the operation of military tribunals .

the d.c .

circuit court of appeals overturned that decision , allowing dod to restart the military commissions , but the supreme court granted certiorari and reversed .

two other district judges issued contradictory opinions as to whether the detainees have any rights enforceable in federal court ; these decisions also have been appealed .

the administration has filed motions either to dismiss all of these petitions on the basis that the dta has curtailed the courts' jurisdiction or to convert the cases to appeals subject to the strictures of that act .

the supreme court rejected the government's argument that the hamdan case should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction pursuant to the dta .

congress responded by passing the military commissions act of 2006 , which , in addition to providing explicit authority for military commissions , cuts off jurisdiction to hear all habeas cases and other legal actions brought by aliens in relation to their detention as "unlawful enemy combatants," including such cases that are currently pending .

the detention and treatment of the suspected enemy combatants at guantánamo bay has been a consistent source of friction for the bush administration since it began transporting prisoners there in january , 2002 .

after criticism from human rights organizations and many foreign governments regarding the determination that the geneva conventions of 1949 do not apply to the detainees there , president bush shifted position with an announcement that taliban fighters are covered by the 1949 geneva conventions , while al qaeda fighters are not .

taliban fighters are not , however , treated as prisoners of war ( pow ) because they reportedly fail to meet international standards as lawful combatants .

the president had determined that al qaeda remains outside the geneva conventions because it is not a state and not a party to the treaty .

the president proclaimed , in a previously secret memorandum that was issued february 7 , 2002 , that "[a]s a matter of policy , the united states armed forces shall continue to treat detainees humanely and , to the extent appropriate and consistent with military necessity , in a manner consistent with the principles of geneva. .

the bush administration deems all of the detainees to be "unlawful combatants," who may , according to administration officials , be held indefinitely without trial or even despite their possible acquittal by a military tribunal .

the 9 / 11 commission , apparently finding the international discord over the treatment and status of the detainees to be harmful to the u.s. effort to thwart terrorism , recommended the development of a common coalition approach toward the detention and humane treatment of captured terrorists .

after the hamdan decision was announced , the department of defense issued a memorandum announcing that al qaeda detainees were to be considered to be covered by the protections of common article 3 , and that dod regulations pertinent to detainee operations , other than those pertaining to military commissions , were understood to comply with common article 3 .

subordinate departments were requested to review directives and regulations to ensure such compliance .

the law of war , also known as the law of armed conflict or humanitarian law , is a subset of international law that has evolved through centuries of efforts to mitigate the harmful effects of war .

recognizing the impossibility of eliminating warfare all together , nations in essence have agreed to abide by rules limiting their conduct in war , in return for the enemy's agreement to abide by the same rules .

there are two branches of the law of war: the older of the two branches , known as "hague law" after the hague conventions of 1899 and 1907 , prescribes the rules of engagement during combat and is based on the key principles of military necessity and proportionality .

the humanitarian side of the law , known as "geneva law," emphasizes human rights and responsibilities , including the humane and just treatment of prisoners .

the legality and proper justification for resorting to war in the first place are a separate legal regime .

a principal distinction exists between the law of conduct during war — jus in bello — and international law regulating when going to war is justified — jus ad bellum .

parties to an armed conflict retain the same rights and obligations without regard to which party initiated hostilities and whether that conduct is justifiable under international law .

otherwise , each party would routinely regard its enemy as unlawfully engaging in war and would thus feel justified in taking whatever measures might be seen as necessary to accomplish its defeat .

if the law of war is to have any effect in restraining the conduct of belligerents , there must be both inducements for adherence to it and punishment for failure to adhere .

one incentive for parties to adhere to the rules is the promise that their members will receive humane treatment and some legal privileges at the hands of the enemy if they are captured .

reciprocity serves as a primary motivator , but is not an absolute requirement for adherence ; a derogation from the rules by one party does not excuse breaches by another , although reprisal in proportion may be permissible .

were this not the case , any deviation from the letter of the law could be invoked to justify wholesale abandonment of the law of war , causing the conflict to degenerate into the kind of barbarity the law of war aims to mitigate .

reprisals may not be taken against pows or other protected persons .

some experts argue that in keeping with the purpose of humanitarian law , that is , to protect civilians and reduce the needless suffering of combatants , humanitarian law should be interpreted as broadly as possible in favor of individual rights and protections , to include rights of irregular combatants who comply to the extent possible with the law of war .

under this view , no one falls completely outside the protection of the geneva conventions during an armed conflict .

others would adhere rigidly to their interpretation of the letter of the law , denying rights to irregular combatants in order to deter the formation of resistance movements and to avoid legitimizing their belligerent acts .

proponents of this view argue the treatment of detainees not clearly covered by the conventions is entirely at the discretion of the detaining power .

however , states dealing with insurgents and armed resistance groups have typically denied that a state of war exists , treating rebels as common criminals and trying them in civil court for any belligerent acts .

the department of defense defends its treatment of the detainees at the guantánamo naval station as fully complying with the principles of the geneva convention , and view the treatment as compliant with common article 3 as well as standards set by congress in the detainee treatment act of 2005 and the military commissions act of 2006 .

dod also points to the combatant status review tribunals as evidence that the detainees have received a determination of their status that roughly corresponds to what they would receive from a "competent tribunal" under gpw art .

5 .

critics of the policy respond that the u.s.' position regarding the inapplicability of the geneva conventions could be invoked as precedent to defend the poor human rights practices of other regimes , and it could lead to harsh treatment of u.s. service members who fall into enemy hands during this or any future conflict .

under the critics' view , if the administration can accomplish its goals by applying the gpw criteria in article 4 to determine by means of a competent tribunal which of the detainees is entitled to pow status , the foreign policy and humanitarian benefits would be worth the cost .

the perceived implications of granting pow status appear to have played a role in the decision - making process , with administration officials emphasizing the detrimental impact of treating the detainees as pows on the u.s.' ability to fight the war against terror .

some of the issues are discussed below .

the constitution provides congress with ample authority to legislate the treatment of battlefield detainees in the custody of the u.s. military .

the constitution empowers congress to make rules regarding capture on land or water , to define and punish violations of international law , and to make regulations to govern the armed forces .

congress also has the constitutional prerogative to declare war , a power it did not formally exercise with regard to the armed conflict in afghanistan .

by not declaring war , congress has implicitly limited some presidential authorities .

despite the constitutional powers listed above , congress has not generally taken an active rule in prescribing the treatment of prisoners of war .

existing statutes concerning enemy prisoners of war are limited to providing for the use of dod funds to pay expenses incident to the maintenance , pay , and allowances of persons in custody of any military department , to provide for the disposition of the remains of enemy prisoners of war and interned enemy aliens who die in the custody of a military department , to penalize those who aid the escape of an enemy prisoner , and to exempt prisoners of war from the entitlement to claim of compensation for injury or death resulting from war - risk hazard .

however , prisoners of war are covered under the jurisdiction of the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

the administration has asserted that the war on terror is a new kind of conflict , requiring a new set of rules and definitions .

it has been observed that the nature of the hostilities and u.s. objectives borrow some characteristics from the realm of law enforcement and others from a model based on conventional war .

consequently , the role of congress might be seen as particularly important in providing a definition and a set of boundaries to shape how such a war is to be fought .

courts have not been receptive to the argument that the president has the inherent authority to determine how to pursue the war against terrorism .

however , congress's enactment of the detainee treatment act and the military commissions act , by restricting the guantanamo bay detainees' access to u.s. courts , may limit the opportunity for any judicial testing of whether executive actions comply with congressional authorization .

several measures were introduced during the 108 th congress to address the detention of persons detained in connection with the war on terrorism .

legislation to authorize the president to convene military tribunals under certain circumstances was not enacted .

however , the national defense authorization act for fy2005 , pl 108-375 ( october 28 , 2004 ) ( "nda" ) provided measures to ensure the proper treatment of all prisoners held in connection with the war on terrorism , including the prisoners in military custody at guantanamo bay .

the nda emphasizes that the policy of the united states is to ensure that no detainee in its custody is subjected to torture or cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment , and to promptly investigate and prosecute instances of abuse , to ensure that u.s. personnel understand the applicable standards , to accord detainees whose status is in doubt the protection for prisoners of war under the geneva conventions , and to "expeditiously process and , if appropriate , prosecute detainees in the custody of the united states , including those in the custody of the united states armed forces at guantanamo bay , cuba. .

 ( sec .

1091 ) .

it also requires the military to implement , within 150 days of the passage of the act , a policy to ensure detainees are treated in accordance with the obligations set forth in section 1091 , ( sec .

1092 ) , and to submit copies of regulations to congress along with a report setting forth steps taken to implement section 1092 .

 ( sec .

1093 ) .

the nda also requires dod to submit an annual report giving notice of any investigation into any violation of laws regarding the treatment of detainees , aggregate data relating to the detention operations of the department of defense , including how many persons are held and in what status , and how many have been transferred to the jurisdiction of other countries .

the nda does not address the treatment of persons in custody of the cia .

congress passed the detainee treatment act of 2005 as part of both the fy2006 defense appropriations and authorization acts .

in addition , the national defense authorization act of 2006 , p.l .

109-163 , requires the secretary of defense to establish a uniform policy with respect to the role of military medical and behavioral science personnel in the interrogation of detainees , which was to be reported to the congressional defense committees by march 1 , 2006 ( § 705 ) .

the house of representatives passed language in its foreign relations authorization bill for fy2006 and fy2007 ( h.r .

2601 ) to express the sense of the congress affirming the necessity of interrogation operations at guantanamo bay .

the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) requires uniform standards for interrogation of persons in the custody of the department of defense and expressly bans cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment of detainees in the custody of any u.s. agency .

the prohibited treatment is defined as that which would violate the fifth , eighth , and fourteenth amendments to the u.s. constitution , as the senate has interpreted "cruel , inhuman , or degrading" treatment banned by the u.n. convention against torture .

the provision does not create a cause of action for detainees to ask a court for relief based on inconsistent treatment , and it divests the courts of jurisdiction to hear challenges by those detained at guantanamo bay based on their treatment or living conditions .

it also provides a legal defense to u.s. officers and agents who may be sued or prosecuted based on their treatment or interrogation of detainees .

this language appears to have been added as a compromise , because the administration reportedly sought to have the central intelligence agency excepted from the prohibition on cruel , inhuman , and degrading treatment on the grounds that the president needs "maximum flexibility in dealing with the global war on terrorism. .

the dta also includes a modified version of the graham amendment ( s.amdt .

2516 to s. 1042 , "the graham - levin amendment" ) , which requires the defense department to submit to the armed services and judiciary committees the procedural rules for determining detainees' status .

the amendment neither authorizes nor requires a formal status determination , but it does require that certain congressional committees be notified 30 days prior to the implementation of any changes to the rules .

as initially adopted by the senate , the amendment would have required these procedural rules to preclude evidence determined by the board or tribunal to have been obtained by undue coercion ; however , the conferees modified the language so that the tribunal or board must assess , "to the extent practicable ... whether any statement derived from or relating to such detainee was obtained as a result of coercion" and "the probative value , if any , of any such statement. .

the dta also eliminates the federal courts' statutory jurisdiction over habeas claims by aliens detained at guantanamo bay , but provides for limited appeals of status determinations made pursuant to the dod procedures for combatant status review tribunals ( csrts ) .

the supreme court interpreted the act to find that at least some habeas corpus claims pending on the day of enactment were not affected .

the d.c .

circuit court of appeals has exclusive jurisdiction to hear appeals of any status determination made by a "designated civilian official," but the review is limited to a consideration of whether the determination was made consistently with applicable dod procedures , including whether it is supported by the preponderance of the evidence , but allowing a rebuttable presumption in favor of the government .

the procedural rule regarding the use of evidence obtained through undue coercion applies prospectively only , so that detainees who have already been determined by csrts to be enemy combatants may not base an appeal on the failure to comply with that procedure .

detainees may also appeal status determinations on the basis that , "to the extent the constitution and laws of the united states are applicable , whether the use of such standards and procedures to make the determination is consistent with the constitution and laws of the united states. .

jurisdiction ceases if the detainee is transferred from dod custody .

after the court's decision in hamdan , congress passed the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca ) , which amends the dta provisions regarding appellate review and habeas corpus jurisdiction .

it expands the dta to make its csrt review provisions the exclusive remedy for all aliens detained as enemy combatants , not just those housed at guantanamo bay , cuba .

the mca revokes u.s. courts' jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions by all aliens in u.s. custody as enemy combatants , including lawful enemy combatants , regardless of the place of custody .

this amendment takes effect on the date of its enactment and applies to "all cases , without exception , pending on or after the date of [enactment] which relate to any aspect of the detention , transfer , treatment , trial , or conditions of detention of an alien detained by the united states since september 11 , 2001. .

section 5 of the mca specifically precludes the application of the geneva conventions to habeas or other civil proceedings .

the mca sets forth detailed definitions of crimes that constitute "grave breaches" of common article 3 .

in addition , the act provides that the president shall have the authority to interpret the meaning of the geneva conventions .

the intended effect of this provision is somewhat unclear .

although the president generally has a role in the negotiation , implementation , and domestic enforcement of treaty obligations , this power does not generally extend to "interpreting" treaty obligations , a role more traditionally associated with courts .

instead , the language appears to be intended to establish the authority of the president within the executive branch to issue interpretative regulations by executive order , although the president and the department of defense have traditionally exercised such authority without specific legislation .

the house of representatives passed the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( h.r .

1 ) , which contains a reporting requirement , § 1433 , with respect to the recommendation of the 9 / 11 commission that the united states "should work with friends to develop mutually agreed - on principles for the detention and humane treatment of captured international terrorists who are not being held under a particular country's criminal laws" drawing from common article 3 of the geneva conventions .

the secretary of state would be required to report , within 90 days of enactment and every 180 days thereafter , on any progress toward implementing the above recommendation , including a "description of the steps taken to implement such recommendations and achieve such policy goals," when the recommendations are expected to be implemented , and any allocation of resources or other actions by congress that the secretary of state considers necessary to implement such recommendations and achieve such policy goals .

the comptroller general would then report on whether the recommendations have been implemented and whether the policy goals described in such subsection have been achieved .

a measure has been introduced in the house of representatives , military commissions habeas corpus restoration act of 2007 ( h.r .

267 ) , that would restore habeas corpus jurisdiction to federal courts for aliens detained as "enemy combatants. .

h.r .

267 would not restore jurisdiction for any other action in court related to the such detention , but would maintain appellate jurisdiction for challenges to military commission final decisions and challenges to csrt review decisions .

