under the united states constitution , congress has little direct authority to legislate in the field of domestic relations .

generally , state policy guides these decisions .

despite the lack of direct authority to legislate domestic relations issues , congress continues to utilize a number of indirect approaches to enact numerous federal laws which impact on family law questions .

the constitution's framers felt that states , rather than the federal government , should maintain jurisdiction over most family law questions .

thus , the final document reflects that view .

as summarized by the supreme court in hisquierdo v. hisquierdo : insofar as marriage is within temporal control , the states lay on the guiding hand .

"the whole subject of the domestic relations of husband and wife , parent and child , belongs to the laws of the states and not to the laws of the united states. .

in re burrus , 136 u.s. 586 , 593-94 ( 1890 ) .... on the rare occasion when state family law has come into conflict with a federal statute , this court has limited review under the supremacy clause to a determination whether congress has "positively required by direct enactment" that state law shall be preempted .

wetmore v. markoe , 196 u.s. 68 , 77 ( 1904 ) .

thus , the individual states have the primary authority and responsibility to legislate in the domestic relations arena , which includes incidents of marriage , divorce , and child welfare .

the rationale behind this approach is the lack of overriding national considerations in the family law area .

therefore , states generally have the freedom to legislate as they see fit on these questions .

however , states' freedom to legislate has led to substantial variation between the individual states on many of these topics , although more uniformity now exists than at any time in the past .

thus , similarly situated spouses , parents and children may have different legal options depending on where they reside .

for example , the community property concept of marital property adopted by nine states is quite different from the common law property system in the other forty - one states .

while all states have some form of no - fault divorce , based either on grounds such as "irreconcilable differences" or some period of separation , many authorize divorces based on fault or consider marital fault as a factor when awarding spousal support or dividing marital property .

in addition , states have varying rules regarding the "who , what , when and where" of marriages and / or divorces .

adoption is another area in which states have diverse regulations .

for example , state statutes concerning the eligibility of homosexuals to adopt range from florida's statutory prohibition to mississippi's statute barring adoption by same - sex couples to utah's prohibition on unmarried couples , heterosexual or homosexual , from adopting .

in addition , states have different statutes regarding the rights of adopted adults , birth parents , adoptive parents , birth siblings and birth relatives to gain access to identifying and non - identifying information about the adoptee or birth relatives .

for example , a few states permit adoptees to gain access to their birth and / or adoption records , but most require a court order issued for "good cause" ( usually a medical crisis or some comparably serious situation ) before unsealing such information .

although many states use similar procedures , the laws and processes surrounding access in any one state are unique .

during the first half of the twentieth century , numerous constitutional amendments were proposed which , if adopted would have authorized congress to enact uniform national marriage and divorce laws .

however , none of these proposals received the requisite two - thirds vote of each house of congress necessitating submission to the states for ratification .

this approach now appears disfavored , in part due to a continuing view that the federal government should refrain from intervening in most family matters and in part because other approaches ( all discussed infra ) have led , or have the potential of leading , toward the same result in those areas where uniformity is thought desirable .

for example , the national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws ( nccusl ) , a non - governmental entity , has proposed uniform laws on a number of family law topics , many of which have been widely adopted by the states .

a more expansive view of congressional power to legislate under its commerce clause authority has led to federal legislation such as the parental kidnapping prevention act ( pkpa ) , which authorizes federal intervention into certain custodial interference cases where applicable state law classifies such action as a felony .

also , congress has enacted legislation under the full faith and credit clause .

legislation under this clause directs sister states to give full faith and credit to child custody , child support and protection orders of other states .

congress passed the defense of marriage act ( doma ) , which permits sister states to give no effect to the law of other states with respect to governing same - sex marriages .

congress has also established a number of funding programs whereby states must comply with detailed requirements in such areas as child abuse and the adoption of hard - to - place children before they can receive federal money to help deal with these problems .

this report discusses the extent to which congress is constitutionally authorized to legislate on family law questions , and includes examples of present laws utilizing the various approaches available in this area .

there are generally applicable constitutional principles which limit the authority of all governmental entities ( federal , state , and local ) to legislate on family law questions .

between 1917 and 2001 , 33 constitutional amendments were proposed to give congress authority to legislate on marriage and divorce questions .

in addition , 12 bills were introduced during this period to provide for uniform marriage and divorce laws throughout the united states , presumably in anticipation that such a constitutional amendment would be ratified .

eleven of the proposed constitutional amendments and all of the implementing bills introduced in the senate were sponsored by senator arthur caper .

the text of his proposed amendments uniformly stated: the congress shall have power to make laws , which shall be uniform throughout the united states , on marriage and divorce , the legitimization of children , and the care and custody of children affected by annulment of marriage or by divorce .

however , none of these proposed amendments ever received congressional action .

beginning in the 107 th congress , legislation has been introduced proposing a constitutional amendment to define marriage as the "union of a man and a woman. .

in the absence of a constitutional amendment providing general authority for congress to legislate in the field of domestic relations , its direct authority is limited to those areas specifically reserved for congressional action under article i , section 8 , of the constitution .

however , various indirect approaches , most notably those tied to congressional authority under the commerce clause and congress's appropriations powers , have resulted in significant federal impact on a myriad of family law questions .

currently , there appears to be little sentiment in favor of a national marriage and divorce law , at least one which would be imposed involuntarily by congress on the states .

however , it is probable that federal involvement will continue or be forthcoming in those areas where it is argued that federal resources can be utilized more efficiently and effectively than those available at the state or local level , such as tracking down parental kidnappers or establishing and enforcing child support orders .

the spending power can be used to shape state approaches to a given situation , although this option involves expenditures of federal funds ; the higher the funding level , the more likely a state is to comply with the federal directive .

the nature of family law cases is such that an individualized approach to each particular case will undoubtedly continue .

however , state domestic relations laws have become more uniform in recent years , and even without federal intervention this trend is likely to continue .

thus , it is possible that some of the national uniformity envisioned by proponents of adopting a constitutional amendment for this purpose will be realized , although states retain primary authority to legislate in this area .

