over the last few years , nowhere have tensions between the united states and its europeanallies and friends been more evident than on a range of issues related to the middle east .

 ( 1 ) these include iraq , theisraeli - palestinian conflict , and iran .

some worry that u.s. - european differences in combatingterrorism are growing wider .

how best to approach the challenges posed by syria may also figureprominently on the transatlantic agenda in the near future .

although the european countries are notmonolithic in their opinions with respect to the middle east , views among them often tend to bemuch closer to each other than to those of the united states .

this is largely because europeanperspectives on the region have been shaped over time by common elements unique to europe'shistory and geostrategic position .

some bush administration officials and members of congress are concerned that the recentvitriolic disputes between washington and a number of european capitals on middle east issuescould constrain u.s. policies , and erode the broader transatlantic relationship and u.s. - europeancounterterrorism efforts in the longer term .

the 9 / 11 commission report notes that nearly everyaspect of u.s. counterterrorism strategy relies on international cooperation , including with europeangovernments and multilateral institutions such as nato and the european union ( eu ) .

someprovisions in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) seek toenhance international collaboration against terrorism .

the bush administration has sought to mendtransatlantic relations in its second term , but u.s. - european policy differences over middle easternissues are likely to persist .

many analysts argue that the united states and europe share common vital interests in themiddle east: combating terrorism ; halting proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) ; promoting middle east peace and stability ; ensuring a reliable flow of oil ; and curtailing islamicextremism .

these experts assert that the goals of u.s. and european policies toward these variouschallenges are not that far apart .

both sides of the atlantic tend to emphasize different interests .

europe largely views the israeli - palestinian conflict as the preeminent concern , believing it to be thekey source of regional instability that fuels terrorism , islamic extremism , and domestic politicalunrest at home .

in contrast , the bush administration stresses that terrorism and weaponsproliferation must be confronted to ensure u.s. national security , and that the conditions for peaceand stability in the middle east will not be possible until these twin threats are removed .

thesedifferent perspectives often result in the employment of disparate tactics by the two sides of theatlantic as they pursue their foreign policy agendas in the region .

a combination of factors lie at the root of u.s. - european tensions on the middle east .

theyinclude different histories , geography , and demographics ; the nature of economic ties with theregion ; somewhat divergent threat perceptions ; and different views on the appropriate role of the useof force .

many analysts also suggest that current u.s. - european frictions over many middle eastissues are heightened on the one hand by european views of a unilateralist bush administration , andon the other by growing eu ambitions to play a larger role on the world stage .

the combination of underlying factors mentioned above help account for many of thedifferences in u.s. and european policies on a range of challenges in the middle east .

key policygaps exist in u.s. and european efforts to deal with iraq , address the israeli - palestinian conflict,manage iran and syria , and counter terrorism .

historically , u.s. - european relations have experienced numerous ups and downs .

pro - atlanticists have always stressed in times of tension the underlying solidity of the transatlanticrelationship given its basis in common values and shared interests .

even without the soviet threatto bind the two sides of the atlantic together , many observers note that the united states and itseuropean allies and friends face a common set of challenges in the middle east and elsewhere , andhave few other prospective partners .

conventional wisdom has dictated that whatever frictions existin the relationship merely represent disagreements among friends characteristic of u.s. - european"business as usual. .

however , many analysts worry that the transatlantic relationship is fraying .

they questionthe bush administration's commitment to partnership with europe in light of disagreements overthe middle east and other trade and foreign policy issues .

europeans assert that washingtonimported disagreements over iraq into nato with little concern for the consequences of suchactions for the alliance , which has been the cornerstone of european security for the last half - century .

meanwhile , u.s. critics see little value in trying to bridge u.s. - european policy gaps given thelimited military capabilities of most european countries to contribute to u.s. operations aimed atreducing the threats posed by terrorism and wmd proliferation .

some european officials also resent that u.s. policies toward iraq exposed divisions amongeu members at a time when the eu has been seeking to shape its future structure and forge a morecommon foreign and security policy .

a number of observers suggest that this is a key reason whythe transatlantic quarrel over iraq was divisive .

the internal eu clashes over iraq were in partindicative of a broader power struggle among and between eu member states and eu candidatesover the future of the union - - in particular , the future shape of cfsp and who speaks for europe,as well as what kind of relationship the eu desires with the united states .

despite several commoneu statements in january and february 2003 calling on iraq to disarm , experts contend thesepronouncements only papered over differences on the use of force , and represented the lowestcommon denominator of eu opinion .

many analysts say the true depth of the eu rift over iraq was exposed by the january 30,2003 decision of five eu members and three aspirants to publicly call for unity with washington oniraq , which was followed by a similar declaration by seven other eu candidates and three balkancountries with eu aspirations .

the lack of prior consultation on these statements with brussels orathens , holder of the eu's rotating presidency at the time , outraged paris and some other eucapitals .

french president jacques chirac publically blasted the eu candidates , stating that theywere "badly brought up" and had "missed a good opportunity to keep quiet. .

 ( 67 ) some attribute chirac's outburst to fears of dwindling french influence over cfsp'sdevelopment as the eu expands to include central and eastern european states that paris perceivesas more pro - american .

 ( 68 ) many new eu member states still view the united states as theultimate guarantor of european security .

although some new eu members may have privatelyshared french and german concerns about u.s. actions in iraq , they viewed the crisis as a strategicchoice between the united states and saddam hussein , and calculated that the iraqi regime was notworth putting good relations with washington at risk .

at the same time , then - eu candidates weredismayed by u.s. defense secretary donald rumsfeld's comments in february 2003 that dividedeurope into "old" ( countries that opposed the u.s. - led invasion of iraq ) and "new" ( countries thatsupported it ) given their desires to join "a europe whole and free. .

other experts also attribute thestatements supporting the u.s. stance on iraq to a rebellion by smaller eu members and aspirantsto french - german attempts to reassert themselves as the key drivers of the eu agenda .

 ( 69 ) since the end of major combat operations in iraq , european and eu officials have beenseeking to mend fences , both within the eu and between europe and the united states .

someobservers suggest that the internal eu rift over iraq may have reinvigorated eu efforts to build cfspin order to avoid similar bitter internecine disputes in the future .

in may 2003 , eu foreign ministerstasked the eu's high representative for cfsp , javier solana , with developing an eu securitystrategy to identify common eu security interests and joint policy responses ; this new , first - ever eusecurity strategy was officially approved in december 2003 .

at the june 2003 eu summit in greece , eu leaders attempted to portray the eu as a reliablepartner that also recognizes the significant threats posed by terrorism , wmd , and failed states .

u.s.policymakers reportedly welcomed the eu's new wmd doctrine , agreed at the greece summit , andits threat to use "coercive measures" as a last resort , asserting that it marked a "new realism" in theeu .

 ( 70 ) also in june2003 , the united states and the eu issued a joint statement in which they pledged closer cooperationto better combat the spread of wmd .

at the june 2004 u.s. - eu summit in ireland , both sidessought to portray the transatlantic dispute over iraq as being firmly behind them and stressed theimportance of the u.s. - eu partnership .

the bush administration asserted that it would make mending transatlantic relations - - inboth nato and the eu - - a priority in its second term .

europeans welcomed these efforts andresponded positively to president bush's and secretary rice's trips to europe in february 2005 .

many believe they have gone a long way toward improving the atmospherics of the relationship andthat the discussions between president bush and key european leaders have helped to narrow somedifferences over how to manage iran and syria .

despite these hopeful signs , skeptics assert that the wounds from the clash over iraq have notfully healed and u.s. and european policies still diverge on many issues .

several factors will likelyinfluence how deep and lasting the damage from the dispute over iraq and subsequent policies in themiddle east will be to the broader transatlantic relationship .

one key determinant will be whetherthe united states and its european allies and friends can cooperate more robustly in the future inrebuilding iraq .

another factor likely to affect the shape of the future transatlantic relationship maybe whether the europeans perceive a renewed commitment by the united states to engage in asustained effort to revive middle east peace negotiations .

furthermore , observers note that the overall transatlantic relationship would furtherdeteriorate if recriminations over iraq or policy differences on other middle east issues were toweaken nato or impede the eu's efforts to forge a deeper and wider union .

some worry thatwashington has lost confidence in nato as a result of the failure of france , germany , and belgiumto clearly and quickly support their fellow ally turkey as the conflict with iraq loomed .

they believethis incident will reinforce those in the administration already inclined to marginalize nato,viewing it at best as a hedge against a resurgent russia and as a stabilizing element in the balkans .

some also suggest that the crisis over iraq emboldened france to renew its efforts to develop aeuropean defense arm independent of nato and the transatlantic link .

they point to the april 2003meeting of french , german , belgian , and luxembourg leaders to discuss creating a europeanmilitary headquarters .

this initiative was scaled back in december 2003 , but some experts believethat the eu agreement to enhance its existing military planning capabilities may be the first step indriving the transatlantic alliance apart - - despite the fact that eu leaders also agreed to set up an euplanning cell at nato and will accept nato liaison officers at the eu to ensure transparency andcooperation between the two organizations .

over the last several years , some europeans worried that the bush administration - - in partbecause of u.s. - european differences over iraq and other contentious middle east issues - - was keento keep europe weak and divided in order to preserve u.s. leverage on individual eu member states .

they feared that secretary rumsfeld's comments about "old" and "new" europe signaled anunofficial shift in u.s. policy away from continued support for further european integration .

suchconcerns have contributed significantly to recent frictions in the broader u.s. - european relationship .

president bush's visit to the eu's institutions while in brussels in february 2005 , and his clearassertion that "the united states wants the european project to succeed," have helped alleviate someeuropean anxieties .

 ( 71 ) however , if future u.s. policy choices related to iran , the israeli - palestinian conflict , or syria againdivide eu member states and thus hinder the eu's development of cfsp , this could negatively affectthe broader transatlantic relationship as many europeans may find the united states an easy targetto blame .

others fear that u.s. - european disputes over the middle east could spill over into u.s. - eutrade relations .

they point out that the breakdown in trust between the two sides of the atlanticcould complicate efforts to resolve u.s. - eu trade disputes or to sustain u.s. - eu cooperation inmultilateral trade negotiations .

 ( 72 ) .

