the 20th century was rich in changes to the institutions and processes that together comprise theamerican administrative state .

this very richness of subject matter , however , calls for somegeneralizations to help explain the events and trends that occupied the attention of successivecongresses , scholars , and generations of practitioners .

in its effort to develop such statements ofgenerality this report will study the work and results of a number of commissions and other similarbodies that have had executive organization and reorganization as part of their mandate .

forpurposes of this report , these reorganization exercises are referred to collectively as "landmarkcommissions. .

viewing landmark commissions sequentially and exploring the philosophical norms andvalues guiding their work is only one of several possible approaches to the extensive subject ofexecutive branch organization in the recently completed century .

the landmark commissionapproach clearly emphasizes institutional issues and will concentrate on structural changes resultingfrom the commissions' recommendations and subsequent implementation .

it is recognized , however,that the term "reorganization" covers much more than structural changes .

laws may be passed toachieve policy or enforcement objectives and indirectly reorganize internal department and agencystructure in the process .

this was certainly the case when congress passed the inspectors generalact of 1978 , an act that altered the internal structure of agencies and the behavior of agency officials .

this broad definition of the term reorganization , however , will be largely avoided to facilitateattention to the successive landmark commissions as guideposts through this century ofadministrative management .

context for discussion of landmark commissions in the 20th century is provided by a reviewand analysis of six crucial periods in the evolution of the organization of the executive branch ofgovernment: the founders and the political theory that informed their organizationaldecisions in 1789 ; the interplay of the president and congress in executive organizationalmanagement during the 19th century ; the progressive movement of the 20th century's first decades and its continuinglegacy ; the rise and decline of "orthodoxy" in organizational management of theexecutive branch ; the interregnum period ( 1972-1992 ) with its doctrinal heterodoxy ; and the emergence of a new public management paradigm and itscritics .

the selected landmark commissions of the recently completed century , beginning with thekeep commission in 1905 , are described and analyzed in chronological order .

 ( 1 ) in tracing the history of thesecommissions , the interplay of conflicting values appear with regularity .

should the principalsupervisor of the administrative agencies be the president , or congress , or should the president andcongress be co - managers ? .

should commission recommendations serve to encourage administrativeintegration and centralization or the values of agency particularity and decentralization ? .

shouldcommission recommendations seek to give a greater or lesser role for government in the social andeconomic life of the nation ? .

successive commission reports and recommendations provideevidence of the recurring nature of these and other related value issues .

with the advent of the 21st century , the question reasonably arises: has the age ofreorganizational commissions passed ? .

or , is there a continuing need for periodic reviews andrealignments of the basic organizational structure of government ? .

in nearly every congress , legislation is introduced to establish a commission with a broadmandate .

the 106th congress , the last congress of the 20st century , proved to be no exception in thisrespect .

senator fred thompson , then chairman of the senate governmental affairs committee,introduced the "government for the 21st century act" ( s. 2306 ) .

the legislation , whichdid not receive congressional action , sought to establish a nine - member commission on governmentrestructuring and reform appointed jointly by the president and congressional leadership .

thepurpose of the commission was to study the entire government and make recommendations "toreduce the cost and increase the effectiveness of the executive branch. .

the commission was tosubmit its recommendations on restructuring by december 1 , 2002 .

a period of public commentwas to follow .

then , the commission was to prepare a final report to congress in a form that wouldpermit its recommendations to have been included in a single implementation bill and referred to theappropriate committees for consideration .

an "expedited procedures" process for floor considerationand mandatory voting was included .

as indicated , congress chose not to act on the proposal .

are reorganization panels now passã© ? .

or , is the time approaching when a newcomprehensive commission will be viewed as essential ? .

have the events since september 11 , 2001changed the playing field for government organization and management ? .

is organizationalmanagement a separate field of study and endeavor , or should it be viewed as properly tied andsubordinate to the budgetary process , as some argue is presently the case ? .

to what degree shoulddepartments and agencies be able to initiate organizational changes on their own authority or takethe lead with their oversight committees in congress ? .

should organizational management beultimately placed under the purview of a central management agency which applies certain principles and general management laws across the board , with the burden of proof for exception resting onthe appealing agency ? .

in short , what political , legal , and administrative values should prevail in the21st century ? .

what can the experience of the landmark commissions of the 20th century tell us aboutwhat to expect as the nation continues down the path of democratic governance in the new century ? .

the commissions studied in this report contributed to the evolution of the executive branchof the federal government .

each was concerned principally , if not exclusively , with the organizationand management of the executive branch .

the commissions were temporary bodies , normallyunassociated with the legislative institutions of government .

they did not conduct their proceedingsin an apolitical environment , however , nor were they able to ignore the work and ideas of those whohad trod this path before .

most especially , these commissions were beholden to the framers of theconstitution and to an early 20th century political movement , progressivism .

it is therefore necessaryto begin by studying the evolving theoretical foundations of the executive branch to fully understandthe role of landmark commissions .

those commissions considered to be "landmark" in character , while they may be studiedindividually or collectively , may also be viewed as part of a much larger institutional category , thefederal "advisory commission. .

advisory commissions , or committees as they are often called , comein many sizes , lengths of service , and are assigned remarkably diverse mandates .

indeed,categorizing the multitude of advisory commissions has proven to be a daunting task .

 ( 55 ) one attempt wasundertaken by hugh davis graham .

graham suggested that there were essentially five categoriesof advisory commissions: 1. reorganization .

the study of organizational structure generally with the intent torealign authorities , organizations and personnel toward the end of increasingrationality and accountability .

2. mega - commission .

intended to examine the existing status of national life and offerrecommendations for its betterment .

3. crisis - induced .

in the turbulent 1960s , the practice began of establishing highvisibility commissions to make investigations into so - called national crises ( eg , thenational advisory commission on civil disorders ( 1968 ) , generally referred to asthe kerner commission ) .

4. technical .

the great majority of advisory commissions perform technical functionsand give advice to agencies .

most such commissions are permanent , staffed bytechnical experts , and form a basic method for the inclusion of diverse views in theagency's policies and management .

5. major policy .

these commissions have been appointed to study and makerecommendations on policy issues .

in the past , such commissions have studied civilrights , elements of u.s. foreign policy , and more recently , provided a study on thefuture of social security .

 ( 56 ) in this study our attention will center on one of the subcategories of advisory committees , thereorganization commissions , those that were assigned a comprehensive mandate to study theorganization and management of the executive branch , broadly interpreted .

it is also worth notingthat the literature on both advisory committees and reorganization generally focuses on advisorycommittees created by , or related to , the executive branch .

much less attention has been paid to themany advisory committees created by or related to the legislative branch .

 ( 57 ) many of these advisorycommittees , such as the base closure and realignment commission , ( 58 ) while reporting tocongress , nonetheless ultimately impact the organization and management of the executive branch .

it is one of the givens of government that executive organization undergoes constant change.these changes may be comprehensive and visible , or incremental and of low visibility .

they mayreflect a variety of values , some emphasizing universality , and others particularity .

changes maybe designed and intended to enhance agency accountability , or encourage managerial autonomy .

onereorganization may be inconsistent , or even contradictory , with another .

reorganizations may reflecta new agreement among previously conflicting parties , or reinforce their irreconcilable differences .

the point is that reorganizing the executive branch of government is a natural and continuousactivity .

reorganization , while it may be natural and continuous , is not a neutral activity .

there arewinners and losers when reorganizations occur .

not all reorganization proposals are of equal valueand utility .

reorganizations are instrumental in character and have no value except as they assist inachieving an agreed upon political or policy objective .

reorganizations cannot make workable andsuccessful programs that are conceptually unsound .

there are distinct limitations and managementcosts associated with reorganization .

reorganizations are not self - executing exercises .

implementation may be costly and result in unanticipated and undesired consequences .

even if oneassumes that the motives of the reorganizers are worthy , how is one to know a "good" from a "bad"reorganization ? .

is there any theory or set of principles available to use as guideposts in evaluation ? .

is there some tribal wisdom available that expresses the collective experience of those who havewrestled with executive management issues before ? .

or , are we intentionally to avoid this collectivewisdom of the past and single - mindedly seek out new truths and new organizations ? .

reflecting upon the organizational state of the executive branch during the 20th century , itis evident that the motivating force for comprehensive reorganization commissions has changed .

from the turn of the century to the mid - 1970s , comprehensive commissions were viewed asinstruments to promote executive branch political accountability to the president , and through thepresident to congress .

the proposal for a bureau of the budget , for instance , was strongly favoredby congress as a means to hold the president responsible for agency budget submissions and forsubsequent agency oversight .

to be sure , the budget bureau strengthened the institutionalpresidency , but this strengthening was not part of a zero sum game where one institution's gain mustnecessarily be at the expense of another institution .

rather , the centralizing element inherent in theestablishment of the budget bureau worked to the benefit of both the president and the congress intheir relations with the departments and agencies of the executive branch .

beginning in the 1970s , and reaching its peak at the end of the century , a differentmotivating force for reorganization emerged .

the entrepreneurial values of the nationalperformance review ( npr ) , for instance , were arguably not congenial to central management of theexecutive branch , or to the political accountability associated with central management .

indeed,managerial autonomy at the agency level became one of the highest values of the npr .

politicalaccountability , in the npr view , was to be largely supplanted by management processes intendedto provide better results and performance , however those terms might be defined and measured .

there was nothing modest in the claims of the npr .

the rhetoric tended to be hortatory andthe evidence cited anecdotal .

entrepreneurs prefer to avoid theory and rely instead on "successstories" to teach government managers how to perform better .

congress rarely appears in theirwritings or motivational seminars , and their attitude is more likely to be one of confrontation thanconciliation .

vice president gore's reinventing government exercise measured its success in"vanquishing big government" at least in part by the number of civil service positions it eliminated .

by and large , the entrepreneurs abjure theory with its requirements of precision , predictability,replicability , and acceptance of disproof , ( 300 ) preferring instead the enlightenment of success indicators , suchas customer polling ( "we will ... measure our success by customer satisfaction" ) .

 ( 301 ) all of this isimportant in assessing the future of landmark commissions in the coming century , even if the newpublic management "paradigm" itself proves to be of passing persuasiveness .

a distinction needs to be drawn between commissions established to study specific issueareas with recommendations forwarded to the president , congress , appointing authority , the public,or any combination of the above .

these commissions , such as the current social securitycommission , remain popular , and the number appointed annually is likely to remain high .

theso - called landmark commission , however , constitutes a very different situation .

of necessity , acomprehensive review of the organization of the executive branch requires a coherency of objectivesand evaluations that are difficult to develop without some overarching theory or set of principles .

has the day of the landmark commission passed ? .

has the loss in appeal of the so - called"orthodox theory" of organizational management made the comprehensive study approach obsolete ? .

can the entrepreneurial management paradigm be offered as a viable , comprehensible theory towhich a commission may repair in organizing its studies and recommendations ? .

or , would acommission naturally gravitate back toward the earlier values of , say , the hoover commissions ? .

can a new set of organizational doctrines be developed to accommodate the traditionalconstitutionalist values with the entrepreneurial values ? .

or , is there a "new" new publicmanagement waiting somewhere to be discovered ? .

 ( 302 ) even if some agreement on organizational theory can bereached , at a more practical level has the executive branch simply become too complex for a singlecommission to study and make appropriate recommendations ? .

what about the burgeoningquasi - government ; should it be included within the purview of any future landmarkcommission ? .

 ( 303 ) finally , should the president and his central management agencies seek to reassert their prior roleover matters of organizational management ? .

 ( 304 ) doubts regarding the utility of landmark - type commissions notwithstanding , they retain muchof their appeal to lawmakers .

it is a rare congress indeed in which there is not some effort toestablish a "new hoover commission. .

as mentioned previously , such a bill ( s. 2306 ) was introduced in the 106th congress by senator fred thompson , then - chairman of the senategovernmental affairs committee .

the charge to the nine - member commission was to makestructural recommendations respecting the entire executive branch and incorporate them in a singlebill .

this bill would then have to be considered by congress and voted up or down followingexpedited procedures .

among its supporters was paul light of the brookings institution whoannounced at a hearings in 2000: i believe , too , that there has been a lack ofattention to structural reform... .

i think you should pass s. 2306 .

i think you shouldattach it to every bill leaving this committee and every bill leaving the senate .

i have referred to thefederal organization chart as rather like the mouth of the ulonga - bora river where the africanqueen and humphrey bogart got bogged down .

i think that s. 2306 could be thatgentle rain that lifts the federal government out of the mouth of that swamp and gets it back ontrack .

i think it is time for a very detailed look at the structure of the federal government , and thathas to be done through legislation .

i don't see anyway you can do it otherwise .

 ( 305 ) in the late 1980s , congress passed a law ( which president reagan signed ) one provision ofwhich authorized the establishment of such a commission .

the public law elevating the veteransadministration to departmental status provided for the establishment of a national commission onexecutive organization patterned in general outline after the first hoover commission of the late1940s ( 102 stat .

2635 , sec .

17 ) .

this new commission , however , could be activated only bypresidential initiative .

if the president , in this case the newly inaugurated george h.w .

bush,transmitted written notification to congress within 30 days after the operational date for the veteransdepartment ( march 15 , 1989 ) that such a commission would serve "the national interest," then , andonly then , would the commission be activated .

president bush , although he was on the receivingend of some congressional lobbying for the commission , let the final date , april 15 , 1989 , passwithout a message to congress requesting the commission .

 ( 306 ) if , obstacles notwithstanding , a new landmark - style commission were established to reviewcomprehensively the structure of the executive branch , what sort of situation would this commissionface with respect to the political and institutional presidency and the congress ? .

are there unitswithin each of these branches that currently handle organizational management issues that might feelthreatened and offer resistance ? .

or , have both institutions retreated from their organizationalmanagement responsibilities ? .

looking to the presidency first , it is clear that recent presidents have been ambivalenttowards management generally , and organizational management in particular .

whereas once,through the mid - 1970s , there was a consensus that the president was the "chief manager" of theexecutive branch and should have institutional capacity to perform these responsibilities , no suchconsensus exists today .

recent presidents , beginning with john f. kennedy , have been warned byscholars and aides to avoid management issues .

stephen hess , writing in 1976 , and read bypresident - elect jimmy carter , argued that the president ought to limit himself to political leadership .

"presidents have made a serious mistake , starting with roosevelt , in asserting that they are chiefmanagers of the federal government.... rather than chief manager the president is the chief politicalofficer of the united states. .

 ( 307 ) this argument was repeated in various forms for theremainder of the century .

these scholarly warnings reinforced the inclination of contemporarypresidents to shy away from management responsibilities .

one consequence of this retreat was anerosion in the will and capacity of the office of management and budget ( omb ) to performmanagement functions .

in a bit of historical irony , the erosion of omb's capacity to manage becamepronounced shortly after the implementation of the reorganization plan of 1970 that , among otherthings , changed the name of the bureau of the budget to that of the office of management andbudget .

 ( 308 ) while employee statistics may not tell the whole story , they provide evidence of the declinein omb's management capacity , and therefore the institutional presidency's decline as well .

in 1970,224 employees were on the management side of omb .

by 1980 , when carter left office , the numberhad fallen to 111 .

the reagan administration further reduced this staff to only 47 ( compared to8,500 at the staff level of agency inspectors general ) .

 ( 309 ) rather than rebuild the omb management capacity , asrecommended by napa and others , the clinton administration decided ( "omb 2000 review" ) tointegrate most of the remaining staff of the general management division into five resourcemanagement offices ( rmos ) structured along budgetary functional lines .

 ( 310 ) in early 2002 , thereremained only a skeletal staff of 12 with the position of deputy director for management continuingits pattern of vacancies and short tenures .

 ( 311 ) what does this admitted retreat from management by the president and omb have to do withfuture proposals for a landmark - style commission ? .

the fact is that the proper design andimplementation of structural management proposals rests with a central management agency thatfunctions from a presidential perspective .

reorganizations that are designed and implemented bythe agencies themselves tend to meet parochial needs that may or may not be in concert with thepresident's interests .

with respect to congress , it had been the intention of the hoover commission in 1949 tohave most future executive reorganization be the result of ongoing interchange between thethen - bureau of the budget and a single committee in both houses of congress .

the house andsenate each established government operations committees , committees that continue to functiontoday with different titles and an altered sense of mission .

all presidentially initiated reorganizationplans were to be sent to these committees rather than to the subject field committees to insure thatmanagerial issues were addressed according to executive branch - wide standards .

joint hearings andreferrals yes , but the final response rested with the general management committees .

with the endof the reorganization plan process in 1984 , reorganization proposals now typically are referred to thesubject field committees none of which have a government - wide perspective .

the result isincreasing disaggregation in the organization and management of the executive branch .

the institutional weakness in the executive and legislative branches with respect to structuralquestions has implications that could well influence the prospects of success any new landmarkcommission might enjoy .

a commission cannot successfully function and see its recommendationsimplemented if it does not have institutional support readily available .

it cannot work in anenvironment isolated from the ongoing government .

a successful landmark commission seeminglyrequires as a necessary , but not sufficient , precondition the proper working of a central managementagency in the executive office and jurisdictional support of general management committees in thehouse and senate .

several generalizations may be useful in concluding this review and analysis of landmarkcommissions and their utility for the future .

1.a focused and limited mandate for a commission ( eg , the need for a separate officeof management and budget ) is more likely to provide useful results than acommission with a broad , unstructured mandate with substantial policy implications .

2.a commission should have ties with central managerial agencies in the executivebranch and with committees with general management responsibilities in congress .

others besides the commission must have a stake in the success of the exercise .

3.commissions should be cognizant of the distinctive legal character of governmentalorganization and activities .

included in any commission review should be a review,with recommendations , of the general management laws pertinent to the mandate ofthe commission .

4.there should be some consensus in advance among commission members regardingthe organizational principles to be applied in their review and recommendations .

commissions do not tend to be effective vehicles for generating consensus if nonepreviously existed .

acceptance of these general propositions for an effective landmark - style commission doesnot guarantee success , but it may be difficult to envision success if they are willfully ignored .

