international trade continues to grow in importance for the world economy as well as for the u.s. economy , enhancing economic well - being generally , but also imposing costs on trade sensitive sectors of national economies .

the importance of trade has been recognized by congress , which in recent years has paid close attention to many dimensions of u.s. international trade performance as part of its oversight of economic policy .

persistent large u.s. trade deficits raise a number of concerns among the public and in congress .

there are concerns that trade deficits slow economic growth , increase unemployment , generate deindustrialization , and raise the risk of economic and financial instability .

to address those concerns , this report examines the trade deficit from the context of mainstream economic analysis .

the first part of the report explains the fundamental macroeconomic forces that cause a trade imbalance ( deficit or surplus ) .

in light of those fundamental forces , the report then evaluates the most common economic concerns about trade deficits .

finally , the report examines the efficacy of alternative policy responses to trade imbalances and the economic forces that generate them .

the current account balance is the nation's most comprehensive measure of international transactions .

it has three component balances: the goods and services balance , the investment income balance , and net unilateral transfers .

goods are tangible items in the form of raw materials , intermediate products , and final products .

services are intangible output that cannot be stored and are usually produced and consumed at the same time .

income transactions are the payments and receipts on international investments such as dividends and interest .

unilateral transfers are the transfer of a good , service , or asset for which the receiving country does not provide anything of value in return , such as foreign aid , charitable contributions , or the payment of social security benefits to a u.s. citizen living abroad .

the three types of transactions measured in the current account balance are thought by economists to be closely related to current production , consumption , and income .

for the united states , the size of the current account deficit is largely the refection of a similarly sized goods and services deficit ( i.e. , trade deficit ) .

in 2009 , the united states had a current account deficit of $378.4 billion , composed of a goods and services deficit of $374.9 billion , an investment income surplus of $121.4 billion , and a net unilateral transfers deficit of $124.9 billion .

therefore , for the united states , the terms current account deficit and trade deficit can be used interchangeably with little inaccuracy .

such equivalence is not always the case , however .

australia , for example , has a relatively large current account deficit but a relatively small goods and services deficit ( trade deficit ) because it also has a relatively large investment income deficit ( an outflow of retained earnings and interest payments ) .

in talking about trade balances , it is also important to distinguish between multilateral and bilateral balances .

a bilateral balance is the balance between any pair of countries , whereas a multilateral balance is the balance between several or all of the country's trading partners .

the current account balance is a multilateral balance across all trading partners .

it is very likely that even if the united states' current account was in balance it would still have sizable bilateral imbalances ( surpluses and deficits ) with individual trading partners .

such bilateral imbalances would typically be a reflection of differences between countries in comparative advantage and in the structure of production and trade between economies and not necessarily a matter of economic concern .

in all but three years between the end of wwii and 1970 , the united states had modest current account surpluses .

during the 1970s , modest deficits occurred more frequently .

however , in all but three years between 1981 and 2009 , current account deficits have occurred and their typical size , both in dollar terms and as a share of gdp , has been rising as well .

a necessary corollary of rising u.s. deficits over this period has been rising current account surpluses abroad .

the u.s. current account ( trade ) deficit , decreased to just above $378 billion in 2009 , down substantially from $706 billion in 2008 , and from a high of $803 billion in 2006 .

as a percentage of gdp , the 2009 trade deficit stands at 2.7% , down from 4.9% in 2008 , and a record high of 6.1% in 2006 .

the sharp fall of the trade deficit in 2009 is largely the short - term consequence of the recent recession .

with economic recovery , more enduring economic forces are likely to determine the size of the trade deficit .

from the end of wwii to 1973 , the bretton woods international monetary system of fixed exchange rates constrained the united states and other nations to maintain more or less balanced trade .

with the collapse of the bretton woods system in 1973 that constraint was removed .

but that by itself is not sufficient to account for why , from the 1980s to the present , the united states experienced a steady growth of current account deficits , while other nations experienced a steady growth of current account surpluses .

nor is the tendency toward persistent large current account deficits in recent decades the consequence of rising trade barriers abroad , increased foreign dumping of exports , or any inherent inferiority of u.s. goods on the world market .

rather , trade imbalances occur because of underlying macroeconomic spending and saving behavior at home and abroad .

since the early 1980s , there is a strong tendency in the united states to spend beyond current output , with the excess of demand met by a net inflow of foreign goods and services that manifests itself as the u.s. current account deficit .

to understand the economic forces generating these persistent current account deficits ( and surpluses abroad ) , it is helpful to have familiarity with basic balance of payments accounting conventions: specifically , two accounting identities ( i.e. , conditions that must always be true ) that the current account must conform with .

the first identity defines the necessary condition for the economy's external balance .

the second accounting identity is the necessary condition for the economy's internal balance .

this section looks more closely at the economic forces that cause the two concurrent adjustments necessary for achieving internal and external economic balance .

the first adjustment is investment - saving imbalances generating inflows and outflows of capital between economies linked by global asset markets ; the second adjustment is cross - border flows of assets generating changes in the current account balance .

the flow of capital represents a transfer of purchasing power between countries , while changes in the current account balance represent a reciprocal transfer of goods and services between countries .

a domestic saving - investment imbalance can occur as a result of either investment rising relative to saving or saving falling relative to investment .

the united states has always had a low rate of gross saving compared to western europe and japan .

in addition , since the 1970s , a pattern of generally falling saving rates has occurred in all three regions .

however , investment rates in western europe and japan also fell by a similar amount .

so with saving and investment falling in tandem , there was no significant widening of their domestic savings - investment imbalance and , in turn , little change in their current account balances .

in contrast , in the united states , as the saving rate decreased , the investment rate remained relatively stable or , as occurred in the late 1990s , increased with an acceleration of u.s. productivity .

therefore , the u.s. saving - investment imbalance increased , leading to steadily larger current account deficits .

enabling larger u.s. current account deficits since the mid - 1990s was a complementary increase in global saving outside of the advanced industrial economies that was not being absorbed by domestic investment in the home economies .

a sizable slowing of economic growth in europe and japan since the 1970s is thought to be the primary reason for the tandem fall of saving and investment rates in these regions .

in the united states , however , economic growth did not slow and therefore is not the cause of the steady fall of the u.s. saving rate .

that fall was , in part , the result of a sharp decline of the household component of the private saving rate , decreasing from near 10% in the 1970s to near zero by 2005 .

to the degree that a trade deficit's effects on the economy are on balance beneficial , there may be no reason for a policy response to reduce or eliminate it .

in addition , if there is an orderly reduction in foreign investors' demand for dollar assets , the trade deficit could fall without any inducement by policy .

however , in this circumstance the adjustment might not be achieved on the best terms for the united states since it would be accomplished by a reduction in domestic investment rather than an increase in domestic saving .

if a reduction of the trade deficit is desired , macroeconomic polices are likely to be more effective than traditional trade - policy responses .

so long as domestic saving in the united states falls short of domestic investment and so long as an inflow of foreign saving is available to fill all or part of the gap , the united states will run a trade deficit .

this suggests that for any policy to be effective in reducing the trade deficit , it must be able to affect the saving - investment imbalances at home and abroad that are its ultimate cause .

trade policy tools to alter the flow of exports or imports , while imposing economic costs on the domestic economy , would not over time significantly change the domestic saving - investment imbalance , and therefore would not change the overall size of the trade deficit .

on the other hand , macroeconomic policy tools have the potential to alter the saving - investment balance and therefore alter the trade balance , but the realistic opportunity for their use is in practice often limited .

also , whether macroeconomic policy affects primarily saving or investment could be a matter of concern because of the potential differential effect on long - term growth .

where is the trade deficit headed in the period just ahead ? .

in the economic framework presented in this report , the answer to that question will hinge on the net direction of capital flows into and out of the american economy .

whether the current capital inflow gets bigger , smaller , or remains the same will most likely be determined by the resolution of two opposing forces: risk and reward .

if , on balance , foreign investors see further investment in the united states as a more risky undertaking , other factors equal , the capital inflow will ebb and bring the trade deficit down with it .

on the other hand , if the relative rate of return from investment in u.s. assets grows more attractive , the net capital inflow could expand and bring the trade deficit up with it .

a u.s. recovery will likely include a recovery of investment spending .

if increased investment spending is not matched by increased domestic saving , the trade deficit is likely to rise .

while the private saving rate is likely to be higher than its pre - recession level , the government saving rate is likely to be lower , making it difficult to judge whether the overall saving rate will be significantly above its pre - recession value .

private investor behavior is sensitive to the investment alternatives available .

the relative attractiveness of global investment alternatives will be influenced by the relative pace of the economic recoveries in the united states and the rest of the world .

at this time , the expectation is that europe and japan will rebound more slowly than the united states .

also , the recent troubles in greece and other euro area economies may diminish the attractiveness of the euro area as an investment destination .

however , most emerging markets , especially in asia , are expected to outpace the developed economies , including the united states .

a risk factor that could exert a medium - term influence on foreign suppliers of capital to the u.s. economy is the adequacy of diversification in their asset holdings , which already contain substantial dollar balances .

diversification would likely manifest itself as a slowing in the rate of accumulation of dollar assets , not as the "dumping" of dollar assets already held .

such diversification was a likely reason for a significant weakening of private capital inflows between 2002 and 2007 .

regarding the behavior of foreign central banks , it is uncertain whether they will continue to increase their already large holdings of dollar assets .

given the sizable damage caused by the recent financial crisis and recession , the unprecedented scale of the policy responses to those negative shocks , and the weakened state of the global economy , projections of the u.s. trade deficit's near - term path carry an above - normal degree of uncertainty .

most forecasts have the overall u.s. economy on a path of recovery in 2010 and for several years after that .

however , there is some variance in the pace of that recovery among prominent forecasters .

outside of emerging asia , most foreign economies are projected to recover more slowly than the united states .

the imf is forecasting a modest increase in the u.s. current account deficit for 2010 to $487 billion , from $418 billion in 2009 .

the critical factor generating this increase is the beginning of the recovery of investment spending in the aftermath of the recession .

saving rises but more slowly than investment .

as the recovery gains momentum and investment spending rebounds more strongly than domestic saving , the trade deficit is projected to increase to $638 billion by 2015 .

however , the increase is moderate , moving at a pace that keeps the trade deficit as a share of gdp stable and well below recent highs , remaining at around 3.5% of gdp .

relatively weaker recovery and more damped investment spending in much of the rest of the world makes the united states an attractive destination for foreign investors and helps to reinforce this pattern of net capital inflows .

although there is no dampening effect on economic activity , the foreign sector is not seen as a significant contributing force to the pace of economic activity .

global insight , an economic forecasting company , projects a larger increase in the trade deficit than does the imf .

the current account deficit in their view will rise to $526 billion in 2010 and will continue to increase , reaching $641 billion in 2012 , pushing the trade deficit share of gdp to 3.9% .

the sharper rise of the trade deficit in this projection as compared with the imf projection is driven by a faster - paced recovery and stronger domestic investment spending in conjunction with relatively low domestic saving .

also , slower - paced recoveries in other major economies tend to encourage an inflow of foreign capital .

