one of the stated objectives of the u.s. public health service , as outlined in its report healthy people 2010 , is to increase the proportion of mothers who breastfeed their children .

the national objective set forth in the report is to strive for a 75% participation rate of nursing mothers in the early postpartum period , a 50% participation rate of nursing mothers in the period after the infant reaches six months of age , and a 25% participation rate of nursing mothers at the age of one year .

many health care professionals encourage breastfeeding as the optimal form of nutrition for infants for at least the first six months of life .

reports show that in 2005 , more than 74 % of infants were being breastfed immediately after delivery — a number that continues to increase .

breastfeeding is generally considered to be beneficial to both mother and child .

research has indicated that the special composition of human milk enhances cognitive and visual development and lowers the risk and severity of a variety of acute childhood illnesses and chronic diseases , including diarrhea , lower respiratory infection , otitis media , bacteremia , bacterial meningitis , urinary tract infection , necrotizing enterocolitis , lymphoma , and digestive diseases .

research has also demonstrated health benefits to mothers who breastfeed , such as reduced risk of breast and ovarian cancer and osteoporosis .

the american academy of pediatrics and the american dietetic association have reported that breastfeeding may reduce health care costs and employee absenteeism for care which is attributable to child illness .

it has been reported that breastfeeding may be economically beneficial .

because of the growing incidence of women in the workforce , certain issues have arisen concerning working mothers and breastfeeding .

it may be necessary for a working mother to express milk during working hours , and / or to breastfeed her child during working hours .

other issues concern nursing and / or the expression of milk in public or semi - public places such as restaurants , public transportation facilities , and other locations where the public is present .

various states have enacted legislation and / or adopted court rules relating to nursing mothers and jury duty .

over the years congress has also considered legislation concerning the rights of breastfeeding mothers .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

2819 and s. 1244 , the proposed breastfeeding promotion acts of 2009 , were introduced on june 11 , 2009 .

as breastfeeding has become more common , legal concerns have arisen on applying state decency laws and other laws concerning public nudity and exposure to nursing mothers .

because of these concerns , a wide range of state laws have been enacted to deal with issues involving various aspects of breastfeeding .

the first state to enact comprehensive breastfeeding legislation was florida in 1993 .

this legislation removed breastfeeding from the criminal statutes and created a new law that stated that breastfeeding was an important and basic act of nature that needed to be encouraged in the interests of maternal and child health .

the law provided that a woman had a right to breastfeed in any place where she had a right to be .

this legislation served as a model for legislation subsequently enacted by other states .

in 1994 , florida enacted the first state legislation on breastfeeding mothers having the support and cooperation of their employers .

while this law did not require all employers to accommodate nursing mothers ( such as providing for a location to lactate ) , it set out the reasons why breastfeeding was very important .

the law also established a study to look at the feasibility of breastfeeding guidelines for employers .

most of the state breastfeeding laws permit mothers to breastfeed in any public or private location and / or provide that breastfeeding does not constitute indecent exposure or other criminal behavior .

some states have vested nursing mothers with certain rights , including rights in the workplace .

for example , hawaii prohibits employers from discriminating against a mother who breastfeeds or expresses milk at the workplace .

other states exempt nursing mothers from jury service .

the current body of state breastfeeding laws varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .

at the current time , west virginia is the only state without some type of legislation dealing with the protection of nursing mothers and / or the promotion of breastfeeding .

in recent years , eleven state legislatures have adopted some version of breastfeeding legislation for the first time .

two of these states have taken larger rather than incremental steps by enacting many provisions at once to provide protection to nursing mothers that is comparable to most other states .

in 2007 , arkansas enacted laws that permitted mothers to breastfeed in public without being subject to any public indecency laws .

the legislature also established laws relating to breastfeeding in the workplace .

likewise , mississippi enacted similar provisions in addition to exempting breastfeeding mothers from jury duty in 2006 .

below is a summary of state laws concerning breastfeeding .

each law is cited and is followed by a brief summary of its provisions .

the report does not cover certain commemorative state legislation relating to breastfeeding .

a chart has been prepared summarizing the existing state breastfeeding laws and grouping the laws into six categories .

it should be considered that if a state does not have specific legislation authorizing or affirming breastfeeding in public , it does not mean that breastfeeding in public is necessarily prohibited .

local ordinances , which are not considered in this report , may deal with the issue .

likewise , an exemption from jury duty by a nursing mother which in some states may be covered by state statute , may also be covered in other states by court rules , local practices , or regulations .

in recent years , there has been an expansion in the practice of breastfeeding .

as a consequence of this growing trend , washington , d.c. , the u.s. virgin islands , puerto rico and every state except west virginia have enacted some sort of legislation associated with breastfeeding .

the laws vary considerably in their scope and in their coverage .

however , these state laws may be generally classified into six broad categories .

thirty - six states and the u.s. virgin islands permit mothers to breastfeed in any public or private location where the mother is legally entitled to be: alabama , arizona , arkansas , california , colorado , connecticut , delaware , florida , georgia , hawaii , illinois , indiana , iowa , kansas , kentucky , louisiana , maine , maryland , massachusetts , minnesota , mississippi , missouri , nevada , new jersey , new mexico , new york , north carolina , ohio , oklahoma , oregon , pennsylvania , south carolina , texas , vermont , virginia , and wyoming .

twenty - three states and the u.s. virgin islands exempt breastfeeding from public indecency laws: alaska , arkansas , florida , illinois , massachusetts , michigan , mississippi , montana , nevada , new hampshire , new york , north carolina , north dakota , oklahoma , pennsylvania , rhode island , south carolina , south dakota , utah , virginia , washington , wisconsin , and wyoming .

twelve states and puerto rico have laws related to breastfeeding in the workplace: arkansas , california , connecticut , georgia , hawaii , illinois , minnesota , mississippi , rhode island , tennessee , texas , and washington .

eleven states exempt breastfeeding mothers from jury duty: california , idaho , iowa , kansas , kentucky , minnesota , mississippi , nebraska , oregon , oregon , and virginia .

seven states and washington , d.c. have implemented or encouraged the development of a breastfeeding awareness education campaign: california , florida , illinois , louisiana , missouri , texas , and vermont .

five states have certain optional or voluntary compliance provisions: california , illinois , minnesota , missouri , and virginia .

