radio frequency spectrum is used for all forms of wireless communications , including cellular telephony , paging , personal communications service , radio and television broadcast , telephone radio relay , aeronautical and maritime radio navigation , and satellite command and control .

spectrum policy covers both satellite and terrestrial transmissions .

the issues discussed here refer principally to spectrum management for terrestrial technologies .

radio frequency spectrum is managed primarily by regulations that set rules , for example , for permissible uses , certification of devices , requirements for public safety , and the acquisition of licenses .

spectrum is assigned primarily through licenses while some spectrum remains unlicensed and accessible to any user who meets specific requirements .

the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is responsible for overseeing licensed and unlicensed spectrum used for commercial purposes and by state and local agencies , including first responders , as well as most other radio frequencies not assigned for federal use .

although congress has a legislative role in spectrum management , the fcc routinely takes on the responsibility of making decisions about the assignment of spectrum for different uses and sets the rules for auctions of spectrum licenses .

two recent important auctions of spectrum licenses were for the 700 mhz band , auction 73 , and the advanced wireless services ( aws ) , designated auction 66 or aws - 1 .

the auction for licenses at 700 mhz—airwaves that are or will be available because of the planned switch from analog to digital television broadcasting—ended march 18 , 2008 .

the bids in this auction totaled over $19.5 billion .

aws - 1 was completed on september 18 , 2006 , with nearly $13.9 billion in completed bids .

spectrum is considered to be a natural resource with a combination of characteristics that differentiate it from other resources .

for example , spectrum is: finite .

today's technology can only operate on certain frequencies ; commercially viable frequencies are a valuable commodity .

renewable .

airwaves used to broadcast any transmission can be reused after the broadcast is completed .

technology dependent .

most natural resources can be harvested manually , albeit inefficiently .

spectrum is in the atmosphere and is usable because technology has been developed to exploit the properties of electromagnetic waves for sound , data and video transmission .

a national asset with international rules and regulations .

for example , most domestic uses of spectrum are assigned bands of operation through the international telecommunications union , an agency of the united nations ; satellites for broadcasting are governed by international treaty .

administered .

to avoid interference from competing broadcast transmissions , frequency assignments are managed by recognized authorities .

administrative decisions as to how to allocate spectrum ( for example , the number of channels to assign with a license ) influence its commercial potential and the supply of spectrum for commercial and public use .

the development and implementation of better wireless communications technologies are critical to maximizing the efficiency of spectrum resources .

spectrum management policies ideally should take into account the impact of new technology , or—since it is difficult to predict the development paths of new technologies—allow for flexibility and accommodation in spectrum allocation .

although flexibility may be desirable in policy - making , most existing wireless technologies are inflexibly constructed to work on a limited range of specific frequencies .

relocation from one part of the spectrum to another can require costly equipment changes .

therefore , reallocation of spectrum to new uses is often expensive as well as technically and administratively difficult .

additionally , some uses of spectrum are governed by international regulations .

because two or more signal transmissions over the same frequency in the same location at the same time could cause interference ( a distortion of the signals ) , the fcc , over many years , has developed and refined a system of exclusive licenses for users of specific frequencies .

in the recent past , the fcc has granted licenses using a process known as "comparative hearings" ( also known as "beauty contests" ) , and has used lotteries to distribute spectrum licenses .

after years of debate over the idea of using competitive bidding ( i.e. , auctions ) to assign spectrum licenses , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) added section 309 ( j ) to the communications act , authorizing the fcc to organize auctions to award spectrum licenses for certain wireless communications services .

additional provisions concerning auctions were included in the balanced budget act of 1997 , the auction reform act of 2002 , the commercial spectrum enhancement act , and the deficit reduction act of 2005—all discussed below .

the main category of services for which licenses may be auctioned are called commercial mobile radio services ( cmrs ) , which include advanced wireless services ( aws ) , personal communications service ( pcs ) , cellular , and most specialized mobile radio services ( smr ) with some exceptions , cmrs providers are regulated as common carriers to ensure regulatory parity among similar services that will compete against one another for subscribers .

spectrum policy to manage frequency allocation and license assignments has evolved over the years in response to changes in technology and market demand , among other factors .

auctions are a market - driven solution to assigning licenses to use specific frequencies and are a recent innovation in spectrum management and policy .

spectrum for what is widely described as "prime" frequencies ( 300 mhz - 3000 mhz ) is judged by many to be the most commercially desirable and is widely sought after at auction by competing interests .

several lucrative auctions have added billions to the federal treasury , applied to general revenue .

the fcc has the authority to conduct auctions only when applications are mutually exclusive ( i.e. , two licensees in the same frequency band would be unable to operate without causing interference with each other ) , and when services are primarily subscription - based .

the fcc does not have authority to reclaim licenses awarded prior to the decision to permit auctions .

in accordance with the budget enforcement act of 1990 , and provisions in the communications act of 1934 , as amended , auction proceeds cannot be used for funding other programs .

creation of two important trust funds—the spectrum relocation fund and the digital television and public safety fund—required new language and amendments to existing law to permit some auction revenues to be applied directly to specific programs through trusts .

in 1995 , rules intended to favor entrepreneurs were set for auction 5 , called the pcs c - block auction , for one of the blocks of spectrum allocated for personal communications service ( pcs ) .

the fcc gave bidding credits to small businesses to help them compete .

winning bidders only had to pay 10% down and the remainder could be paid over ten years at below - market interest rates .

at auction in 1996 , broadband c block licenses were sold for bids totaling $13 billion .

by mid - 1997 , however , many of the license winners ( most notably nextwave telecom inc. ) had defaulted and declared bankruptcy .

the licenses were then seized by a court in bankruptcy litigation .

in september 1997 , the fcc offered a set of options for c - block licensees to restructure their debt ( that offer was modified in march 1998 ) .

the licensees opted to maintain their bankrupt status , however , preventing the c - block spectrum from being re - auctioned .

based on its interpretation of a series of decisions in 1999 and 2000 by a u.s. court of appeals , the fcc cancelled the licenses that had not been paid for and re - auctioned that spectrum .

the auction ( auction 35 ) for the defaulted licenses was completed january 26 , 2001 , and booked $16.86 billion in projected revenue for the general treasury .

on june 22 , 2001 , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia found that the fcc did not have the legal right to take back nextwave's licenses for re - auction , and that 216 of the licenses ( worth $15.85 billion ) still belonged to nextwave rather than re - auction winners such as verizon wireless .

the u.s. supreme court agreed to hear the case , essentially weighing nextwave's right to protection under bankruptcy laws against the fcc's right to allocate spectrum .

on january 27 , 2003 the supreme court ruled in favor of nextwave , agreeing with the earlier court of appeals decision that the fcc did not have the authority to recover the licenses .

subsequently , nextwave agreed to return some of the disputed spectrum to the fcc for re - auction .

spectrum value depends on many factors , such as bandwidth , its frequencies ( since signal transmission characteristics vary along different parts of the spectrum ) , the geographic area covered , the services permitted by fcc rules , the availability of equipment that can operate at those frequencies , the demand for services that do not interfere with other bands , the amount of alternative spectrum already available for similar services , the number of incumbents presently occupying the spectrum , and whether incumbents will remain in that spectrum or be relocated to other spectrum .

spectrum license value may be greater if adjacent bands can be aggregated to form larger blocks and if the given spectrum is not encumbered by other licensees using the same frequencies .

cbo annually scores the anticipated receipts from planned auctions of spectrum licenses and includes the revenue estimate in its annual report , the budget and economic outlook .

for fiscal years 2008-2018 , cbo projected auction receipts of $11 billion in 2008 from the sale of tv airwaves and an additional $2.9 billion in the period 2009-2012 .

unlicensed spectrum is not sold to the highest bidder and used for the services chosen by the license - holder but is instead accessible to anyone using wireless equipment certified by the fcc for those frequencies .

among the advantages of unlicensed spectrum is the opportunity to test new technology directly with consumers instead of going through spectrum license - holders .

one of the disadvantages of unlicensed spectrum is the possibility of interference among the transmissions of the various users , both within the assigned bandwidth and with other bandwidths .

rules regarding interference differ between licensed and unlicensed spectrum .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act amended the communications act of 1934 with a number of important provisions affecting the availability of spectrum licenses and authorized the fcc to organize auctions to award spectrum licenses for certain wireless communications services .

among the subsequent laws that deal with spectrum policy and auctions are the balanced budget act of 1997 , the auction reform act of 2002 , the commercial spectrum enhancement act of 2004 , and the deficit reduction act of 2005 .

the balanced budget act also directed fcc actions concerning the transition to digital television , an event with significant impact on spectrum management .

the process of preparing rules for the 700 mhz band auction attracted more debate than usual for a number of reasons .

one reason for interest in the spectrum is that the airwaves used for tv have good propagation qualities , able to travel far and to penetrate building walls easily .

the proposals for service rules that provided the framework for licensee business models dominated the controversy over the preparations for the auction of the 700 mhz airwaves .

spectrum , a valuable resource governed by available technology , is regulated by the federal government with the primary objectives of maximizing its usefulness and efficiency , and to prevent interference among spectrum users .

a key component of spectrum policy is the allocation of bands for specific uses and the assignment of frequencies within those bands .

auctions , a fairly recent innovation in frequency assignment , are regarded as a market - based mechanism for allocating spectrum .

other market - driven policies include licensing fees based on fair - market valuations of spectrum and flexibility in spectrum usage within assigned bandwidths .

today , spectrum for commercial applications is typically auctioned to the highest bidder , but many commercial users have spectrum acquired before the present - day auction process was implemented .

auctions as a means of allocating spectrum are considered a success by many observers because of the federal revenue generated , as well as for the speed with which licenses auctioned have gone to the companies that value them the most and are most likely to put them to use .

moreover , many prefer letting businesses determine whether to invest in a new service rather than relying on the government to decide who receives a spectrum license .

the fcc has concluded that auctioning of spectrum licenses has contributed to the rapid deployment of new wireless technologies , increased competition in the marketplace , and encouraged participation by small businesses .

however , many have questioned whether auction policy should be supplemented more aggressively with other market - driven solutions , and whether the existing auction process and administration can be improved .

spectrum management is an exercise in reconciling divergent interests .

over time , developments in technology may significantly increase the amount of useable spectrum and consequently the ease with which a policy of equitable allocation and use can be crafted .

for the immediate future , congress may choose to debate and act on questions such as reforming spectrum management and allocation mechanisms .

some observers argue that a fully - developed policy should take into account issues such as international competitiveness , the communications needs of public safety agencies and the military , the role of wireless technology in economic growth , and the encouragement of new technologies that make spectrum use more efficient and more beneficial to society as a whole .

the stated objective of many policy reformers is a coherent national policy that provides the proper balance for existing applications while at the same time providing opportunities for future growth and development .

given the number of objectives in the allocation and use of spectrum , and the differing solutions for achieving them , choices made for 700 mhz could be far - reaching in setting the direction for future policy decisions .

