t he persistence of gender - based wage disparities — commonly referred to as the pay or wage gap — has been the subject of extensive debate and commentary .

congress first addressed the issue more than four decades ago in the equal pay act of 1963 , mandating an "equal pay for equal work" standard , and addressed it again the following year in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 .

collection of compensation data and elimination of male / female pay disparities are also integral to department of labor enforcement of executive order 11246 ( initially issued by president lyndon johnson ) , which mandates nondiscrimination and affirmative action by federal contractors .

during the last several decades , initiatives to strengthen and expand current federal remedies available to victims of unlawful sex - based wage discrimination have been taken up in congre ss .

this report begins by presenting data on earnings for male and female workers and by discussing explanations that have been offered for the differences in earnings .

it next discusses the major laws directed at eliminating sex - based wage discrimination as well as relevant federal court cases .

the report closes with a description of pay equity legislation that has been considered or enacted by congress in recent years .

federal data show that full - time female workers have lower earnings than full - time male workers .

examination of some of the characteristics of female and male workers suggests that at least a portion of the differences in earnings are due to observable ( nondiscriminatory ) factors .

at the same time , no widely accepted methodology is able to attribute the entirety of the wage gap to observable characteristics .

this section will use median weekly wage data from the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) to illustrate the debate on the male - female pay gap .

this brief discussion does not attempt to comprehensively review this issue .

instead , it uses easily understood data from a widely used source to highlight common arguments and underscores the complexity of determining the causes of differences in the earnings of male and female workers .

in 2014 , the median weekly wage for full - time female workers was $719 , or 83% of the $871 median weekly earnings of full - time male workers .

differences in earnings for certain subpopulations of workers suggest that some portion of the earnings gap is attributable to factors other than discrimination .

female workers are concentrated in occupations with lower earnings .

for example , women account for 73% of the workers in personal care and service occupations ( such as hairdresser or childcare worker ) , a field with median weekly earnings of $487 .

conversely , men account for 98% of the workers in construction and extraction occupations ( such as bricklayers and mining machine operators ) , a field with median weekly earnings of $756 .

full - time m ale workers work more hours than full - time female workers .

"full - time" includes all workers who work 35 or more hours per week .

among persons who work full - time , male workers average 43.4 hours per week and female workers average 40.8 .

among full - time workers who work exactly 40 hours per week , the pay gap between male and female workers is lower than the overall gap for all full - time workers ( 11% vs. 17% ) .

the earnings gap for younger workers and unmarried workers without children is smaller .

among workers aged 25 to 34 , the earnings gap is 10% .

among unmarried workers without children , the earnings gap is 6% .

interpretations of these data vary .

some suggest that these patterns illustrate that the pay gap between male and female workers is negligible and no further policy interventions are necessary .

in contrast , proponents of further action note that some of the data that "explain" the pay gap , while not directly discriminatory , may be the result of discrimination .

for example , female workers may be tracked to lower - paying fields , or supervisors may be hesitant to give more demanding work to female workers .

further , even among rigorous studies , no widely accepted methodology has been able to attribute the entirety of the pay gap to factors other than the sex of the worker , making it difficult to eliminate the possibility of discrimination .

although the ledbetter legislation discussed above is the only new pay discrimination law enacted by congress in recent years , the issue of pay equity continues to garner congressional attention .

a number of measures have been introduced in the 114 th congress .

the two most well - known of these are the paycheck fairness act and the fair pay act , both of which have been introduced repeatedly in every congressional session for a decade or more .

other bills in the 114 th congress include the end pay discrimination through information act , the workplace advancement act , and the gender advancement in pay act , or gap act .

each of these bills is described briefly below .

introduced in each of the last several congressional sessions , the paycheck fairness act ( h.r .

1619 / s. 862 ) would increase penalties for employers who pay different wages to men and women for "equal work," and would add programs for training , research , technical assistance , and pay equity employer recognition awards .

the legislation would also make it more difficult for employers to avoid epa liability , and proposed safeguards would protect employees from retaliation for making inquiries or disclosures concerning employee wages and for filing a charge or participating in any manner in epa proceedings .

in short , while this legislation would adhere to current equal work standards of the epa , it would reform the procedures and remedies for enforcing the law .

under the epa , as noted , prevailing plaintiffs may recover backpay in an amount equal to the total difference between wages actually received and those to which they are lawfully entitled and an additional amount equal to the backpay award as liquidated damages .

compensatory damages are not authorized , and consequently , awards do not include sums for physical or mental distress , medical expenses , or other costs .

the paycheck fairness act would authorize epa class actions and compensatory and punitive damages .

in addition , the legislation would establish more restrictive standards for proof by employers of an affirmative defense to epa liability based on any "bona fide factor other than sex. .

thus , for a pay factor to be "bona fide," the employer would have to establish that it was "job related," consistent with "business necessity," not derived from a sex - based differential in compensation , and accounts for the wage differential at issue , and that the employer's purpose could not be accomplished by less discriminatory alternative means .

another aspect of epa enforcement addressed by proposed pay equity bills concerns employer recordkeeping and the conduct of technical assistance , research , and educational programs by federal agencies .

for example , the paycheck fairness act would mandate record - keeping and data collection for better enforcement of the law .

the eeoc would also be required to issue regulations for the collection of pay data from employers based on sex , race , and ethnicity , taking into consideration the burden placed on employers and the need to protect the confidentiality of required reports .

finally , a "national award for pay equity in the workplace" would be established to recognize employers who demonstrate "substantial effort to eliminate pay disparities between men and women. .

the fair pay act ( h.r .

1787 ) , which has predecessors dating back to the 103 rd congress , would go further than the paycheck fairness act by proposing a fundamental expansion to the scope of the epa , which is presently confined to sex - based wage differentials , by adding racial and ethnic minorities as protected classes under that law .

intentional wage discrimination against these groups is already prohibited by title vii .

but title vii and the epa have different standards of proof , and because proof of intent to discriminate is not required by the "equal pay for equal work" standard of the epa , it may provide greater protection to minority groups than title vii in many cases .

the epa's catchall exception , affording employers broad immunity for pay differentials attributable to "factors other than sex," would be significantly narrowed by the fair pay act .

a compensatory and punitive damages remedy , without statutory limit , would replace the present epa backpay and liquidated damages scheme , based on the fair labor standards act .

significantly , the fair pay act would also redefine the basic statutory standard of the epa by requiring employers to pay equal wages regardless of sex , race , or national origin to workers in equivalent jobs .

unlike the current law , the epa claims based on wage disparities between dissimilar jobs — for example , a janitor and a clerk — would be permitted if they are determined to be equivalent in some largely undefined manner .

by substituting job equivalency for the "equal work standard" in the epa , the fair pay act arguably could revive legal issues similar to those confronted by the federal courts during the 1980s in so - called "comparable worth" title vii cases .

finally , the fair pay act would require all covered employers to maintain comprehensive records of the method used to set employee wages and to file annual reports with the eeoc detailing the racial , ethnic , and gender composition of the employer's workforce broken down by job classification and wage or salary level .

such reports would be available for reasonable inspection and examination upon request of any person , pursuant to eeoc regulations , and could be used by the commission for research purposes .

the eeoc would also be required to provide technical assistance to implement the proposed ban on racial , ethnic , or gender discrimination between employees working in equivalent jobs .

as noted above , several new bills have been introduced in more recent congressional sessions .

although they differ slightly , both the end pay discrimination through information act ( s. 83 ) and the workplace advancement act ( s. 2200 ) would expand the epa's antiretaliation provisions to prohibit an employer from retaliating against an employee who has discussed salary information with other employees .

broader in scope , the gender advancement in pay act ( gap act ; s. 2773 ) would not only adopt similar prohibitions against retaliation based on the sharing of wage information , but also would alter the employer defenses available under the epa .

specifically , the act would exempt employers from epa liability for wage differentials that are based on expertise , a shift differential , or any business - related factor other than sex , including education , training , or experience .

the bill would also toll the statute of limitations when an epa suit is brought or an eeoc charge is filed , as well as add civil penalties to the epa for willful violations of the statute .

these penalties would be capped in varying amounts based on the size of the employer .

funds derived from these penalties would be used to create a grant program and to support a comptroller general inquiry that would involve a multistate study on strategies to increase the participation of women in high - demand occupations and industries in which women are underrepresented .

in addition , the bill would require the department of labor and the eeoc to develop technical assistance materials to assist small businesses in complying with the law .

