on november 7 , 2003 , the house passed the conference report on h.r .

1588 ,the fy2004 dod authorization , by a vote of 362 to 40 , after the conference report was filed earlythursday morning .

the senate passed the bill by 95 to 3 on november 12 .

on november 24 , thepresident signed the bill ( p.l .

108-136 ) .

compromises were reached on the main issues that had heldup the conference for several months: buy american provisions , the air force lease of boeingkc767 aircraft , a new national security personnel system , concurrent receipt , and tricare fornon - deployed reservists .

the conference version ( h.rept .

108-283 ) of h.r .

2658 , the fy2004department of defense ( dod ) appropriations bill , provided $368.7 billion in funding .

it passed thehouse on september 23 , 2003 , and the senate on the following day , in both cases quickly and withlittle debate .

on september 30 , 2003 , the president signed the bill into law ( p.l .

108-87 ) .

the fy2004 dod authorization act included several contentious issues , which were settledonly after long negotiations .

on domestic preference restrictions in the buy american act and theberry amendment , the dod authorization added provisions to assess the u.s. defense industrialbase and the extent of u.s. reliance on foreign suppliers but dropped proposals to require dod topurchase certain items only from american suppliers .

in the case of the tanker lease , dod agreedto a proposal by senator warner to lease 20 and buy 80 boeing kc767 tankers rather than lease 100aircraft , a proposal less costly than the original lease but more costly than a straight multiyear buy .

the fate of the deal remains uncertain in light of boeing's recent firing of high - level officials forimproprieties and an ongoing investigation by the dod inspector general .

compromises were also brokered on other contentious issues on which the administrationhad threatened a veto .

the administration agreed to a new benefit that provides concurrent receiptof military retirement and disability payments to all military retirees with disability ratings of 50%or higher as well as an expansion of those eligible under the "purple hearts plus" program enactedlast year that provides benefits to military retirees with combat or combat - related disabilities .

theadministration also agreed to a 15-month pilot program to offer access to tricare tonon - deployed reservists who are unemployed or do not qualify for health benefits offered by theiremployer .

h.r .

1588 also authorizes the secretary of defense to develop a new nationalsecurity personnel system for dod's civilian employees , gives dod special exemptions to certainenvironmental statutes , and lifts the current ban on development of low - yield nuclear weapons .

both the house and senate versions of h.r .

1588 , the authorization bill , provide$400.5 billion for national defense programs , about $1.5 billion above the request of $399.7 billionthat the administration submitted in february .

the authorization covers not only defense programsfunded in the defense appropriations bill but also programs funded in the military construction,energy and water , and some other appropriations measures .

the fy2004 dod appropriations bill provides a total of $368.7 billion for the defenseprograms it covers , $500 million less than the $369.2 billion that was included in both the house andsenate versions .

the total in the conference agreement is slightly below the amounts provided fordefense by the budget committees under section 302 ( b ) allocations of the congressional budget actand $3.1 billion below the request .

this decrease freed up the same amount for other appropriationsbills while staying within the cap on discretionary spending established by the fy2004 budgetresolution ( h.con.res .

95 ) .

final funding for dod could also be affected by a $1.8billion rescission included in the conference version of the fy2004 omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

2673 ) that was passed by the house on december 8 but is unlikely to beconsidered by the senate until january 2004 .

the final version of dod's fy2004 appropriations cushioned the programmatic impact ofthe $3.5 billion cut to the request by making an offsetting rescission of $3.6 billion from the $62.6billion in fy2003 supplemental appropriations that congress approved in april .

under budgetscoring rules , rescissions are counted as a credit in the year when they are enacted , even though prioryear monies - - in this case , fy2003 - - are cut .

this allowed the appropriators to meet their fy2004targets without reducing funding for fy2004 programs by $3.5 billion .

after a conference that spanned over five months , the conferees reached agreement and fileda report on november 7 , 2003 , on h.r .

1588 , the fy2004 dod authorization act ( h.rept .

108-354 ) .

the bill was passed by the house by a vote of 362 to 40 on that same day andby the senate by a vote of 95 to 3 on november 12 , the following week .

the president signed thebill on november 24 , 2003 ( p.l .

108-136 ) .

on may 22 , the house and the senate passed their respective versions of the fy2004 dodauthorization bills after several days of floor debate .

the house version , h.r .

1588 ,passed by 361 to 68 .

although the senate passed its version , s. 1050 , by 98 to 1 on thesame date , the senate adopted a unanimous consent agreement on the next day providing forconsideration of several specific amendments .

on june 4 after the memorial day recess , the senateadopted amendments on concurrent receipt and expedited immigration approval for selectedreservists and their families during wartime and rejected an amendment to cancel the 2005 round ofbase closures before passing the bill again by voice vote and appointing its conferees ( see table1a ) .

 ( 1 ) debate in the housetook place on may 20 and may 21 , and in the senate on may 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , and june 4 , 2003 .

on may 13 , the senate armed services committee ( sasc ) reported s. 1050 , after completing markup on may 9 ( s.rept .

108-46 ) .

the bill as reported did not include the dodproposal to redesign its civilian personnel system .

the house armed services committee ( hasc ) reported its bill on may 16 after completing markup on may 14 ( h.rept .

108-106 ) .

on may 21 , thehouse adopted a rule ( h.res .

245 ) that limited general debate to two hours andamendments to those specified in the rule .

the senate rule required that all amendments beconsidered relevant by the parliamentarian .

the house bill included much of dod's legislativeproposal for a new civilian personnel system as initially marked up by the house governmentreform committee ( h.r .

1836 ) .

 ( 2 ) table 1a .

status of fy2004 defense authorization: h.r.1588 and s. 1050 a .

the senate initially passed s. 1050 by 98 to 1 on may 22 , 2003 , but then adopteda unanimous consent agreement on may 23 , 2003 , to continue debate on selectedamendments after the recess ; see congressional record , p. s7115 .

those amendments wereconsidered on june 4 , and the bill was then passed by voice vote .

the conference report reached compromises on seven major issues that held up the authorization bill for several months: buy american restrictions proposed by the house and opposed by the senateand the administration ; proposals to provide costly concurrent receipt of military retirement andveterans administration ( va ) disability benefits ; proposals to allow the air force to initiate acquisition of a $29 billion programto lease and buy 100 boeing kc767 tanker airplanes ; fashioning of the new national security personnel system requested bydod ; expanding access to dod's tricare health system to non - deployedreservists ; exempting dod from certain environmental statutes ; and changing current restrictions on research on low - yield nuclearweapons .

the compromises reached are described below .

details on other conference action , includingrdt&e and weapon system funding , will be included in a later update .

the fy2004 dod appropriations act was signed into law ( p.l .

108-87 ) on september 30,2003 , at the end of the fiscal year .

conferees resolved their issues , and the bill was passed onseptember 23 by the house and september 24 by the senate after the two - day hiatus in businesscaused by hurricane isabel .

differences in funding levels were resolved .

table 1b .

status of fy2004 defense appropriations: h.r.2658 and s. 1382 a .

full committee markup was completed on june 26 , 2003 ; the report was filed on july 2 , 2003. b .

full committee markup was completed on july 9 , 2003 ; the report was filed on july 10 , 2003 .

on february 3 , 2003 , the administration submitted its fy2004 budget request to congress .

the administration proposed $399.7 billion for the national defense budget function , about $7billion above the estimated fy2003 level .

 ( note: this includes in the fy2003 total $10 billion thatcongress appropriated for dod in the fy2003 consolidated appropriations act ; most omb anddod tables prepared for the february budget release do not include these additional funds .

 ( 72 ) this does not include inthe fy2003 level , however , $62.6 billion in supplemental defense appropriations that congressapproved in april for the iraq war and other costs .

 ( 73 ) the fy2004 increase is in addition to substantial increases in fy2002 and fy2003 .

the newrequest is more than $100 billion above the fy1999 level for defense spending , and it represents anincrease over five years of 20% in inflation - adjusted constant fy2004 dollars .

the fy2004 defenserequest is almost 25% higher in real terms than the budget in fy1996 when dod's drawdown inspending and military personnel after the end of the cold war was completed .

the administration is proposing continued increases of about $20 billion annually in thedefense budget for the next five years , which would increase national defense budget authority to$480 billion by fy2008 .

table 3 shows the ten - year fy1999-fy2008 trend in defense spendingunder the administration's plan both for the national defense budget function and for the departmentof defense budget .

 ( 74 ) of the $399.7 billion requested for national defense in fy2004 , $370.6 billion is forprograms covered by the defense appropriations bill , $9.0 billion by the military constructionappropriations bill , $17.3 billion for department of energy defense - related activities funded in theenergy and water appropriations bill , and the remaining $2.8 billion in other appropriations bills .

table 3 .

national defense budget function and dod budget , fy1999-fy2008 , administrationprojections ( current and constant fy2004 dollars in billions ) source: office of management and budget , f2004 historical tables , and fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution ( p.l .

108-11 ) .

a .

includes $10 billion in budget authority appropriated to dod in the fy2003 consolidated appropriations resolution ( see p.l .

108-11 ) but not theoutlay effects of that addition because omb has not re - estimated outlays .

does not include $62.6 billion in fy2003 supplemental appropriationsfor defense provided in h.r .

1559 , p.l .

108-11 .

the overarching theme in the administration's fy2004 request was a call forflexibility to transform not only u.s. military doctrine and technology , but alsomilitary and civilian personnel systems and defense acquisition practices .

accordingto secretary of defense rumsfeld , not only do "our armed forces need to be flexible,light and agile," but also "the same is true of the men and women who support them,"in meeting the "frequent , sudden changes in our security environment," ( 83 ) includingthe global war on terrorism .

to meet this goal , the administration delivered a broad ranging legislativeproposal , entitled the "defense transformation for the 21st century act," to congresson april 10 , 2003 , shortly before congress's two - week april recess .

among otherthings , the legislative proposal would have given the secretary of defense authorityto redesign the civil service system governing the 700,000 civilian employees in thedepartment of defense , provided additional flexibility in managing senior militaryofficers , modify certain acquisition requirements , and exempted dod from certainenvironmental statutes .

some members of congress expressed concern that dod had delivered suchan ambitious proposal at a time when congress was about to recess and shortlybefore markup of the defense authorization bill was planned .

although dodwitnesses discussed their plans to submit the proposal earlier in the year and met withcongressional staff in the preceding couple of months , the specific proposals were notavailable before april 10 ( 84 ) ( as noted above , crs compares all of theproposed new measures with current law in crs report rl31916 , defensedepartment transformation proposal: side by side with current law , by robert l.goldich , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] ) .

the administration characterized its proposals as the logical followup toearlier efforts to transform weapons modernization and operational practices .

according to dod , the fy2004 budget was the first budget to reflect fully presidentbush's commitment to "challenge the status quo" and balance the need to meetcurrent challenges from the global war on terrorism and near - term threats with theneed to transform dod in the longer term .

 ( 85 ) dodcontended that transformation is now fully underway with new emphasis placed onunmanned vehicles , precision guided munitions , special operations forces , command,control , and communications , and missile defense ( see discussion on modernizationbelow ) , as well as the establishment of a new command , northcom , to focus onhomeland security , and changes in training practices to emphasize joint operations .

dod also argued that its proposals for military pay raises and other benefitsand its funding of operational training will ensure that recruitment and retentionremain high and that readiness goals continue to be met .

over the longer term , dodplans to review its current basing strategies in europe and review the role of reserveforces but these areas are currently under study and not incorporated in the fy2004budget .

the major issues in this year's congressional debate - - for example , dod'srequest for broad ranging authority to manage its civilian workforce , exemptions fordod to certain environmental laws - - are discussed above .

other issues raisedinclude whether dod's investment priorities are transformational , affordable , and consistent with "lessons learned" from the war in iraq ; revising criteria governing the fy2005 base closure round dueto be initiated next year ; various organizational and acquisition changes ; and dod's proposed changes for management of militarypersonnel .

an update for conference action will be included in a later update .

in its legislative package , dod included several provisions designed toincrease its flexibility to contract for major defense weapons systems and informationtechnology programs , receive waivers from buy america and domestic contentrequirements , and buy standardized items .

 ( 86 ) two potentially controversial proposals would allow dod to contract out forfirefighting and security guards at bases and would allow dod to count workperformed by contractors at federally owned facilities as part of the 50% minimumfor in - house performance of depot work .

congress has consistently opposed allowingdod to hire private security guards and loosening the definition of work that couldbe counted as "in - house" .

 ( 87 ) a later update will provide the details aboutconference action .

other organizational and financial proposals toincrease flexibility .

other dod proposals would give the secretaryof defense broad discretion to reorganize the department , transfer personnel , and beexempt from current personnel caps .

to increase financial flexibility , dodrequested that the limit on transfers between appropriation accounts be raised fromthe current level of $2.5 billion to 2.5% of total dod spending or about $9 billion .

 ( dod made this same request in the fy2003 supplemental , and received a highertransfer limit but not the 2.5%. ) .

 ( 88 ) dod also proposed changing the standard governing awards of contracts togovernment entities versus private companies based on the a - 76 competitivesourcing rules .

dod proposed using a "best value" assessment rather than thecurrent lowest cost standard .

a less controversial proposal , which has been endorsedby both opm and dod , would transfer the dod civilian personnel currentlyperforming security investigations to opm .

dod also proposed eliminating 184reports to congress that are currently required , ranging from reports on specializedtopics to more general reports on readiness levels and operation and maintenancefunding .

 ( 89 ) a later update will summarize conferenceaction .

authority to spend $200 million to supportforeign militaries .

in its request , dod asked congress to give itpermanent authority to allocate up to $200 million to support "coalition forces," orforeign military forces .

although this request is similar to the request enacted in thefy2003 supplemental for $1.4 billion for coalition forces who help the u.s. tocombat terrorism , dod's request for permanent authority included no provision forcongressional oversight .

in the fy2003 supplemental , congress required dod toreport by july 1 , 2003 on its plan to allocate funding for coalition forces .

 ( 90 ) finalaction will be included in a later update .

a perennial issue in defense policy has been whether the defense departmentwill be able to afford all of the major weapons modernization programs that havebeen on the drawing boards , particularly toward the end of the decade , when anumber of new programs are planned to be in full scale production .

the issue hasbeen complicated by the defense department's growing commitment to defensetransformation , which implies an effort to accelerate selected programs and perhapsadd some entirely new ones .

during the 2000 presidential election campaign,then - governor bush promised to "skip a generation" of weapons programs in orderto free up funds for more transformational priorities .

a full update for conferenceaction will be in a later update .

last year , and again this year , the defense department has tried to calculatethe amount that is being devoted to modernization programs that it regards asparticularly transformational .

according to dod comptroller dov zakheim , theseprograms add up to $24.3 billion in the fy2004 budget and $239 billion over theperiod of the six - year fy2004-fy2009 future years defense plan ( fydp ) .

undersecretary zakheim said that dod made room for these programs in part by cuttingabout $82 billion from projected service budgets over the course of the fydp .

thecuts include termination of a number of army programs to upgrade current weapons,early retirement of 26 navy ships and 259 aircraft and an attendant reduction of10,000 in the navy's personnel end - strength , and early retirement of 115 air forcefighter aircraft and 115 mobility / tanker aircraft , as well as efficiencies .

 ( 91 ) finalconference action will be addressed in a later update .

in the fy2004 budget , the defense department requested $74.4 billion forweapons procurement and $61.8 billion for research , development , test , andevaluation ( rdt&e ) .

major aspects of the administration request , and some keyissues include the following .

army transformation .

in recentyears , the army has been pursuing three major initiatives simultaneously: ( 1 ) upgrades to the current "legacy" force , including improvements in m1 tanks andbradley fighting vehicles ; ( 2 ) development and deployment of an "interim" forcemade up of six brigades equipped with stryker wheeled armored vehicles anddesigned to be more rapidly deployable than heavy armored forces ; and ( 3 ) pursuitof an "objective force" include the "future combat system," a family of newarmored vehicles and other systems designed to fundamentally change the way thearmy will fight in the future .

in addition , the army has been continuing to developthe comanche helicopter , though late last year , the defense department decided tocut planned total comanche procurement by about half .

in the fy2004 budget request , the defense department cut back a number ofplanned upgrades of army legacy systems , including high - profile m1 and bradleyupgrades .

in the wake of the army's success in the iraq war , there was extensivediscussion in congress about the wisdom of these planned cuts .

the house armedservices committee - reported version of the authorization adds $727 million to therequest to continue m1 and bradley upgrades along with some related army upgradeprograms .

congressional action .

table 8a shows action on major army programs in the house and senate defenseauthorization bills , and table 8b shows action in the house and senate versions ofthe defense appropriations bill .

a few issues stand out .

legacy force modernization: the house authorization adds$258.8 million for bradley fighting vehicle upgrades and $424 million for m1 tankupgrades ( offset by cuts of $140 million in other m1 projects ) .

these are among theprograms that the administration wants to terminate as part of the $82 billion in6-year savings that officials announced when the budget was released .

the houseappropriations bill adds the same amount for bradley upgrades and $155 million form1 upgrades .

the house appropriators also urged dod to budget for enough m1upgrades in the future to complete equipping the 3rd armored cavalry regiment withmodernized tanks .

in effect , the house rejected dod plans to cut back on army"legacy force" upgrades , though house appropriators also indicated that they may besatisfied once sufficient upgraded bradleys and m1s are procured to equip 2 and 1 / 3divisions of what the army calls its "counterattack" force of heavy armoredunits .

stryker interim combat brigades: the house appropriationsalso added $35 million for long lead items for stryker armored vehicle procurementto equip the 5th and 6th stryker brigades .

dod has , in the past at least , consideredhalting the interim combat brigade program after four brigades are deployed .

houseappropriators sent a strong message that they expect dod to fill out the plannedsix - brigade force .

the senate appropriations committee also added $35 million forlong lead items for stryker procurement , though its report language did not specifythat it was for the 5th and 6th brigades .

in addition , senate appropriators added $100million in other army procurement - - for communications and other equipment - - toaccelerate stryker brigade deployment , a strong vote of support for the armyprogram .

helicopters: all of the committees add money for uh - 60utility helicopters , largely for the national guard , though there are some differencesin how the money is allocated .

this is a perennial congressional addition to proposedbudgets .

all of the committees also support continued comanche helicopterdevelopment despite cost growth and substantial cuts in the plannedprogram .

table 8a .

house and senate action on major army acquisition programs: authorization ( amounts in millions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

108-106 ; s.rept .

108-46 .

note: figures reflect committee - reported versions of the bills and not changes made in subsequent floor action .

table 8b .

house and senate action on major army acquisition programs: appropriations ( amounts in millions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

108-187 ; s.rept .

108-87 .

note: figures reflect committee - reported versions of the bills and not changes made in subsequent floor action .

note: futurecombat system funding includes pe 0604645a - armored systems modernization ( asm ) - eng .

dev .

only .

navyprograms .

 ( 92 ) key navyship - acquisition programs for fy2004 include the virginia ( ssn - 774 ) classsubmarine program , the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program , the arleigh burke ( ddg - 51 ) class aegis destroyer , the dd ( x ) next - generation destroyer program , thesan antonio ( lpd - 17 ) class amphibius ship program , the lewis and clark ( take - 1 ) auxiliary ship program , the trident cruise - missile submarine ( ssgn ) conversionprogram , and the aegis cruiser ( cg - 47 class ) conversion program .

the fy2004budget also includes , among other things , continued advanced procurement fundingfor cvn - 21 , an aircraft carrier to be procured in fy2007 .

one issue in congressional hearings on the fy2004 navy program concernsthe planned size and structure of the navy .

the 2001 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) revalidated the plan for a 310-ship navy established by the 1997 qdr , butalso stated that force - structure goals in the 2001 qdr , including the 310-ship goal,were subject to change pending the maturation of dod's transformation efforts .

in february 2003 , in submitting its proposed fy2004 defense budget , dodofficials stated that they had launched studies on future requirements for underseawarfare and future options for forcibly entering overseas military theaters .

thesestudies have the potential for changing , among other things , the planned number ofattack submarines and the planned size and structure of the amphibious fleet .

sinceattack submarines and amphibious ships are two of the four major building blocksof the navy ( the others being aircraft carriers and surface combatants ) , dod , bylaunching these two studies , appears to have taken steps to back away from the310-ship plan .

at the same time , the secretary of defense has explicitly declined toendorse a plan for a 375-ship fleet that has been put forward in recent months bynavy leaders .

as a result of these events , there is now uncertainty concerning the plannedsize and structure of the navy: dod may no longer support the 310-ship plan , butneither has it endorsed the 375-ship plan or any other replacement plan .

thisuncertainty over the planned size and structure of the navy affects surfacecombatants as well as submarines and amphibious ships , because the biggest singledifference between the 310-ship and 375-ship plans is in the area of surfacecombatants .

the 310-ship plan includes 116 surface combatants , all of which arecruisers , destroyers , and frigates , while the 375-ship plan includes 160 surfacecombatants , including not only cruisers , destroyers , and frigates , but as many as 60smaller littoral combat ships as well .

congressional action: senate and housemarkup .

table 9a shows action on major navy programsin the house and senate defense authorization bills , and table 9b shows houseaction in the committee - reported version of the defense appropriations bill .

in actionon key issues: carrier replacement program: a major budget decision in thefy2004-fy2009 defense plan was to accelerate the transition to the next generationof carriers by incorporating more advanced technology into the next carrier to befully funded in fy2007 or fy2008 .

in all , the new carrier is projected to cost almost$12 billion for development and production , of which about $5 billion is for r&d .

all of the congressional defense committees supported the administration's revisedcarrier development program .

virginia - class attack submarines: the house appropriationscommittee denied funds requested to sign a multi - year procurement ( myp ) contractfor new submarines , saying ( 1 ) that the schedule for delivery of the first submarineremains too uncertain and ( 2 ) that the requirement to buy two submarines each yearin fy2007 and fy2008 may be unaffordable given the $2.6 billion price of eachboat .

the senate appropriations committee approved multi - year procurement ofvirginia - class submarines , but only for 5 boats over the fy2004-fy2009 planningperiod rather than the 7 boats that the navy had requested .

subsequently , on august14 , the navy announced an agreement with contractors on a multi - year procurementdeal for 7 boats , but with an option to reduce procurement to 5 or 6 boats with someincrease in costs per ship .

attack submarine refueling overhaul: the senate armedservices committee added $248 million to refuel one los angeles - class attacksubmarine ; the navy did not request funding for any overhauls .

the senateappropriations committee added $450 million for two refueling overhauls .

neitherhouse defense committee added any funds .

littoral combat ship: all of the defense committees expressedsome concern about the status of the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) developmentprogram , though none eliminated funding .

the senate armed services committeeissued the most critical report language , though it also added $35 million for moreexperimentation to determine the utility of the concept .

the committee said ( 1 ) anavy report on the program that congress required last year did not adequatelyreview alternatives or establish priorities among navy combat requirements , ( 2 ) thatnavy cost estimates did not include firm figures on the various modules that wouldbe installed in the common sea frame , and ( 3 ) that costs of the program couldcompete with higher priority navy shipbuilding in a constrained budget environmentin the future .

the house armed services committee added $35 million for moduledesign , while the house appropriations committee added $25 million for moduledesign but cut $10 million from the overall program .

the senate appropriationscommittee added funds for module design .

lpd - 17 class amphibious ship: the house appropriationscommittee added $175 million for advance procurement for the next ship of theclass , the lpd - 23 , and told the navy to provide full funding for the ship in fy2005,as had been planned , rather than in fy2006 , as the navy projected this year .

thesenate appropriations committee added $75 million for thelpd - 23 .

table 9a .

house and senate action on major navy acquisition programs: authorization ( amounts in millions of dollars ) sources: h.rept .

108-106 ; s.rept .

108-46 .

note: figures reflect committee - reported versions of the bills and not changes made in subsequent floor action .

table 9b .

house and senate action on major navy acquisition programs:appropriations ( amounts in millions of dollars ) .

