federal government budget deficits have been a concern of policymakers in recent years .

one concern has been what effects these sustained deficits are having on the u.s. economy .

tax cut proponents have claimed that "deficits don't matter," in a phrase attributed to vice president cheney , while deficit "hawks" claim that deficits raise interest rates , to the economy's detriment .

this is an important question because how effective tax cuts are in stimulating the economy depends on how the rest of the economy adjusts .

as this report explains , the adjustment can occur through interest rates , the trade balance , or private saving .

this report reviews theoretical and empirical evidence to see what relationship exists between budget deficits and interest rates .

unfortunately , simply observing whether interest rates are higher or lower in the presence of deficits is not a sufficient test of the hypothesis .

that is because there are many other factors that are simultaneously affecting interest rates .

these include the state of the economy , the saving behavior of individuals and companies , the investment opportunities of business , the state of financial markets , demographics , and the financial relationship between the united states and the rest of the world .

in the real world , these factors cannot be held constant , so economists try to "control" for them statistically to separate out the effects of deficits .

but controlling for other factors requires a theoretical model that explains and identifies how a deficit and those other factors affect interest rates .

thus , even those who are skeptical of theoretical explanations are dependent on theoretical models to translate the relationship from the empirical evidence .

because so many different models of the economy exist , some models offer positive evidence about the deficit - interest rate relationship while others offer evidence refuting the relationship .

any explanation of the budget deficit - interest rate relationship must first come to grips with an indisputable fact: budget deficits consume real resources .

when the government borrows from the public to finance public spending or tax cuts , the resources must come from somewhere .

in mainstream theory , the resources come from the nation's pool of saving , which pushes up interest rates for simple supply and demand reasons .

this "crowds out" private investment that was competing with government borrowing for the same pool of national saving .

but other theories offer different explanations of where the resources come from that do not involve higher interest rates .

fundamentally , the effect of budget deficits on interest rates is only the proximate question that economists and policymakers wish to answer .

the ultimate question is where the resources come from to finance a deficit , and what ramifications the use of those resources have for the nation's welfare .

a model in which budget deficits do not affect interest rates still has consequences for the nation's welfare .

in reviewing the major theories of the budget deficit's effect , this report explores the deficit's effect on both interest rates and the nation's welfare .

it begins with the mainstream view , and then explains how other versions differ from that view .

in the mainstream economic view , budget deficits expand total spending ( aggregate demand ) , and thereby short - term economic growth .

if a budget deficit is the result of higher government spending , the additional government spending expands aggregate spending directly .

if a budget deficit is the result of tax cuts , aggregate spending is expanded by an increase in spending by the tax cut's recipients .

in an economy operating at full employment , production ( aggregate supply ) cannot be increased to match the increase in spending because all of the economy's labor and capital resources are already in use .

this mismatch between aggregate demand and aggregate supply must be resolved through market adjustment .

market adjustment takes place in four distinct ways , each of which has consequences for interest rates .

the greater demand for goods and services pushes up prices , leading to a temporary increase in inflation .

because nominal interest rates are equal to real ( inflation - adjusted ) interest rates and the expected inflation rate , an increase in inflation ( if anticipated ) would push up nominal interest rates .

if the federal reserve's objective is to maintain a stable inflation rate , as most observers believe , it will offset the rise in demand through a contraction in monetary policy .

it will increase short - term real interest rates directly , and this will reduce interest - sensitive spending ( i.e. , private investment and consumer durables ) .

in the market for savings , the demand for savings has increased for two reasons .

first , because the government is now competing with private firms for the same pool of national saving to finance its deficit , the government has increased the demand for savings directly , and interest rates rise as a result .

higher interest rates make investment spending less profitable for private firms , and the budget deficit is thus said to have "crowded out" private investment .

second , in response to the greater demand for their goods , firms wish to increase their investment spending in order to increase their supply of goods .

investment demand increases in response to the desire for higher production , and interest rates rise as a result .

in the money market , the increase in aggregate spending leads to an increase in money demand .

as a result , if monetary policy is left unchanged , interest rates increase since the opportunity cost of holding money is now greater .

with higher interest rates , the same supply of money can now be used to purchase more goods and services because people do not hold on to money as long ( money velocity increases ) .

as a result of the interaction between these market forces , resources have been shifted toward the government ( or tax cut recipients ) and away from the saving of the private sector .

this has consequences for the economy in the long run .

in the long run , economic growth is dependent on increases in private investment , productivity , and the labor force .

by identity , private investment equals national saving less the budget deficit ( foreign saving will be considered below ) .

thus , by reducing national saving , budget deficits lead to less private investment .

this reduces the size of the economy in the long run , and future standards of living .

if the deficit lasts for one year , there would be a one - time reduction in growth .

if the deficit lasted for several years , it would reduce growth for the duration of that time .

for this reason , economists often describe deficits as placing a burden on future generations .

deficits allow individuals to enjoy more consumption today .

but since this higher consumption comes at the expense of lower saving , and hence lower investment , it reduces the size of the economy in the future .

thus , individuals would enjoy lower consumption in the future .

thus far , the mainstream model described has used the assumption that the united states is a closed economy , in which trade and capital does not flow between it and the rest of the world .

relaxing this assumption has very important ramifications for interest rates .

in a closed economy , the pool of savings available to the government to finance its deficits and the private sector to finance its investment spending is fixed .

for that reason , any increase in the demand for that savings must push up interest rates .

but what if the firms and government of the united states could draw from the world pool of savings , rather than being limited to the national pool of savings ? .

if the increase in the deficit were an insignificant fraction of world savings , it would have no effect on world interest rates .

therefore , it would have no effect on u.s. interest rates because u.s. interest rates , adjusted for risk , would have to equal world interest rates .

any time u.s. interest rates rose above ( or fell below ) world interest rates , in theory capital would enter ( or leave ) the country seeking to take advantage of the profit differential until the point where u.s. interest rates fell ( rose ) back to world levels .

although with perfect capital mobility , a deficit would have no effect on interest rates , a deficit would still have a cost to the economy .

first , although the foreign capital inflows permit a larger u.s. capital stock than would otherwise exist , the returns from that capital would flow to foreigners rather than u.s. citizens .

however , u.s. workers would benefit from the larger capital stock in the form of higher wages .

the second cost comes from the effect the capital inflow has on the economy .

for foreign capital to enter the country , foreigners must buy u.s. dollars .

the increased demand for dollars causes the dollar exchange rate to appreciate .

as the dollar appreciates , u.s. exports become less competitive abroad and u.s. import - competing firms become less competitive domestically .

this causes the trade deficit to expand , which reduces aggregate spending in the economy .

in a world of perfectly mobile capital , the expansion in the trade deficit would offset the expansion of fiscal policy one - to - one , so that fiscal stimulus had no net effect on aggregate spending .

by adding capital mobility , crowding out has not been eliminated , it has been shifted from the investment sector to the trade sector .

thus , although there is no effect on interest rates , fiscal policy in this scenario no longer has any stimulative effect on the economy .

whereas the burden of deficits was borne by future generations in a closed economy , in the presence of perfect capital mobility , it is borne by u.s. exporters and import - competing firms .

comparing changes in budget deficits to changes in interest rates is not a valid way to determine whether budget deficits affect interest rates .

that is because there are many other factors that affect interest rates .

to determine the effect of budget deficits on interest rates , these other factors must be held constant using statistical methods .

otherwise , the effect of budget deficits on interest rates could be mis - estimated or even reversed .

for example , interest rates often fall during recessions since investment demand is reduced and precautionary saving may rise .

if the business cycle has a greater effect on interest rates than budget deficits , and changes in the budget deficit ( more specifically , changes in the structural deficit ) happen to coincide with recessions , a simple comparison of deficits and interest rates would suggest that deficits cause interest rates to fall .

in reality it is the recession that is causing interest rates to fall , and after controlling for the recession , very different results may be achieved .

it should also be stressed that empirical evidence that budget deficits do not affect interest rates does not demonstrate that government budget deficits are burdenless .

empirical tests of the effects of deficits on interest rates are only tests of the conventional view without capital mobility .

the capital mobility view and barro - ricardo view both explain how deficits could have no effect on interest rates , and yet the deficits still impose a burden in both views .

in the capital mobility view , they crowd out the trade sector of the economy ; in the barro - ricardo view , they crowd out current private consumption .

over the past two decades , there have been dozens of econometric studies estimating the effects of budget deficits on interest rates .

the studies have reached very different conclusions because they have covered different periods , included different variables , and modeled the relationship between the variables and interest rates differently .

seemingly insignificant changes in the structure of the model , such as how long a deficit should affect interest rates , how deficits and interest rates are defined , and the mathematical form used to represent the relationship can drastically change the results .

not only do variations in the model used lead to different results , but some researchers make assumptions at odds with theory .

these include the use of the actual budget deficit rather than the structural deficit , the effect of debt on interest rates instead of the deficit , the use of nominal instead of real interest rates , the omission of foreign capital flows , and so on .

another problem with the statistical method used in all of the studies reviewed , time series analysis , is that there can be no fundamental change in the economic regime over the time period for the results to be valid .

yet many studies commingled data from both the fixed and floating exchange rate period ; the period in which capital mobility has been relatively free and the period that used capital controls ; the 1970s , in which the fed arguably tolerated high inflation , and the period since , when it did not .

some studies even included world war ii , although this period featured the rationing of goods and credit , price controls , and the fixing of interest rates by the federal reserve .

rather than review all of these studies , this report will summarize the results of three literature reviews .

in 1991 , barth et al .

published a literature review of 42 papers exploring the link between deficits and interest rates .

they found the evidence to be mixed , with 17 studies finding deficits to have a positive and statistically significant effect on interest rates , 6 having mixed effects , and 19 having statistically insignificant or negative effects .

some studies with a positive relationship estimated that the effect of a deficit equal to 1% of gnp could increase interest rates as much 0.4-1.2 percentage points .

summarizing the studies , the authors reach a number of conclusions: more of an effect is found on long - term interest rates than short - term rates .

this makes sense since overnight rates are targeted by the federal reserve , and thus heavily influenced by monetary policy in the short run .

changes in structural budget deficits have more of an effect on interest rates than changes in the actual budget deficit .

the structural ( full - employment ) deficit is a measure of the deficit that eliminates the effects of the business cycle on the budget .

a downturn in economic activity automatically causes revenues to fall as taxable income falls and certain types of government expenditures , such as unemployment benefits , to rise .

using the actual budget deficit in a statistical study would skew the results because the actual deficit is being determined in part by the same factors ( the state of the economy ) that are determining interest rates .

using the structural budget deficit or advanced statistical techniques avoids this problem .

a link between deficits and interest rates is less likely to be found when high frequency ( monthly or quarterly ) data are used .

this makes sense given how "noisy" ( volatile ) high frequency data tend to be .

an effect is more likely to be found if a study uses a measure of the expectation of future deficits rather than contemporaneous deficits .

this makes sense if investors are rational and forward looking — investors are not only concerned about what will happen today , but also what will happen in the future .

however , the proper measure of future deficits is controversial .

the cbo baseline is not a proper measure since it is an extension of current policy , and thus not a "best guess" of future policy .

the link between deficits and interest rates is better established when the deficits finance government spending than when they finance tax cuts .

the effect of a tax cut on interest rates would be expected to be smaller if tax cut recipients save some of the proceeds of the tax cut .

studies using a statistical method called vector - autoregression consistently found deficits to have no effect on interest rates .

basically , the vector - autoregression uses a small number of variables and makes no attempt to identify the theoretical relationship between the variables .

this method has advantages and disadvantages — it would not be as accurate as an estimation of the correct theoretical model , but given the lack of consensus over what the correct model is , it may be more accurate than an incorrect theoretical model .

it is not a method that can control for investors' expectations of future deficits , which is a drawback if this an important factor .

they conclude that since the available evidence on the effects of deficits is mixed , one cannot say with complete confidence that budget deficits raise interest rates and reduce saving and capital formation .

but equally important , one cannot say that they do not have effects .

this conclusion seems apt given the balanced range of results in the studies they surveyed .

they also look at studies that attempt to estimate whether deficits crowd out investment , the trade sector , or consumption , and find the results of these studies to be mixed as well .

a joint economic committee study surveyed many of the same studies .

it surveyed five articles , all of which were included in the barth survey , on the relationship between deficits and interest rates , all five of which found the relationship to be negative or statistically insignificant .

it also surveyed 15 articles on the relationship between deficits and consumption , which the study took to be a test of the barro - ricardo theory , and found that seven studies supported the barro - ricardo theory and eight rejected it .

gale and orszag review journal articles written on the subject in the 1990s , since the barth paper was published .

they find that of the 16 studies published since the barth paper , 11 found that deficits had a positive and statistically significant effect on interest rates , five had mixed effects , and none found statistically insignificant or negative effects .

this evidence is quite a bit stronger than the evidence found in the barth review , and they attribute the change in outcome to some changes in research techniques , which they believe to be superior to earlier studies .

 ( the studies also covered several more years of data. ) .

specifically , they believe the more recent studies to be superior because all of the recent studies focus on changes in long - term budget forecasts rather than current - year deficit totals and because they differentiate between long - term interest rates and short - term interest rates .

these developments seem consistent with the expectations theory of interest rates , which suggests that long - term interest rates are determined by a combination of today's short - term interest rates and investors' perception of future short - term rates .

long - term deficits would therefore have a greater effect on interest rates than a temporary deficit .

short - term rates may also offer misleading evidence since they are so heavily influenced by the fed , which targets overnight interest rates .

gale and orszag also examined the effects of a budget deficit on interest rates in 10 leading macroeconomic forecasting models , including the models of dri , macroeconomic advisers , cbo , and the federal reserve .

in all 10 models , a budget deficit equal to 1% of gdp would increase interest rates , with a range of 0.1 to 1.0 ( mean=0.52 ) percentage points after one year and 0.05 to 2.0 ( mean=0.99 ) percentage points after 10 years .

it is striking that all forecasters , with reputational and profit motives to produce the most accurate results , use models in which deficits increase interest rates .

any explanation of the budget deficit - interest rate relationship must first come to grips with an indisputable fact: budget deficits are financed through the use of real resources .

when the government borrows from the public to finance public spending or tax cuts , the resources must come from somewhere .

in mainstream economic theory , the resources come from the nation's pool of saving , which pushes up interest rates for simple supply and demand reasons .

this "crowds out" private investment which was competing with government borrowing for the same pool of national saving .

because less investment leads to a smaller economy in the future , economists often describe deficits as placing a burden on future generations .

but other theories offer different explanations of where the resources come from that do not involve higher interest rates .

in the capital mobility view , foreigners lend the united states the saving it needs to finance a deficit , leaving interest rates unaffected .

but foreign capital can only enter the country through a trade deficit , leading to a decline in the output of u.s. exporting and import - competing industries .

in the barro - ricardo view , forward - looking , rational , infinitely - lived individuals see that a budget deficit would result in higher taxes or lower government spending in the future .

therefore , they reduce their consumption and save more today .

this provides the government with the saving needed to finance its deficit , placing no upward pressure on interest rates .

although theoretically compelling , the very particular assumptions made in the barro - ricardo view ( such as infinite lifespans ) lead one to question its practicality as an explanation of the real world .

fundamentally , the effect of budget deficits on interest rates is only the proximate question that economists and policymakers wish to answer .

the ultimate question is where the resources come from to finance a deficit , and what ramifications the use of those resources have for the nation's welfare .

empirical evidence that budget deficits do not affect interest rates is not evidence that government budget deficits do not impose a burden .

the capital mobility view and barro - ricardo view both explain how deficits could have no effect on interest rates , and yet still impose a burden in both views .

in the capital mobility view , they crowd out the trade sector of the economy ; in the barro - ricardo view , they crowd out current private consumption .

ironically , the conventional view is the only one which suggests that deficits can stimulate aggregate spending in the short run , so rising interest rates would be a positive sign for policymakers attempting to stimulate the economy that they have succeeded .

simply comparing changes in budget deficits to changes in interest rates is not a valid way to determine whether budget deficits affect interest rates because there are many other factors that simultaneously affect interest rates .

these include the state of the economy , the saving behavior of individuals and companies , the investment opportunities of business , the state of financial markets , demographics , and the financial relationship between the united states and the rest of the world .

to determine the effect of budget deficits on interest rates , one must hold these other factors constant using statistical methods .

otherwise , the effect of budget deficits on interest rates could be misestimated or even reversed .

but controlling for other factors requires a model that explains how a deficit and those other factors affect interest rates .

thus , even those who are skeptical of theoretical explanations are dependent on theoretical models to glean the relationship from the empirical evidence .

because so many different models of the economy exist , the empirical evidence is mixed , with some models offering positive evidence about the deficit - interest rate relationship while others offer evidence refuting the relationship .

some studies are questionable because they make assumptions at odds with the underlying theory ( eg , measuring the relationship of interest rates and debt , rather than deficits ) .

gale and orszag ( 2002 ) argue that more recent evidence tends to find a stronger , positive relationship between the two , with all sixteen of the studies they surveyed finding positive or mixed evidence .

in addition , 10 major forecasting models all predict that a budget deficit would increase interest rates .

according to gale and orszag ( 2002 ) , the models predict that a budget deficit equal to 1% of gdp would increase interest rates , with a range of 0.1 to 1.0 ( mean=0.52 ) percentage points after one year and 0.05 to 2.0 ( mean=0.99 ) percentage points after 10 years .

