the constitution's speedy trial clause protects the criminally accused against unreasonable delays between his indictment and trial .

before indictment , the statutes of limitation , and in extreme circumstances , the due process clauses protect the accused from unreasonable delays .

this is an overview of federal law relating to the statutes of limitation in criminal cases , including those changes produced by the act .

the phrase "statute of limitations" refers to the time period within which formal criminal charges must be brought after a crime has been committed .

"the purpose of a statute of limitations is to limit exposure to criminal prosecution to a certain fixed period of time following the occurrence of those acts the legislature has decided to punish by criminal sanctions .

such a limitation is designed to protect individuals from having to defend themselves against charges when the basic facts may have become obscured by the passage of time and to minimize the danger of official punishment because of acts in the far - distant past .

such a time limit may also have the salutary effect of encouraging law enforcement officials promptly to investigate suspected criminal activity. .

therefore , in most instances , prosecutions are barred if the defendant can show that there was no indictment or other formal charge filed within the time period dictated by the statute of limitations .

statutes of limitation are creatures of statute .

the common law recognized no period of limitation .

an indictment could be brought at any time .

limitations are recognized today only to the extent that a statute or due process dictates their recognition .

congress and most state legislatures have enacted statutes of limitation , but declare that prosecution for some crimes may be brought at any time .

federal statutes of limitation are as old as federal crimes .

when the founders assembled in the first congress , they passed not only the first federal criminal laws but made prosecution under those laws subject to specific statutes of limitation .

similar provisions continue to this day .

federal capital offenses may be prosecuted at any time , but unless some more specific arrangement has been made a general five - year statute of limitations covers all other federal crimes .

some of the exceptions to the general rule identify longer periods for particular crimes .

others suspend or extend the applicable period under certain circumstances such as the flight of the accused , or during time of war .

aside from capital offenses , crimes which congress associated with terrorism may be prosecuted at any time if they result in a death or serious injury or create a foreseeable risk of death or serious injury .

although the crimes were selected because they are often implicated in acts of terrorism , a terrorist defendant is not a prerequisite to an unlimited period for prosecution .

a third category of crimes that may be prosecuted at any time consists of various designated federal child abduction and sex offenses .

although the majority of federal crimes are governed by the general five - year statute of limitations , congress has chosen longer periods for specific types of crimes — 20 years for the theft of art work ; 10 years for arson , for certain crimes against financial institutions , and for immigration offenses ; and 8 years for the nonviolent terrorist offenses that may be prosecuted at any time if committed under violent circumstances .

investigative difficulties or the seriousness of the crime seem to have provided the rationale for enlargement of the time limit for prosecuting these offenses beyond the five - year standard .

the five - year rule may yield to circumstances other than the type of crime to be prosecuted .

for example , an otherwise applicable limitation period may be suspended or extended in cases involving child abuse , the concealment of the assets of an estate in bankruptcy , wartime fraud against the government , dismissal of original charges , fugitives , foreign evidence , or dna evidence .

statutes of limitation "normally begin to run when the crime is complete," which occurs when the last element of the crime has been satisfied .

the rule for conspiracy is a bit different .

the general conspiracy statute consists of two elements: ( 1 ) an agreement to commit a federal crime or to defraud the united states and ( 2 ) an overt act committed in furtherance of the agreement .

conspirators left uninterrupted will frequently continue on through several overt acts to the ultimate commission of the underlying substantive offenses which are the objectives of their plots .

thus , the statute of limitations for such conspiracies begins to run not with the first overt act committed in furtherance of the conspiracy but with the last .

the statute of limitations under conspiracy statutes that have no overt act requirement begins to run with the accomplishment of the conspiracy's objectives , with its abandonment , or with the defendant's effective withdrawal from the conspiracy .

concealment of the criminal plot after its completion is considered a natural component of all conspiracies .

consequently , overt acts of concealment after the objectives of the conspiracy have been accomplished may not be used to delay the running of the statute of limitations .

overt acts of concealment which are among the original objectives of the conspiracy as charged in the indictment , however , may serve as the point at which the statute of limitations begins to run .

distinguishing between the two is sometimes difficult .

there are other crimes , which , like conspiracy , continue on long after all the elements necessary for their prosecution fall into place .

the applicable statute of limitations for these continuing crimes is delayed if either "the explicit language of the substantive criminal statute compels such a conclusion , or the nature of the crime involved is such that congress must assuredly have intended that it be treated as a continuing one. .

continuing federal offenses for purposes of the statutes of limitation include the following: escape from federal custody ; flight to avoid prosecution ; failure to report for sentencing ; possession of the skin and skull of an endangered species ; possession of counterfeit currency ; kidnaping ; failure to register under the foreign agents registration act ; failure to register under the selective service act ; being found in the united states having reentered this country after deportation ; embezzlement under some circumstances ; possession of unregistered pipe bombs ; failure to pay child support ; possession of an immigration document obtained fraudulently ; bank fraud ; and health care fraud .

