japan's august 1999 agreement to engage in ballistic missile defense cooperation with theunited states has the potential for contributing materially to the ability of the u.s. navy to field anasian regional defense against intermediate - range ballistic missiles , a goal that has long receivedstrong support from congress .

although japan has committed to research and development ( r&d ) cooperation on four elements of a navy interceptor missile , tokyo has not made a decision toacquire a missile defense capability .

it is even less clear how far japan might be prepared to movein the direction of an integrated regional missile defense cooperation arrangement .

the extent ofjapan's future participation in missile defense will be governed by a number of considerations,including its threat perceptions , overall national defense strategy , regional relationships,constitutional constraints , domestic political impact , technical feasibility , and cost .

the relativeimportance of these factors cannot be established with any precision - - any one or combination ofthem could have a make or break effect on japanese decisionmaking .

to date , these considerationshave had a mixed and sometimes contradictory effect on japanese policy .

in a series of policy statements beginning with a speech by the president at the nationaldefense university on may 1 , 2001 , the bush administration indicated an intention to enlarge andredirect current bmd programs in a way that tends to erase the clear distinction between tmd andnmd .

the reasoning behind this decision appears to be at least two - fold .

first , the relevanttechnologies are applicable across the whole range of bmd threats .

second , and relatedly , certainprograms currently in development for lower tier threats are deemed to have the potential , if suitablyenhanced , of serving as a stop - gap , near - term nmd capability in the absence of a full - scope nmdsystem .

this reasoning applies particularly to the former navy theater wide ( ntw ) program , whichhas been the focus of u.s. - japan tmd cooperation .

one possible sea - based option would buildupon the technologies being developed in the former ntw program to develop a system that couldbe deployed on the navy's aegis cruisers stationed off the u.s. pacific coast , with the mission of intercepting icbms in mid - course , outside the atmosphere .

another concept is to deploy a sea - basedsystem in the sea of japan with a capability to intercept north korean intercontinental missiles intheir assent , or "boost" phase , when they are most vulnerable .

 ( 5 ) a more technologicallyambitious concept under active consideration involves deploying aircraft with laser systems capableof destroying missiles in their boost phase .

this report discusses and analyses the administration's approach to missile defense and itsimplications for u.s. - japan cooperation on missile defense , but the report's point of departure is thetraditional delineation of types of anti - missile systems based on the characteristics of the specificballistic missile threats that they seek to counter .

in other words , the main ballistic missile threat tou.s .

forward - deployed forces in the asia - pacific region , and to japan , south korea , and taiwan , isfrom short - and medium - range , or "theater" range ballistic missiles .

japanese interest in u.s. missile defense programs dates from the mid - 1980s , when thedepartment of defense solicited participation by allied countries in the reagan administration'sstrategic defense initiative ( sdi ) , partly in order to bolster congressional support for the program .

japan declined to participate but did partly relax its post - world war ii arms export ban to open theway for sharing military and dual use technology with the united states .

subsequently , japan sharedtechnology with the united states for several weapons systems , including portable surface - air missile ( sam ) systems , naval ship construction , a ducted rocket engine , and the controversial fs - x,next - generation fighter program .

the fs - x collaboration , which involved transfer of technology used in the usaf's f - 16fighter , produced by what was then general dynamics , proved a searing experience for the japanese .

it is widely accepted among students of us - japan alliance relations that the japanese government,backed by domestic industry and influential diet members , strongly preferred to develop anindigenous fighter aircraft to replace its ageing fleet of f - 1 fighters , but decided reluctantly that themaintenance of smooth alliance relations required yielding to pressure from the reaganadministration for co - development .

among other considerations for the nakasone government intokyo , the reagan administration had imposed stiff sanctions on semiconductor imports as a resultof japan's failure to meet the terms of a trade agreement , and members of congress were stronglycriticizing japan and the toshiba corporation for the sale of some sensitive u.s. metal millingtechnology to the then - soviet union .

 ( 16 ) japan had barely signed the memorandum of understanding on the fs - x co - production dealwhen it was whipsawed by a high profile u.s. policy debate involving industry and labor interests,members of congress , the u.s. commerce department , and others , over the wisdom of technologycooperation with the united states' main high tech competitor .

opponents of the fs - x cooperationdeal were concerned that japan might use u.s. - supplied technology to erode the u.s. lead inaerospace production , one of the few areas of u.s. high technology dominance that had not beenconquered by japanese industry .

in early february 1989 the newly inaugurated george h. w. bushadministration yielded to these pressures and initiated a policy review that eventually required japanto renegotiate the terms of technology transfer in the co - development project .

 ( 17 ) the product of the lattercollaboration has entered service with the japanese air self - defense force as the f - 2 fighter , afterlong delays and huge cost overruns .

japan inevitably will play a key role in the ability of the united states to deploy a bmdsystem in asia , either to protect u.s. forces or to shield american allies and friends .

the exactnature of japan's role , however , is highly dependent on still unpredictable political and nationalsecurity policy factors .

under different scenarios , japan's role could greatly enhance theeffectiveness of an american missile defense capability , passively support it , or , under certaincircumstances , seek to impose restraints on u.s. options .

the north korean missile launch brought about a breakthrough in japan's consideration ofthe long - standing u.s. request for joint cooperation on bmd research and development .

thejapanese defense agency already favored cooperation , but the effect of the taepo dong missileflying over the main island of honshu greatly raised the level of interest within the japanesegovernment and among the public .

because of the implications for japan's relations with the united states and the people'srepublic of china , which opposes many aspects of u.s. - japan defense cooperation , the issues ofwhether japan will acquire a missile defense capability and the extent to which such capabilitywould be integrated with that of the u.s. navy , have assumed major national policy significance fortokyo .

because of the stakes , japanese views on the development and deployment of a tmd systemvary widely , even within government and political circles .

these differences appear deep enoughto make the political uncertainties surrounding tmd cooperation as significant as the technologicalchallenges .

the extent of future cooperation with the united states on bmd is one of the most importantforeign and security policy decisions facing japanese policymakers .

in addition to being importantto the future of the u.s. - japan alliance , cooperative research and the deployment of a bmd systemwould have major ramifications for japanese security and its relations with china and other asianneighbors , as well as with russia .

as the u.s. bmd program progresses , a number of uncertainties concerning japan's futureparticipation are likely to emerge as executive branch and congressional concerns .

assumingdevelopment proceeds as u.s. planners hope , japan may have to address the issue within the currentterm of the bush administration .

japan's decisions are not likely to have a significant impact on theu.s .

program , but could affect the size and effectiveness of a u.s. bmd capability in asia , as wellas on u.s. - japan alliance cooperation more generally .

japanese decisions either for or against the acquisition of a bmd capability raise separatesets of subsidiary issues .

the following discussion analyzes some implications of alternateoutcomes .

1 ) burden - sharing issues .

because the japanesecommitment on the u.s. bmd project to date is only for technology research on four specificcomponents for sea - based midcourse defense , the u.s. department of defense anticipates asignificant , but not crucial , japanese technological contribution .

if japanese cooperation ends at thejoint technology research level , however , japan still will be a major beneficiary if a bmd capability - - assuming , as is likely , that such a capability is deployed with the u.s. 7th fleet , home - ported injapan .

if japan does not develop or deploy the system with the united states , what kinds ofcompensation , if any , would the united states expect of japan ? .

at the moment , this is still a hypothetical question .

a number of signs indicate that japanwants to acquire a bmd capability .

these indicators include not only the funds that the japanesegovernment is committing to cooperative r&d , but also the fact that two new aegis destroyers andfunds for the most current radar and communications suite have been included in the current fiveyear defense plan .

if , however , japan decided not to acquire a bmd capability , the decision wouldplay into the broader issue of defense burden - sharing .

at a minimum , a decision not to acquire abmd capability could revive congressional concerns about whether japan is shouldering enough ofthe burden of regional stability and its own defense .

2 ) utility of a jointly deployed u.s. - japan bmd capability tou.s .

military operations in the event of a regional conflict .

although thejapanese government has rarely issued objections to the u.s. military's joint operations with japanin the past , prior to the recent response to the u.s. - led anti - terrorist campaign in afghanistan , suchactivities have been carefully restricted to training exercises having limited objectives such assea - lane defense , air defense , or peacekeeping support .

current rules of engagement governing theoperations of the japanese navy rule out activities that could be construed as combat support of u.s.forces for any missions not involving the defense of japanese territory .

if a missile defense capability were deployed on japan's aegis destroyers and a conflicterupted on the korean peninsula on between china and taiwan , the united states might put pressureon japan to deploy some missile defense capability outside its own territory .

under prevailingjapanese rules of engagement and constitutional interpretations , a favorable japanese response wouldappear all but impossible .

less clear is whether in a crisis situation the exchange of real - time data between japaneseaegis ships equipped with a bmd capability could pass political or constitutional muster .

forinstance , could japanese ships equipped with the sea - based midcourse system back up moreforward - deployed u.s. units with supplementary target information ? .

presumably they could , so longas japanese territory or u.s. bases in japan were possible targets of a missile attack .

under currentjapanese constitutional constraints , however , the u.s. military would likely find it prudent not tocount on japanese participation in anything short of a clear and present threat to japanese territory .

the example of prime minister koizumi reversing his decision to send an aegis - equipped destroyerto the indian ocean is a case in point .

in summary , an integrated binational bmd capability could be highly useful in situations thatalso threatened japanese territory , but might be of little utility to u.s. forces in situations outsidejapanese territorial waters or not involving an attack on japanese territory .

in these cases , u.s.forces presumably would have to operate independently .

since bmd capable ships are beingdesigned to be self - supporting , if necessary , these limitations are not critical , but they raise questionsabout the ultimate value to u.s. security of a japanese bmd capability .

japanese perspectives on the limits of the collective security ban are in flux , and primeminister koizumi has speculated in public that japan might have to have a more open mind abouta situation involving an attack on u.s. military forces in the region .

 ( 67 ) while campaigning forthe ldp presidency , koizumi said that he would give high priority to constitutional revision , butsince taking office he has given first priority to his call for the direct election of the prime minister,and appears to have downgraded the urgency of revising article 9 , while calling for continueddiscussion of the issue .

the prime minister's caution may reflect repeated polls consistently showingthat 70% or more of the respondents oppose revising article 9 .

 ( 68 ) 3 ) impact of japan's active involvement in regional deploymentof a bmd system on u.s. operational flexibility .

given the historical mistrust ofjapan's intentions and programs among its asian neighbors , a highly visible involvement by japanin missile defense , were it otherwise possible , could have negative implications for u.s. securityinterests in asia .

china , for instance , might see an integrated u.s. - japan bmd capability as morethreatening to its interests than a u.s. system alone , because of the implication that japan is joininga de facto collective security arrangement that is aimed at china , especially in a confrontationinvolving taiwan .

china and other neighboring countries may be less than convinced that article9 will continue to inhibit japan's participation in collective security with the united states , especiallybecause the restriction has become the target of nationalist opposition in japan .

thus for china,north and south korea , and some southeast asian countries , an integrated u.s. - japan bmd systemcould be viewed as symbolizing the remilitarization of japan under the cloak of alliance cooperationwith the united states .

to the extent that joint bmd deployment generated fears of a rearmedjapan , it could detract from the acceptability of a u.s. bmd capability .

on the other side of the equation , japan's neighbors are likely to regard an independentjapanese bmd with even greater concern .

for some of japan's neighbors , such as south korea , ajapanese capability firmly linked to that of the united states would seem more desirable .

china , onthe other hand , opposes both deployment options .

4 ) command , control , communication , and intelligence ( câ³i ) issues .

these could be critical issues in the case of an integrated u.s. - japanesebmd capability .

to what degree would the united states be dependent on the decision - makingcapability of the japanese cabinet , which has yet to develop effective crisis managementcapabilities ? .

would , some ask , japan allow a u.s. commander to control the "button" that wouldactivate a joint system ? .

this would be most unlikely , according to japanese sources ? .

 ( 69 ) a similar dilemma could arise if u.s. and japanese missiles were integrated into a jointsensor and command and control system .

in scenarios that do not involve the defense of japaneseterritory , such as the deployment of u.s. bmd systems to protect taiwan , the question arises as towhether japan could or would allow the involvement of jointly operated satellite and command andcontrol facilities .

several defense commentators and private analysts have suggested that thisproblem could be circumvented by the creation of a joint command and control system that wouldalso allow either party to act independently , if necessary .

 ( 70 ) japanese officials and defense analysts are well aware of the inadequacy of their current crisismanagement and câ³ capabilities .

prime minister koizumi reportedly hopes to succeed where hisrecent predecessors have failed in getting the diet to approve legislation giving him the emergencypowers necessary for crisis decisionmaking .

as of early 2002 , however , the prospects for theintroduction of such legislation remain doubtful .

the united states and japan have shared concerns about the proliferation of ballistic missilesin asia and , therefore , a shared interest in the theater missile defense .

the technological andfinancial contributions that japan may bring into cooperative research on the sea - based midcoursesystem element of the u.s. bmd program are potentially significant , although not critical .

japancontinues to keep its options open regarding the acquisition and deployment of a bmd capability .

subject to flexible enough rules of engagement and crisis management capabilities , japan'spossession of an operationally compatible bmd capability would contribute importantly to theability of u.s. military forces to deploy an effective missile defense system in the asian region , asseems to be envisioned by bmd supporters in congress and the bush administration .

also , the veryfeasibility of deploying a bmd system in asia depends on the availability of bases in japan , mostnotably the u.s. naval base at yokosuka , on tokyo bay , which is the home port for the u.s. seventhfleet .

considering the wide range of issues that the japanese government must resolve beforeproceeding with a decision to acquire a bmd capability , the future of an interoperable u.s. - japancapability cannot be taken for granted , let alone an integrated binational system .

on the positiveside , japanese defense officials seem clearly to be leaning in the direction of at least a national bmdcapability that would be interoperable with that of the united states .

even if japan does opt toprocure and deploy an operationally compatible bmd system , however , it remains highlyquestionable whether japan will agree to an integrated command and control arrangement .

atpresent , a substantial majority of the japanese public appears opposed to constitutional changes thatwould allow collective self - defense , either for missile defense or other purposes .

senior bush administration officials , most notably deputy secretary of defense armitage,have expressed a strong desire for japan to address the constitutional constraints .

were japan toamend or reinterpret article 9 , however , japanese policy would still be based on its national interestperceptions .

thus any decision by japan to opt for joint deployment of a bmd capability would itself raise additional foreign policy issues for japan and operational challenges for u.s. forces .

several of these foreign policy issues are trilateral rather than bilateral .

for instance,japanese policy could turn on the evolution of u.s. relations with the prc and taiwan , and whetheror not the united states succeeds in negotiations to eliminate the north korean missile threat .

northkorea's taepo dong launch of august 1998 provided an important public relations asset to bmdsupporters in japan .

on the other hand , a number of indicators suggest that the main concern amongdefense analysts and planners in japan , and those in the political world who think about suchmatters , is fear that china may one day threaten japan with ballistic missiles .

from this perspective,a missile defense capability is one means to counter china's rising military power .

it is difficult to assess the impact of future political change on japanese decisionmakingconcerning bmd cooperation , especially regarding any matters touching on the constitution .

ingeneral , political change since the split in the ldp in july 1993 seems not to have had muchperceptible impact on the trend towards a more assertive defense posture and increased u.s. - japansecurity cooperation .

because of the steady decline of the social democratic party of japan ( sdpj ) ,the two most likely alternatives to the status quo are a revitalized democratic party of japan ( dpj ) ,which remains divided between former members of the sdpj and more conservative defectors fromthe ldp , and the more nationalistic wing of the ldp , as represented by shintaro ishiharo , thepopular , iconoclastic governor the tokyo metropolitan prefecture .

for different reasons , neitherof these alternatives to the political status quo has been enthusiastic about missile defensecooperation with the united states .

what stance they would take were they to attain power isdifficult to forecast with any confidence .

another imponderable at this time is the longer term prospect for retaining u.s. bases injapan .

at present , the principal targets of public opposition to u.s. bases in japan are facilities inokinawa whose training and other operations have a large impact on the environment and qualityof life .

these mainly involve the u.s. marines stationed there .

in general , u.s. navy and air forcebases receive less criticism .

nonetheless , some of the same groups that support a defense buildupand closer alliance relations are ambivalent about hosting a major u.s. military presence more thanfive decades after the end of the u.s. post - world war ii occupation .

already , okinawans havesucceeded in getting the japanese government to "relay" their desire to put a fifteen year limit on useby the u.s. marines of a proposed replacement for the current futenma marine air station .

fornow , issues concerning u.s. access to bases in japan are limited to okinawa , and to forces that donot relate to bmd .

should this situation change , it would become more difficult for the united statesto maintain an "asian" bmd capability .

 ( 71 ) japan's involvement in joint development of the smd element of the u.s. missile defenseprogram represents considerable progress by japan towards greater alliance burden sharing , but itsfull implications remain to be seen .

neither japan's participation in joint research and development,nor a decision by japan for or against acquisition or deployment of a bmd capability , are likely tohave critical impact on the development of a u.s. missile defense capability or on the deploymentof an american sea - based capability in asia .

nonetheless , japan's participation in the research anddevelopment phase is viewed by u.s. officials as possibly contributing important technology , anda decision by tokyo to acquire a bmd capability could have considerable foreign policy significancefor the united states and important military implications .

given the prevailing uncertainties aboutjapanese policy and the implications of its future decisions , congress may decide to considercarefully the assumptions of the administration and the terms of any further steps in bmdcooperation with japan .

part of such consideration could be obtaining additional information on thethreat perceptions of the japanese defense agency ( jda ) and self - defense forces ( sdf ) , thepossible implications of a change in the perceived threat from north korea's missiles , the attitudeof japanese political leaders and ministry of foreign affairs policymakers towards china , japan'sfiscal situation and defense budget trends , public and political attitudes towards u.s. - japan securitycooperation and u.s. bases in japan , and the prospects for constitutional revision and the acquisitionof emergency powers by the japanese national command authorities .

