since the september 11 attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , the united states has launched three major military operations: operation noble eagle ( one ) , operation enduring freedom ( oef ) , and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) .

operation noble eagle is the name given to military operations related to homeland security and support to federal , state , and local agencies in the wake of the september 11 attacks .

operation enduring freedom includes ongoing operations in afghanistan , operations against terrorists in other countries , and training assistance to foreign militaries which are conducting operations against terrorists .

operation iraqi freedom includes the invasion of iraq , the defeat of saddam hussein's regime , and the subsequent rebuilding and counter - insurgency operations in iraq .

this report provides short answers to commonly asked questions about military personnel and compensation issues related to these operations .

the questions are grouped into three major thematic areas: personnel , compensation , and force structure .

the section on personnel addresses issues such as casualties , reserve mobilization , "sole surviving" son or daughter status , conscientious objection , and "stop - loss. .

the section on compensation addresses issues related to the pay and benefits — including casualty and death benefits — provided to members of the u.s. military participating in one / oef / oif and their families .

the section on force structure addresses issues related to how one / oef / oif might affect the number of personnel needed by the military , and answers common questions about whether or not a return to conscription is likely under current circumstances .

prior to the september 11 attacks , there was a serious debate between congress and the executive branch over whether the military was being tasked with more missions than it could realistically handle , given its manpower levels .

congress was especially concerned that these missions — in bosnia , kosovo , southwest asia , the sinai , and elsewhere — might be producing personnel tempo ( perstempo ) levels high enough to have a negative effect on retention .

as such , congress passed laws requiring the services to track the perstempo of every servicemember , to monitor individual perstempo levels more closely , and to pay an allowance to servicemembers assigned lengthy or numerous deployments .

similar concerns about perstempo led general eric shinseki , the army chief of staff , to assert before the house armed services committee in july , 2001 , that "given today's mission profile , the army is too small for the mission load it is carrying. .

during that hearing , both shinseki and secretary of the army thomas white endorsed a proposal to increase the army's end strength from 480,000 to 520,000 soldiers .

since september 11 , 2001 , operations noble eagle , enduring freedom and iraqi freedom have dramatically increased the manpower needs of the military services , especially for the army , which has shouldered the bulk of the manpower burden associated with the occupation of iraq .

these manpower needs have been filled primarily through the call up of over 500,000 reservists , longer duty days and higher perstempo rates for many active duty personnel , and the use of contract personnel .

so far , this response has enabled the military to perform its assigned missions , but some observers note that it could cause problems in the future — for example , in unacceptably low retention rates , unacceptable performance levels , and difficulty responding to new crises — if carried out over an extended period of time .

in order to prevent such problems from occurring , congress and the executive branch have taken a number of actions .

for example , at the end of fy2003 and fy2004 the department of defense invoked a statutory provision which allowed it to exceeded its authorized end strength .

additionally , congress recently authorized an increase of 20,000 to the size of the active army and an increase of 3,000 to the size of the active marine corps in the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fy2005 .

a separate provision in that law gives the secretary of defense the authority to temporarily increase the size of the army by another 10,000 people , and the size of the marine corps by 6,000 people .

most recently , the fy2006 national defense authorization act provides for an active duty end strength ( as of september 30 , 2006 ) of 512,400 for the army ( an increase of 30,000 ) and an end strength of 179,000 for the marine corps ( an increase of 4,000 ) .

furthermore , this legislation authorized additional annual increases of 20,000 for the army and 5,000 for the marine corps for each fy2007 through 2009 .

however , the army is having difficulty increasing its strength due to recruiting shortfalls .

another prominent initiative intended to reduce manpower strain is the army's ongoing effort to reorganize itself , converting from a divisional structure to one based on brigade sized "units of action. .

the army believes that this reorganization will increase its pool of deployable units , which could help reduce perstempo rates .

the army is also shifting of some critical military capabilities from the reserve component to the active component , thereby reducing the need to call up reserve units to support military operations , and retraining personnel from skills in lower demand ( such as air defense and artillery ) to skills in higher demand ( such as military police ) .

other alternatives which have been suggested include contracting out more functions to the private sector , increasing the use of technologies which reduce manpower needs , securing greater participation in iraq and afghanistan by allied military personnel , reducing u.s. involvement in missions such as the sinai and kosovo , and withdrawing u.s. forces from iraq in relatively large numbers .

any attempt to reinstate the draft would require congressional approval .

the legal framework for conscription is codified in law , but the law contains a provision which prohibits actual induction into the armed forces after july 1 , 1973 .

to reinstate the draft , congress would have to pass legislation reauthorizing inductions .

at the present time , it appears unlikely that the u.s. will reinstate the draft to meet its manpower needs .

while the army and some of the reserve components are having difficulty making recruiting goals , the military is meeting its retention objectives and has a large pool of trained personnel in the reserves that it can draw on to augment its active forces .

additionally , while conscription is useful for producing large numbers of basically trained military personnel , it is not very useful for producing high skill specialists which the military often has the greatest need for: for example , intelligence analysts , linguists , special operations forces , civil affairs personnel , and pilots .

these people need years of training and high motivation levels to become proficient in their military occupations .

however , should reconstruction and counter - insurgency operations in iraq require a major u.s. presence for a prolonged period of time , the utility of a draft might become a more active consideration .

such a mission could demand a large numbers of military personnel who do not require the more specialized skills .

the draft might also be useful if congress decided to dramatically expand the size of the army over a short period of time .

see also crs report rl31682 , the military draft and a possible war with iraq , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) , for a more detailed discussion of arguments for and against a draft .

