this report updates the version issued on september 10 , 2001 , just prior to the september 11 attacks on theworld trade center and the pentagon that killed about 3,000 persons .

it is an analysis of near eastern terroristgroups and countries on the u.s. "terrorism list," a list of countries that the secretary of commerce and secretaryof state have determined provide repeated support for international terrorism .

 ( 2 ) this report adopts the samedefinition of terrorism as that used by the state department in its annual reports: the definition contained in title22 u.s.c .

section 2656f ( d ) .

according to this section , "terrorism" means "premeditated politically - motivatedviolence perpetrated against non - combatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents , usually intendedto influence an audience. .

five out of the seven states currently on the terrorism list are located in the near east region - - iran , iraq , syria , libya , and sudan .

 ( the other two are cuba and north korea , which will not be covered in this report ) .

thecomposition of the list has not changed since sudan was added in 1993 .

the groups analyzed in this reportinclude , but are not limited to , those designated as "foreign terrorist organizations" ( ftos ) , pursuant to theanti - terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-132 ) .

the last section of the report discussessignificant themes in u.s. unilateral and multilateral efforts to combat terrorism in or from the region .

the statedepartment's annual report on international terrorism , entitled patterns of global terrorism: 2000 ( 3 ) is asignificant source for this report ; other sources include press reports and conversations with u.s.counter - terrorism officials , experts , investigative journalists , and foreign diplomats .

although the september 11 attacks have placed near eastern terrorist groups at the center of u.s. anti - terrorism policy , near eastern terrorist groups and their state sponsors have been a focus of u.s. counter - terrorism policiesfor several decades .

since the 1970s , many of the most high - profile acts of terrorism against american citizensand targets have been conducted by these groups , sometimes with the encouragement or at the instigation of theirstate sponsors .

however , no single terrorist attack - - either in or outside the near east region - - compares inscale to the september 11 attacks on the world trade center and pentagon , which killed a total of over 3,000persons .

senior u.s. officials have attributed this attack to the al qaeda network , whose leaders enjoyedsanctuary in afghanistan from 1996 until their defeat at the hands of the u.s. military and its afghan partners inlate 2001 .

according to patterns of global terrorism: 2000 ( available on the u.s. department of state's web site at http: / / www.state.gov / s / ct / rls / pgtrpt / 2000 / ; hereafter cited as patterns 2000 ) , worldwideterrorism - relatedcasualties increased to 405 in 2000 from 233 in 1999 , but the number of attacks increased only slightly , from 392in 1999 to 423 in 2000 .

of these 2000 totals , only 16 of the 423 attacks and 19 of the 405 casualties occurred inthe middle east , although patterns 2000 covered only three months of the palestinian uprising that began in lateseptember 2000 .

since 2001 began , there have been dozens of terrorism - related israeli casualties resulting frompalestinian suicide bomb attacks , some of them in retaliation for israeli actions against suspected palestinianmilitants .

thirty - one of attacks and 12 of the deaths during 2000 occurred in eurasia ( central asia , thecaucasus , and russia ) .

the terrorist groups analyzed often differ in their motivations , objectives , ideologies , and levels of activity .

the islamist groups remain generally the most active , stating as their main objective the overthrow of secular,pro - western governments , the derailment of the arab - israeli peace process , the expulsion of u.s. forces from theregion , or the end of what they consider unjust occupation of muslim lands .

some groups , such as the kurdistanworkers' party ( pkk ) , fight for cultural and political rights or the formation of separate ethnically - based states .

table 1 below shows the 20 near eastern groups currently designated by the state departmentas ftos .

thedesignations were mostly made when the fto list was inaugurated in october 1997 and revised in october 1999and october 2001 .

a group can be added to the list at any time ; al qaeda ( the bin laden network ) was added onaugust 21 , 1998 , the islamic movement of uzbekistan was designated on september 25 , 2000 , and two pakistanigroups - - lashkar e - tayyiba and jaish e - mohammad - - were added to the fto list on december 26 , 2001 .

under the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act , the designation of a group as an fto blocks its assetsin the united states and makes it a criminal offense for u.s. persons to provide it with material support orresources , such as financial contributions .

executive order 12947 of january 23 , 1995 , also bars u.s. dealings ( contributions to or financial transactions ) with any individuals named as "specially designated terrorists ( sdts ) . .

on november 2 , 2001 , the secretary of state also subjected all ftos to the increased financialrestrictions that had been applied to al qaeda - related entities under executive order 13224 ( september 23,2001 ) .

under this new executive order , the united states can close down u.s. branches of foreign banks that donot comply with u.s. requests to end dealings with the ftos .

an sdt , according to the executive order , is aperson found to pose a significant risk of disrupting the middle east peace process , or to have materiallysupported acts of violence toward that end .

table 1 .

near eastern foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) in contrast to patterns 2000 , this report analyzes the following: the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) , which has not been the subject of a separate section in patterns since patterns 1995 , is analyzed in this report because of the debate over whether plo leaderyasir arafat is taking sufficient steps to prevent terrorism by other groups in areas under the control of thepalestinian authority .

since late 2000 , there has been discussion about the degree to which certain plo factionsare involved in violence against israel and whether they should be named as ftos .

when the fto list was reviewed and re - issued in october 1999 , the democratic front for the liberation of palestine ( dflp ) was dropped , largely because it has reconciled with arafat .

the group's pastinvolvement in terrorism , and the recent revival of its operations against israel , are discussed in this report .

this report contains a section on the abu sayyaf group operating in the philippines , as well as analysis of several pakistani islamist groups that are fighting indian control of part of kashmir province .

these groups are discussed in this report , even though they operate outside the near east region , because of theiralleged connections to the bin laden network and the taliban of afghanistan .

in accordance with the october 2001 redesignation of the fto list , the two jewish extremist groups kach and kahane chai will be treated as one group .

since the 1979 islamic revolution in iran , and particularly since the seizure of the u.s. embassy in tehran innovember of that year , radical islam has attracted widespread press attention as the driving ideology of the mostactive middle eastern terrorist groups and state sponsors .

of the 20 ftos listed above , 12 are islamicorganizations .

some radical jewish groups are as opposed to the arab - israeli peace process as are radical islamic groups .

thejewish groups , which derive their support primarily from jewish settlers in the occupied territories , have beenwilling to engage in terrorism to try to derail the process .

the incidents involving these jewish groups havedeclined in recent years , although settlers possibly linked to them have attacked palestinians throughout the latestpalestinian uprising that began in september 2000 .

in the october 2001 reissuing of the foreign terroristorganization list , the state dept .

combined kach and kahane chai into a single designation , suggesting that thetwo have either merged or are so closely associated as to be indistinguishable .

kach was founded by rabbi meir kahane , who was assassinated in the united states in 1990 .

 ( 29 ) kahane chai ( kahane lives ) was founded by kahane's son , binyamin , following his father's assassination .

binyamin kahaneand his wife were killed on december 31 , 2000 by a palestinian group calling itself the "martyr's of al - aqsa. .

the two jewish movements seek to expel all arabs from israel and expand israel's boundaries to include theoccupied territories and parts of jordan .

they also want strict implementation of jewish law in israel .

to try toaccomplish these goals , the two groups have organized protests against the israeli government , and threatenedpalestinians in hebron and elsewhere in the west bank .

on march 13 , 1994 , the israeli cabinet declared both to be terrorist organizations under a 1948 terrorism law .

the declaration came after the groups publicly stated their support for a february 25 , 1994 attack on a hebronmosque by a radical jewish settler , baruch goldstein , who was a kach affiliate and an immigrant from theunited states .

the attack killed 29 worshipers and wounded about 150 .

patterns 2000 says that the numericalstrength of kach and kahane chai is unknown and repeats previous assertions that both receive support fromsympathizers in the united states and europe .

prime minister yitzhak rabin was killed by israeli extremistyigal amir in november 1995 , shortly after signing the oslo ii interim agreement with the palestinians .

neitheramir nor his two accomplices were known to be formal members of kach or kahane chai , although amirappears to espouse ideologies similar to those of the two groups .

blocked assets .

according to the terrorist assets report for2000 , about $200 belonging to kahane chai has been blocked since 1995 .

some middle eastern terrorist groups are guided by arab nationalism or left - wing ideologies rather than islamicfundamentalism .

during the 1980s and 1990s , with the collapse of the soviet union and the loss of much oftheir backing from state sponsors , the left - wing and nationalist groups became progressively less active and werelargely eclipsed by militant islamic groups .

however , some of the left - wing nationalist groups have reactivatedtheir terrorist and commando operations since the latest palestinian uprising began in september 2000 .

three groups designated as ftos primarily are attempting to influence the domestic political structures or theforeign policies of their countries of origin .

two of them operate against the government of turkey and the otheragainst the government of iran .

u.s. officials maintain that they have made a number of gains in their efforts to reduce state sponsorship ofterrorism .

five middle eastern countries are on the terrorism list - - iraq , iran , syria , sudan , and libya .

 ( 37 ) in thecase of libya , sudan , and , to a lesser extent , iraq , u.s. and international pressure , coupled with internaldevelopments in some of these states , have reduced their support for international terrorism long beforeseptember 11 .

of the middle eastern countries on the list , sudan appears to be the closest to achieving removal .

the state department openly acknowledges working with sudan to help it meet the remaining requirements forremoving it from the list , and has praised its cooperation against al qaeda after september 11 .

in the case of iranand syria , however , u.s. efforts have had little success in curbing the support of these governments for terroristgroups .

under section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act , removal from the list requires 45 day advance notification to the house international relations committee , the senate foreign relations committee , and the senate andhouse banking committees , that the country has ceased support for international terrorism and pledges tocontinue doing so .

also under that provision , a major change of government in the listed country can serve asgrounds for immediate removal from the list .

prior to september 11 , there was little agreement on a strategy for countering the terrorism threats discussedabove .

the apparent success of the u.s. military campaign against the taliban and al qaeda in afghanistanapparently has prompted wider acceptance of the utility of military force than was the case previously .

observerstend to agree that the continued success against al qaeda and other terrorist groups will depend on sustainedbilateral , multilateral , or international cooperation with u.s. efforts .

not all options focus on pressuring states or groups ; some experts believe that diplomatic engagement with somestate sponsors and u.s. efforts to address terrorists' grievances could be more effective over the long term .

theunited states has claimed some successes for its policy of pressuring state sponsors , but there are signs that theunited states is now incorporating a greater degree of engagement into its policy framework .

at the same time,the united states has not dropped the longstanding stated u.s. policy of refusing to make concessions toterrorists or of pursuing terrorism cases , politically or legally , as long as is needed to obtain a resolution .

an exhaustive discussion of u.s. efforts to counter terrorism emanating from the region is beyond the scope ofthis paper , but the following sections highlight key themes in u.s. efforts to reduce this threat .

 ( 49 ) .

the success of the u.s. military against the taliban movement of afghanistan that had protected the al qaeda organization has , according to many experts , validated the utility of military force against terrorism .

somebelieve that many governments are now moving against al qaeda cells and other terrorist groups present in theircountries , fearing that u.s. military force might be used against regimes that tolerate the presence of terroristgroups .

advocates of broad application of military force believe that military action against al qaeda inafghanistan has severely disrupted that organization's ability to plan new acts of terrorism .

skeptics of furthermilitary action maintain that conditions in afghanistan are unique and that the anti - terrorism campaign inafghanistan cannot easily be replicated elsewhere .

u.s. officials say that the continued campaign against alqaeda might unfold differently elsewhere , including the use of u.s. military advisers to help governmentsdestroy al qaeda sanctuaries in other countries .

u.s. military attacks were conducted in retaliation for terrorist acts sponsored by libya and iraq , as well as those allegedly sponsored by al qaeda .

on april 15 , 1986 , the united states sent about 100 u.s. aircraft to bombmilitary installations in libya .

the attack was in retaliation for the april 2 , 1986 bombing of a berlin nightclubin which 2 u.s. military personnel were killed , and in which libya was implicated .

on june 26 , 1993 , the unitedstates fired cruise missiles at the headquarters in baghdad of the iraqi intelligence service , which allegedlysponsored a failed assassination plot against former president george bush during his april 14-16 , 1993 visit tokuwait .

 ( other u.s. retaliation against iraq since 1991 has been triggered by iraqi violations of ceasefire termsnot related to terrorism. ) .

the august 20 , 1998 cruise missile strikes against the bin laden network inafghanistan represented a u.s. strike against a group , not a state sponsor .

the related strike on a pharmaceuticalplant in sudan could have been intended as a signal to sudan to sever any remaining ties to bin laden .

the effectiveness of other u.s. military action against terrorist groups or state sponsors is difficult to judge .

libya did not immediately try to retaliate after the 1986 u.s. strike , but many believe that it did eventually strikeback by orchestrating the pan am 103 bombing .

since the 1993 u.s. strike , iraq has avoided terrorist attacksagainst high profile u.s. targets , but it has continued to challenge the united states on numerous issues related toits august 1990 invasion of kuwait .

the 1998 airstrikes against al qaeda did not prompt the taliban leadershipto extradite or expel bin laden from afghanistan , nor did the strikes deter bin laden's network from engaging infurther terrorist activities , including september 11 .

the united states has been willing to apply economic sanctions unilaterally , particularly against state sponsors ofterrorism , in an effort to pressure those states to expel terrorist groups they host .

analysts doubt that unilateralu.s .

economic sanctions , by themselves , can force major changes in the behavior of state sponsors of terrorism .

major u.s. allies did not join the u.s. trade ban imposed on iran in may 1995 and the move did not , in itself,measurably alter iran's support for terrorist groups .

on the other hand , virtually all middle eastern terrorism liststates have publicly protested their inclusion on the list and other u.s. sanctions , suggesting that these sanctionsare having an effect politically and / or economically .

u.s. officials assert that u.s. sanctions , even if unilateral,have made some terrorism state sponsors "think twice" about promoting terrorism .

to demonstrate that improvements in behavior can be rewarded , in april 1999 the clinton administration announced that it would permit , on a case - by - case basis , commercial sales of u.s. food and medical products tolibya , sudan , and iran .

the move relaxed the bans on u.s. trade with the three countries .

as noted previously,all three have recently shown some signs of wanting to improve their international images .

terrorism list sanctions .

under a number of differentlaws , ( 50 ) the placement of a country on theterrorism list triggers a wide range of u.s. economic sanctions,including: a ban on direct u.s. foreign aid , including export - import bank guarantees .

a ban on sales of items on the u.s .

munitions control list .

a requirement that the united states vote against lending to that country by international institutions .

strict licensing requirements for sales to that country , which generally prohibit exports of items that can have military applications , such as advanced sensing , computation , or transportationequipment .

a u.s. trade ban has been imposed on every middle eastern terrorism list state , except syria , under separate executive orders .

placement on the terrorism list does not automatically trigger a total ban onu.s .

trade with orinvestment by the united states .

in addition , foreign aid appropriations bills since the late 1980s have barred direct and indirect assistance to terrorism list and other selected countries , and mandated cuts in u.s.contributions to international programs that work in those countries .

as shown in table 2 above,the unitedstates also tries to maintain some leverage over terrorism list states and groups by blocking some of their assetsin the united states .

some u.s. sanctions are "secondary sanctions," imposing penalties on countries that help or arm terrorism list countries .

sections 325 and 326 of the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act ( p.l .

104-132 ) amendedthe foreign assistance act by requiring the president to withhold u.s. foreign assistance to any government thatprovides assistance or lethal military aid to any terrorism list country .

in april 1999 , three russian entities weresanctioned under this provision for providing anti - tank weaponry to syria ; sanctions on the russian governmentwere waived .

"non - cooperating list. .

the 1996 anti - terrorism act alsogave the administration another option besides placing a country on the terrorism list .

section 303 of that actcreated a new list of states that are deemed "not cooperating with u.s. anti - terrorism efforts," and provided thatstates on that list be barred from sales of u.s .

munitions list items .

under that provision , and every year since1997 , afghanistan , along with the seven terrorism list countries , has been designated as not cooperating .

no u.s.allies have been designated as "not cooperating," although the provision was enacted following an april 1995incident in which saudi arabia did not attempt to detain hizballah terrorist imad mughniyah when a plane onwhich he was believed to be a passenger was scheduled to land in saudi arabia .

 ( 51 ) possibly in an attempt toavoid similar incidents , on june 21 , 1995 , president clinton signed presidential decision directive 39 ( pdd - 39 ) ,enabling u.s. law enforcement authorities to capture suspected terrorists by force from foreign countries thatrefuse to cooperate in their extradition .

 ( 52 ) the clinton administration rejected several outside recommendations - - most recently those issued in june 2000 by the congressionally mandated national commission on terrorism - - to place afghanistan on the terrorismlist .

the clinton administration said that placing afghanistan on the list would imply that the united statesrecognizes the taliban movement as the legitimate government of afghanistan , a position later adopted by thebush administration .

however , president clinton , on july 4 , 1999 , issued executive order 13129 , imposingsanctions on the taliban that are similar to those imposed on terrorism list countries and on foreign terroristorganizations .

the order imposed a ban on u.s. trade with areas of afghanistan under taliban control , frozetaliban assets in the united states , and prohibited contributions to taliban by u.s. persons .

the clintonadministration justified the move by citing the taliban's continued harboring of bin laden .

also in its june 2000 report , the national commission on terrorism recommended naming greece and pakistan as not fully cooperating with u.s. anti - terrorism efforts .

the clinton administration rejected thoserecommendations as well .

in patterns 2000 , the state department implied that pakistan and lebanon werepotential candidates for the terrorism list , or possibly the "not cooperating" list , for supporting or toleratingoperations by terrorist groups .

 ( 53 ) on the otherhand , patterns 2000 did credit both pakistan and lebanon withanti - terrorism cooperation in selected cases .

in the aftermath of the september 11 attacks and pakistan's decisionto align itself with the u.s. war effort , the united states has praised pakistan's cooperation , lifted u.s. sanctions,and begun a new foreign assistance program for that country .

in concert with u.s. unilateral actions , the united states has sought to enlist its friends , allies , and other countriesto employ multilateral sanctions against middle eastern terrorism .

as noted above , the united states led effortsto impose international sanctions on libya and sudan for their support of terrorism , and both those states soughtto distance themselves from terrorist groups .

this suggests that the perception of isolation caused by the u.n.sanctions was a factor in the terrorism policy decisions of these countries .

in 1998 and 1999 , the united statesand russia jointly worked successfully to persuade the united nations security council to adopt sanctions on thetaliban because of its refusal to extradite bin laden .

u.n. security council resolution 1267 , adopted october15 , 1999 , banned flights outside afghanistan by its national airline , ariana , and directed u.n. member states tofreeze taliban assets .

the united states and russia teamed up again to push another resolution ( u.n. securitycouncil resolution 1333 , adopted december 19 , 2000 ) that , among other measures , imposed an internationalarms embargo on the taliban only , not on opposition factions .

 ( 54 ) these measures began to be implemented justprior to the september 11 attacks , but did not cause the taliban to waiver in its refusal to hand over bin laden .

successive administrations have identified counter - terrorism cooperation with friendly countries as a key elementof u.s. policy .

in one important regional example , the united states has sought to contain hizballah byproviding military and law enforcement assistance to the government of lebanon .

in the past few years , theunited states has sold lebanon non - lethal defense articles such as armored personnel carriers .

in 1994 , on aone - time basis , the united states provided non - lethal aid , including excess trucks and equipment , to palestinianauthority security forces in an effort to strengthen them against hamas and pij .

prior to september 11 , the united states had been expanding a counter - terrorism dialogue with russia and the central asian states against islamic militant groups linked to al qaeda .

all of these countries subsequentlyaligned themselves , openly or tacitly , with the u.s. war against the taliban and al qaeda .

every year since1999 , the state department hosted a multilateral conference of senior counter - terrorism officials from the middleeast , central asia , and asia , focusing on combating the terrorism threat from afghanistan .

these conferencesand meetings have often resulted in agreements to exchange information , to conduct joint efforts to counterterrorist fundraising , and to develop improved export controls on explosives and conventions against nuclearterrorism .

 ( 55 ) for the past few years , the unitedstates has been providing some detection equipment and a fewmillion dollars in financial assistance to the central asian states to help them prevent the smuggling of nuclearand other material to terrorist groups such as al qaeda .

the measure yielded some results in april 2000 , whenuzbek border authorities used this equipment to detect and seize ten containers with radioactive material boundfor pakistan .

 ( 56 ) the united states has worked with the european union ( eu ) to exert influence on iran to end its sponsorship ofterrorism .

in exchange for relaxing enforcement of u.s. sanctions under the iran - libya sanctions act ( p.l.104-172 ) , which would have sanctioned eu firms that invest in iran's energy industry , in mid 1998 the unitedstates extracted a pledge from the eu to increase cooperation with the united states against iranian terrorism .

inmay 1998 , the eu countries agreed on a "code of conduct" to curb arms sales to states , such as iran , that mightuse the arms to support terrorism .

however , the code is not legally binding on the eu member governments .

 ( 57 ) terrorism fundraising cooperation .

in january 2000 , theunited states signed a new international convention for the suppression of terrorist financing , which creates aninternational legal framework to investigate those involved in terrorist financing .

since september 11 , the unitedstates has made cooperation against terrorism fundraising a major priority in its dealings with other countries,particularly middle eastern countries where much of the fundraising for al qaeda is conducted .

as noted in the discussions of terrorism list countries , the administration has shown increasing willingness to engage state sponsors , once these countries have demonstrated some willingness to curb support for terrorism .

u.s. officials justify engagement with the argument that doing so creates incentives for terrorism list countries tocontinue to reduce their support for international terrorism .

on the other hand , critics believe that terrorism listcountries are likely to view a u.s. policy of engagement as a sign that supporting terrorism will not adverselyaffect relations with the united states .

of the middle eastern terrorism list countries , the united states engages in bilateral dialogue with all except iranand iraq .

the united states has called for a dialogue with iran , but iran has thus far refused on the grounds thatthe united states has not dismantled what iran calls "hostile" policies toward that country - - a formulationwidely interpreted to refer to u.s. sanctions .

iraq has asked for direct talks with the united states , but the unitedstates has rejected the suggestion on the grounds that iraq is too far from compliance with gulf war - relatedrequirements to make official talks useful .

legal action against terrorist groups and state sponsors had become an increasingly large component of u.s. counter - terrorism strategy , although the september 11 attacks and u.s. military response has , to some extent,diminished support among observers for this option .

in the case of the bombing of pan am 103 , the bushadministration chose international legal action - - a trial of the two libyan suspects - - over military retaliation .

a similar choice has apparently been made in the khobar towers bombing case , although that legal effortconsists of u.s. indictments of suspects and not a u.n. - centered legal effort .

the united states is planning to trysome al qaeda fighters captured in afghanistan , although the u.s. strategy has been primarily to defeat alqaeda militarily rather than treat the september 11 attacks primarily as a criminal case .

congress has attempted to give victims of international terrorism a legal option against state sponsors .

the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( section 221 ) created an exception to the foreignsovereign immunity for certain cases ( 28 u.s.c. , section 1605 ) , allowing victims of terrorism to sue terrorismlist countries for acts of terrorism by them or groups they support .

since this provision was enacted , a number ofcases have been brought in u.s. courts , and several multimillion dollar awards have been made to formerhostages and the families of victims of groups proven in court to have been sponsored by iran .

in 2000 , theclinton administration accepted compromise legislation to use general revenues to pay compensatory damageawards to these successful claimants , with the stipulation that the president try to recoup expended funds fromiran as part of an overall reconciliation in relations and settlement of assets disputes .

the provision , called the"justice for victims of terrorism act," was incorporated into the victims of trafficking and violence protectionact of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) .

the clinton and bush administrations have opposed directly tapping frozen iranianassets in the united states , such as selling iran's former embassy in washington , on the grounds that doing socould violate diplomatic sovereignty or provoke attacks on u.s. property or citizens abroad .

the september 11 attacks have exposed the vulnerability of the united states homeland to middle eastern - inspired terrorism as no other previous event .

the october - november 2002 anthrax mailings alsoexposed u.s. vulnerabilities , although it is not known whether these incidents were related to september 11,other middle eastern - related terrorism , or activity by groups in the united states not connected to the middleeast .

the september 11 attacks have sparked stepped up law enforcement investigation into the activities ofislamic networks in the united states and alleged fundraising in the united states for middle east terrorism .

some observers allege that middle eastern terrorist groups , including al qaeda , have extensive political networks in the united states , working from seemingly innocent religious and research institutions andinvestment companies .

 ( 58 ) pij leader shallah,before being tapped to lead pij , taught at the university of southflorida in the early 1990s and ran an affiliated islamic studies institute called the world and islam studiesenterprise ( wise ) .

some observers believe that extraordinary security measures are needed to ferret out alqaeda cells in the united states .

others have challenged this view , saying that most american muslims oppose the use of violence , and donate money to organizations that they believe use the funds solely for humanitarian purposes .

some post - september11 u.s. domestic counter - terrorism efforts , particularly those dealing with immigration and investigative powers,have drawn substantial criticism from u.s. civil liberties groups , which have expressed concern about excessiveintrusions by law enforcement authorities .

some arab - american and american muslim organizations have longcomplained that u.s. residents and citizens of arab descent are unfairly branded as suspected terrorists , and thatthis sentiment increased dramatically after september 11 .

as part of their criticism , these organizations point toerroneous initial accusations by some terrorism experts that islamic extremists perpetrated the oklahoma citybombing in april 1995 .

