when the effects of the 1929 depression began to be felt by the rest of the nation , rural residents had been struggling for several years with low incomes and low standards of living .

the federal emergency relief administration began aiding rural families in 1932 .

later , the farm security administration and the work projects administration provided much needed assistance to rural families and farm households .

in the post - world war ii era , widespread rural poverty , most notably among farmers , continued to dominate rural policy concerns .

the eisenhower administration's under secretary for agriculture , true d. morse , began a rural development program in 1955 to assist low - income farmers .

because agriculture was the major economic activity in many rural areas of the time , a focus on farms and farm households became de facto rural policy .

the war on poverty during the 1960s continued the focus on rural poverty as a central policy issue .

with the continued decline in agriculture as rural america's dominant economic activity , policy attention shifted to rural revitalization .

the 1980s farm financial crisis and economic dislocation in rural america brought the importance of rural structural change to the forefront of policy concerns .

the further decline of farming to less than 8% of rural employment and the loss of many manufacturing jobs during the past decade have highlighted the growing gap between many rural areas and the nation's urban / suburban areas .

while no overarching framework guides rural policy at the federal level , adequate housing , employment creation and business retention , human capital concerns , poverty issues , medical care , and physical infrastructure development remain key foci of federal rural policy .

the rural population has declined over the past decade .

according to the u.s. census , as of july 2012 , approximately 46.2 million people ( 14.6% of the u.s. population ) lived in rural areas , down from approximately 16% in 2000 .

while rural farming and mining counties have long experienced dwindling populations , more recently rural retirement and recreation areas have also seen declines as the baby - boomer generation increasingly opts for urban areas in retirement .

manufacturing now accounts for about 22% of rural private sector earnings and about 11% of all rural jobs .

the service sector , as with the u.s. domestic economy as a whole , however , dominates rural job opportunities .

although over 90% of total farm household income now comes from off - farm sources , farming , and agriculture more generally , remain the major legislative focus for much of congressional debate on rural policy .

since 1973 , omnibus farm bills have included a rural development title .

the most recently passed is title vi of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

agriculture and manufacturing issues are increasingly seen as part of global and regional restructuring issues , which have significant implications for rural areas , especially those areas where these production sectors remain dominant .

how to position rural areas to better compete in a global environment is a key issue framing debates about the future of rural america .

omnibus farm bills are the major modern legislative vehicle for addressing many rural development issues .

while other legislation has significant implications for rural areas and rural residents ( eg , transportation initiatives , environmental regulation , finance and taxation , medicare , social security ) , congress has used periodic farm bills to address emerging rural issues as well as to reauthorize a wide range of rural programs administered by the various usda rural development mission agencies .

while the extent of overlap between federal agencies and programs targeting rural areas has been of concern to some rural policy observers , legislation enacted since 1990 reflects an effort to address rural issues more comprehensively .

usda's rural development mission is to enhance rural communities by targeting financial and technical resources to areas of greatest need .

three agencies , established by the agricultural reorganization act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-354 ) , are responsible for the mission area: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) .

an office of community development provides further community development support through usda rural development's state offices .

congress has enacted many public laws bearing on rural policies and rural residents .

the rural electrification act of 1936 , to cite one significant example , was central to the provision of electrical power and telephone service throughout rural america .

in 1966 , congress created the national commission on rural poverty , which published its famous report , the people left behind , the following year .

various loan and grant programs that target improvements in rural social welfare ( eg , housing ) were also authorized and administered by the farmers home administration ( fmha ) , the agency forerunner of today's usda office of rural development .

rural policy as an identified congressional concern , however , may be dated to the 1972 rural development act , an amendment to the consolidated farmers home administration act of 1961 .

in addition to periodic omnibus farm bills , new rural development legislation generally amends three major authorizing statutes: ( 1 ) the consolidated farm and rural development act of 1972 ( p.l .

92-419 ) ; ( 2 ) the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-624 ) ; and ( 3 ) the rural electrification act of 1936 .

to illustrate the range of congressional legislative activity targeting rural areas , a brief description and overview of key sections of the basic statutory authorities for rural development programs are provided below .

the following sections outline the various loan and grant programs administered by the three principal usda rural development mission agencies: rural housing service ( rhs ) , rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and rural utilities service ( rus ) .

program objectives , statutory authority , eligibility , and fy2005-fy2011 funding levels are provided .

an overview of the programs administered by usda's office of community development is also provided .

the following programs are authorized by the housing act of 1949 ( as amended ) and include programs for individual homeownership and rental housing .

the programs do not require annual reauthorization or reauthorization in periodic omnibus farm bills .

budget authorization is expressed in terms of loan subsidies and loan authority .

housing loan subsidies are transfers from the treasury to lenders who may then provide loans at reduced interest rates to low - income borrowers who otherwise would not be able to obtain credit under a lender's usual criteria .

loan authority refers to the total value of all loans made under a particular program .

a subsidy "leverages" a larger loan amount .

a small total loan subsidy permits a relatively large amount of principal actually lent to a borrower .

loan authorization refers to the total amount of loan indebtedness that congress permits a particular program to assume .

funding for rural housing service homeownership programs is provided by the rural housing insurance fund through three financing mechanisms: ( 1 ) direct loans , ( 2 ) guaranteed loans , and ( 3 ) grants .

direct loans are loans whose principal is subsidized by the federal government .

the principal for a guaranteed loan is provided by a private lender , but the lender is protected by the federal government in the event a borrower defaults .

if a guaranteed loan is made at market interest rates and the default rate is zero , then the cost to the federal government for making the guaranteed loan is zero .

a grant is a direct outlay to an applicant , often on the basis of a competition for funds .

funding levels for individual grants , loan subsidies , and total levels of loan authorization are established in annual appropriations legislation .

creating , expanding , and retaining employment in rural areas have been central concerns of rural development policies for nearly 75 years .

originally , agriculture , mining , fishing , and timbering related jobs were major targets of public funding .

since the mid - 1950s , manufacturing was regarded as the most promising source of rural employment as jobs in the primary sectors declined .

abundant and largely non - unionized labor , inexpensive land , and minimal environmental regulation were rural america's competitive advantage as many manufacturing facilities sought branch production facilities .

while manufacturing has provided relatively high - paying and stable employment for many rural residents , the u.s. rural manufacturing sector finds itself today competing with developing countries and with eastern europe .

low - skilled , peripheral manufacturing facilities have left many u.s. rural areas .

even employers in more advanced manufacturing production have moved from rural u.s. areas to offshore employment .

today , rural areas are trying to create new sources of competitive advantage in more technologically sophisticated production with higher - skill labor .

with lack of capital a significant factor in many rural areas , the rbs provides loans and grants to help local entrepreneurs in starting up businesses and in expanding existing businesses .

other rbs programs provide specialized technical and marketing assistance .

programs authorized in the past three farm bills also addressed the needs of rural businesses , especially in capital formation .

arguably , the earliest rural economic development policy consisted of providing infrastructure to get agricultural products to markets or to transportation nodes .

building railroads , roads , and telegraph lines represent early examples .

later , electricity and telephones constituted essential rural infrastructure .

because of great geographical distances and low population densities , rural areas would unlikely have had such services without federal support .

the 1936 rural electrification act discussed above was central to the provision of rural utilities in an urbanizing society .

today , rural electrification , telecommunications , and water infrastructure are the core programs administered by the rural utilities service .

new infrastructure includes facilities for health service delivery ( eg , telemedicine ) and new broadband telecommunication resources .

as was the case in the early years of the nation , great distances and sparse populations have also led congress to provide funding for these new rural utilities as well as continuing support for telephones and electrical generation and transmission .

the 2008 farm bill authorized the establishment of three new regional economic development authorities: the southeast crescent regional commission , the southwest border regional commission , and the northern border regional commission .

only the northern borders commission has had an executive director appointed .

the commissions are under the jurisdiction of the house transportation and infrastructure committee .

the commissions will undertake comprehensive infrastructure development planning for their respective regions .

commissions may make grants to states and local governments to develop basic public infrastructure , support alternative energy development , support telecommunications , and assist economically depressed areas of the regions .

funding was authorized at $30 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) for each commission .

regulatory rules for the implementation of the commissions have not yet been published , although some preliminary administrative functions have begun in the northern border regional authority and the southeast crescent regional authority .

the regional commissions include the following counties: southeast crescent regional commission all counties of the states of virginia , north carolina , south carolina , georgia , alabama , mississippi , and florida not already served by the appalachian regional commission or the delta regional authority .

southwest border regional commission arizona: the counties of cochise , gila , graham , greenlee , la paz , maricopa , pima , pinal , santa cruz , and yuma .

california: the counties of imperial , los angeles , orange , riverside , san bernardino , san diego , and ventura .

new mexico: the counties of catron , chaves , dona ana , eddy , grant , hidalgo , lincoln , luna , otero , sierra , and socorro .

texas: the counties of atascosa , bandera , bee , bexar , brewster , brooks , cameron , coke , concho , crane , crockett , culberson , dimmit , duval , ector , edwards , el paso , frio , gillespie , glasscock , hidalgo , hudspeth , irion , jeff davis , jim hogg , jim wells , karnes , kendall , kenedy , kerr , kimble , kinney , kleberg , la salle , live oak , loving , mason , maverick , mcmullen , medina , menard , midland , nueces , pecos , presidio , reagan , real , reeves , san patricio , shleicher , sutton , starr , sterling , terrell , tom green upton , uvalde , val verde , ward , webb , willacy , wilson , winkler , zapata , and zavala .

northern border regional commission maine: the counties of androscoggin , aroostook , franklin , hancock , kennebec , knox , oxford , penobscot , piscataquis , somerset , waldo , and washington .

new hampshire: the counties of carroll , coos , grafton , and sullivan .

new york: the counties of cayuga , clinton , essex , franklin , fulton , hamilton , herkimer , jefferson , lewis , madison , oneida , oswego , seneca , and st. lawrence .

vermont: the counties of caledonia , essex , franklin , grand isle , lamoille , and orleans .

statutory authority: subtitle v of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

financing : commissions make economic development and infrastructure grants to state , local , tribal , profit , and nonprofit entities to carry out the economic planning and development programs established by the respective commissions .

matching equity funding is required .

eligibility criteria: applications to a commission for a grant or other assistance for a project are made through , and evaluated for approval by , the state - appointed member of the commission representing the applicant .

funding : the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) authorized $30 million in each fiscal year fy2008-fy2012 .

in fy2010 , the northern border regional commission and the southeast crescent regional commission received $1.5 million and $250,000 , respectively , under energy and water appropriations .

