the statutory debt limit applies to almost all federal debt .

the limit applies to federal debt held by the public ( that is , debt held outside the federal government itself ) and to federal debt held by the government's own accounts .

federal trust funds , such as social security , medicare , transportation , and civil service retirement accounts , hold most of this internally held debt .

the government's surpluses or deficits determine essentially all of the change in debt held by the public .

the government's on - budget fiscal balance , which excludes a u.s .

postal service net surplus or deficit and a large social security surplus of payroll taxes net of paid benefits , does not directly affect debt held in government accounts .

increases or decreases in debt held by government accounts result from net financial flows into accounts holding the debt , such as the social security trust fund .

legal requirements and government accounting practices also affect levels of debt held by government accounts .

since the late 1950s , the federal government increased its borrowing from the public in all years , except in fy1969 following imposition of a war surcharge and in the period fy1998-fy2001 .

the persistence of federal budget deficits has required the government to issue more and more debt to the public .

the accumulation of social security and other trust funds , particularly after 1983 when recommendations of the greenspan commission were implemented , led to sustained growth in government - held debt subject to limit .

the growth in federal debt held by the public and in intergovernmental accounts , such as trust funds , has periodically obliged congress to raise the debt limit .

debt limit issues since the passage of the budget control act of 2011 are discussed in more detail in crs report r43389 , the debt limit since 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] .

standard methods of financing federal activities or meeting government obligations used by the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) can be hobbled when federal debt nears its legal limit .

the government's income and outlays vary over the course of the year , producing monthly surpluses and deficits that affect the level of debt , whether or not the government has a surplus or deficit for the entire year .

even major government trust fund accounts that usually run annual surpluses can swing back and forth between deficits and surpluses on a month - to - month basis .

the ability to borrow is central to treasury cash management systems that handle fluctuations in federal revenues and outlays .

when federal debt has neared the debt limit in the past , limiting the u.s. treasury's borrowing authority , financial management has become more complicated .

the debt limit can hinder the treasury's ability to manage the federal government's finances , as noted above .

in extreme cases , when the federal debt is very near its statutory limit , the treasury must take unusual and extraordinary measures to meet federal obligations .

while the debt limit has never caused the federal government to default on its obligations , it has at times caused great inconvenience and has added uncertainty to treasury operations .

the debt limit also provides congress with the strings to control the federal purse , allowing congress to assert its constitutional prerogatives to control spending .

the debt limit also imposes a form of fiscal accountability that compels congress and the president to take visible action to allow further federal borrowing when the federal government spends more than it collects in revenues .

in the words of one author , the debt limit "expresses a national devotion to the idea of thrift and to economical management of the fiscal affairs of the government. .

on the other hand , some budget experts have advocated elimination of the debt limit , arguing that other controls provided by the modern congressional budget process established in 1974 have superseded the debt limit , and that the limit does little to alter spending and revenue policies that determine the size of the federal deficit .

the obama administration has proposed allowing increases in the debt limit subject to congressional disapproval .

while the budget process provides congress with one means of controlling federal spending , the debt limit may provide a different sort of leverage that is not redundant .

congress ordinarily delegates work to its committees .

the committees on appropriations have special responsibilities regarding discretionary spending , and authorizing committees are generally responsible for mandatory program spending decisions , while committees on the budget are tasked with drafting an overall budgetary framework that specifies aggregate levels for federal spending and taxation .

while those committees often incorporate views of other committees and members , measures involving the debt limit often provide individual members not belonging to those committees with a separate instrument to influence federal fiscal policy .

during the four years ( fy1998-fy2001 ) the government ran surpluses , federal debt held by intergovernmental accounts grew by $855 billion and debt held by the public fell by almost $450 billion .

since fy2001 , however , debt held by the public has grown due to persistent and substantial budget deficits .

debt held in government accounts also has grown , in large part because social security payroll taxes have exceeded payments of beneficiaries .

table 1 shows components of debt in current dollars and as percentages of gross domestic product ( gdp ) since fy1996 .

figure 1 shows the components of federal debt as shares of gross domestic product ( gdp ) from fy1940 through fy2014 , along with administration projections through fy2019 .

table 2 provides information on debt limit increases from 1993 to 2014 .

federal debt held by government accounts has grown steadily since 1982 , in part due to increases in social security taxes passed following recommendations of the 1983 greenspan commission , and reflecting the transition of the baby boom generation into its peak earnings years .

debt held by the public , which changes in response to total surpluses or deficits , grew as a share of gdp through the mid - 1990s .

after fy1992 , deficits shrank , and from fy1998 through fy2001 the federal government ran surpluses .

those surpluses , along with rapid gdp growth , reduced debt held by the public as a percentage of gdp .

when large deficits returned and gdp growth slowed in the early 2000s , debt held by the public as a share of gdp again increased .

the 2011 debt limit episode was longer and more contentious compared to those that preceded it .

the 2011 episode was resolved by passage of the budget control act of 2011 , which reinstated statutory caps on discretionary spending and created other means of constraining federal spending .

this section provides a brief summary of debt limit policy developments after 2011 .

a more extensive analysis of recent debt limit developments since 2012 can be found in crs report r43389 , the debt limit since 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] .

from fy1998 through fy2001 , the federal government ran budget surpluses that reduced its debt .

in early 2001 , the 10-year budget forecasts projected large and growing surpluses , indicating rapid reduction in debt held by the public .

some experts had even expressed concern about consequences of retiring all federal debt held by the public .

had such projections been fulfilled , the debt limit issue would have been mooted for the rest of the decade .

the short span of surpluses again turned to a longer string of deficits due to the combined effects of higher military and security spending following the attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; rising nondefense outlays in areas such as education , veterans' care and benefits , and tax reductions in 2001 and 2003 ; as well as the expiration of statutory caps on discretionary spending in 2002 .

the financial crisis of 2007-2009 and the subsequent economic recession led to large federal deficits that accelerated the growth of total debt , which necessitated a series of debt limit increases .

past experience suggests that direct fiscal costs of a financial crisis , such as costs of bailing out financial institutions , are dwarfed by the effects of diminished tax revenues and elevated social safety net benefits .

while the 2011 debt limit episode reflected a growing concern with the fiscal sustainability , fiscal issues have since become less prominent .

since then , the scale of federal deficits has diminished as economic recovery has progressed .

for instance , the fy2015 federal deficit was 2.5% of gdp , while the fy2009 deficit was 9.8% of gdp .

in addition , federal health program costs and net interest expenses have risen less rapidly than previously expected .

nonetheless , over the next decade , without major changes in federal policies , persistent and possibly growing deficits , would substantially increase federal debt .

cbo has been warning for several years that the current trajectory of federal borrowing is unsustainable and could lead to slower economic growth in the long run as debt rises as a percentage of gdp .

unless federal policies change , congress would repeatedly face demands to raise the debt limit to accommodate the growing federal debt in order to provide the government with the means to meet its financial obligations .

debt subject to limit by month since september 2001 table a - 1 provides data on the dollar amount , in current dollars , of federal debt and the changes in these amounts by month between the end of september 2001 ( the end of fy2001 ) and the end of september 2015 .

the table shows outstanding monthly balances , subject to the debt limit , of total federal debt , debt held by government accounts , and debt held by the public .

all three measures of debt subject to limit have increased since the end of fy2001 , the last year in which the federal government ran a budget surplus .

from the end of september 2001 ( the end of fy2001 ) to the end of september 2015 , total federal debt increased by $12,380 billion , debt held in government accounts increased by $2,566 billion , and debt held by the public increased by $9,813 billion .

all three measures experienced periodic reductions in some months .

because federal receipts and outlays are spread unevenly over the fiscal year , debt may rise or fall in a given month , even if debt measures follow an overall increasing trend .

major debt measures before the entry of united states into world war i .

