in the course of developing and executing a response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the world trade center in new york city and the pentagon in suburban washington , dc , president george w. bush set restrictive policy on the disclosure of related sensitive information to congress .

in an october 5 memorandum to the secretaries of state , the treasury , and defense , the attorney general , the director of central intelligence , and the director of the federal bureau of investigation , he indicated that "this administration will continue to work to inform the leadership of the congress about the course of , and important developments in , our critical military , intelligence , and law enforcement operations" while simultaneously honoring the "obligation to protect military operational security , intelligence sources and methods , and sensitive law enforcement investigations. .

accordingly , your departments should adhere to the following procedures when providing briefings to the congress relating to the information we have or the actions we plan to take: ( i ) only you or officers expressly designated by you may brief members of congress regarding classified or sensitive law enforcement information ; and ( ii ) the only members of congress whom you or your expressly designated officers may brief regarding classified or sensitive law enforcement information are the speaker of the house , the house minority leader , the senate majority and minority leaders , and the chairs and ranking members of the intelligence committees in the house and senate .

released amidst allegations of congressional leaking and complaints that executive briefings for congress had been inadequate , the new policy engendered almost universal opposition from the house and senate membership .

five days after its prescription , the new policy was suspended , with an immediate effect being that members of the armed services committees and foreign affairs committees could be briefed by pentagon and state department leaders as they had been prior to the president's october 5 policy memorandum .

under the constitution of the united states , the president is responsible for prosecuting war and directing the armed forces during military conflicts , including attacks upon the nation .

congress is constitutionally empowered to declare war , may otherwise authorize the involvement of american armed forces in military conflict , appropriates funds for government activities and operations , including military actions , and engages in oversight to assess the extent to which government operations have been efficiently , economically , and effectively conducted using appropriated funds .

congress also has a role in prescribing intelligence and foreign policy .

in meeting these responsibilities , congress expects and needs to be informed by executive branch leaders about relevant actions taken and being planned , policy developments , expenditures , and knowledge conditions .

consequently , the information restrictions prescribed in president bush's october 5 memorandum drew critical reaction from various quarters of the house of representatives and the senate .

although the restrictive policy was quickly suspended by the president , questions have arisen concerning the role of the executive in times of war and military conflict in informing congress regarding american involvement in such events .

this report offers a brief review of executive - congressional relations in this regard for 1941-2001 .

a number of considerations affect a president's efforts to inform congress about the commitment of american armed forces to a condition of overseas military conflict .

not the least of these are the majority or minority status of the president's political party in the house and the senate ; the extent of public , congressional , and international support for the president's action ; the number of personnel committed and the conditions of harm they face ; the anticipated duration of the commitment ; and the diplomatic conditions surrounding the commitment .

other important considerations are the nature of the "informing" activity—a presidential speech to the nation or a joint session of congress , informal remarks by the president at the white house , a briefing by an administration representative , testimony before a congressional committee by administration officials , proffered documents , or a conversation about a course of action .

also , who in congress is being informed—the leadership of both houses , selected committee chairs of one or both chambers , certain members who are supportive of the president's action , or the membership of the house and the senate in joint session .

whether personally or through aides , the president usually offers congress information about events that have already transpired .

it is seemingly unusual for a president to include members of congress directly in his decisionmaking , although advice may be solicited ( or offered without invitation ) without any indication of its acceptability .

indeed , although a president may honor the perceived obligation to inform congress about the commitment of american armed forces to a condition of overseas military conflict , members may well be dissatisfied with the manner in which the information is provided , the contents offered , the continued unilateral direction of the commitment by the president , and , in some cases , the broad expansion of a commitment made by congress in response to a specific incident .

