in 1987 , congress amended the clean water act ( cwa ) to provide for establishment of a program of state revolving loan funds ( srfs ) through which to finance local water pollution abatement projects ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

the srfs were to be jointly funded by the federal government and the states with loans to be made ( and repaid ) in cyclical fashion .

the legislation included a provision mandating that construction work performed with srf assistance would be covered by the prevailing wage requirements of the davis - bacon act ( dba ) : a 1931 statute requiring payment of not less than the locally prevailing wage on certain federal ( and , later , federally assisted ) construction work .

by the mid - 1990s , this system was expected to have changed .

once the srfs were in place , federal funding for these waste water treatment facilities would pass through the srfs on a revolving basis .

it was assumed that by the mid - 1990s , the transition would be complete and that no further federal appropriations would be needed .

however , a federal presence would continue through the srfs as funds were recycled through loans and repayment .

in practice , matters evolved somewhat differently .

although no additional authorizing legislation was adopted after 1987 , clean water act appropriations , contrary to stated expectations , continued .

given continuing federal funding , some have argued , federal requirements governing administration of the program ( including labor standards ) should remain in place .

others have sought to set aside the various federal requirements , including the cwa davis - bacon provision .

debate over davis - bacon coverage under the cwa / srf program is ongoing , and has been the subject of several policy shifts on the part of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

first .

in 1995 , epa ruled that davis - bacon no longer applied to cwa / srf projects .

second .

in the spring of 2000 , epa reversed itself and , entering into a settlement agreement with the building and construction trades department , afl - cio , affirmed that the act would be applied to such projects effective july 1 , 2001 .

third .

epa then set back the effective date for davis - bacon coverage to the fall of 2001 , perhaps reversing itself once more .

thereafter , epa seems to have remained silent on the issue .

this report deals neither with environmental / water quality issues nor with the davis - bacon act , per se , but , rather , with the intersection of two statutes and the regulatory complexities that have resulted .

it suggests the evolution of the davis - bacon provision of the clean water act and traces the conflict ( 1994-2008 ) as to whether dba wage standards should / do still apply to cwa / srf projects .

finally , it poses questions of policy: how did the dispute develop , how has it been resolved ( if , indeed , it has been ) , and how might similar conflicts be avoided ? .

with more than 50 program statutes now covered by davis - bacon prevailing wage provisions ( and with congress exploring a variety of innovative funding mechanisms for public works ) , how this issue is ultimately resolved could have wider implications .

in 1948 , congress enacted the federal water pollution control act setting in motion a continuing initiative for restoring the health of america's water resources .

the act , which would evolve into the clean water act , started modestly , mandating a series of studies and limited projects .

gradually , on an ad hoc basis , the pollution abatement program became more ambitious with federal aid to states and local governments .

in 1972 , the various initiatives and requirements were drawn together in a more coherent manner .

other amendments followed .

in 1987 , the most recent amendments , congress made changes both with respect to policy and funding .

the davis - bacon act ( 1931 ) had a two - fold thrust: to promote stability within the construction industry and to protect construction workers from a downward spiral in wages and working conditions .

in 1935 , congress broadly restructured the davis - bacon act , reducing the coverage threshold from $5,000 to $2,000 and extending the scope of the act to "construction , alteration , and / or repair , including painting and decorating , of public buildings or public works" to which "the united states or the district of columbia is a party. .

gradually ( and with increasing frequency after the mid - 1950s ) , davis - bacon provisions were added to statutes in which the work was made possible through federal grants , loans , and other financial arrangements .

conflict developed early on between federal and state responsibilities .

in 1956 , congress adopted legislation ( p.l .

84-660 ) to provide for grants of "up to $50 million a year" through a 10-year period to be used for "matching grants to states and localities for construction of community sewage - treatment plants. .

president eisenhower reluctantly signed the legislation but , later , urged that the grant program be abolished .

when congress , instead , nearly doubled the size of the program , the president vetoed the legislation and his veto was sustained .

observing that "water pollution is a uniquely local blight," the president stated that "primary responsibility for solving the problem lies not with the federal government but rather must be assumed and exercised , as it has been , by state and local governments. .

through the late 1980s , members of congress continued to speak in terms of a terminating program and shifting responsibility .

p.l .

100-4 "brings the [title ii federal grant] program to an end," observed senator daniel moynihan ( d - ny ) .

the program "... will end in 1994 .

the end .

after that there is a revolving loan fund to sustain the program. .

but , federal financial involvement didn't end .

by 1991 , the beginnings of a policy shift were evident .

senators max baucus ( d - mt ) and john chafee ( r - ri ) introduced legislation ( s. 1081 ) that became , in effect , a vehicle for oversight .

senator chafee asserted that the "states have actually lost ground as the construction grants program is [being] phased out," and affirmed that "the states are starved for resources to carry out the act. .

among other things , the baucus / chafee proposal would have set back the target date for termination of the federal role in the srfs from 1995 to 1998 and , it appears , would have extended through that period applicability of the existing specific requirements under section 602 ( b ) ( 6 ) — including davis - bacon coverage ( section 513 ) .

hearings commenced on the baucus / chafee legislation in the spring of 1991 .

but , by that point , a number of things had changed .

concern with wetlands and combined sewer overflows ( csos ) and non - point source pollution had become the key issues , especially the former .

the reagan administration had given way to the bush administration and epa administrator william reilly now acknowledged a municipal pollution abatement need "into the indefinite future. .

he stated that the costs of abatement were rising and that the states and municipalities "are very often not in a position to meet the many federal requirements we are imposing. .

these problems may have overshadowed concern about prevailing wage standards except , perhaps , from the standpoint of keeping costs down .

though specific proposals were avoided for the moment , it became increasingly clear that the federal government would not be able to make a clean break from federal funding and to independent and self - sustaining srfs .

interest groups , associated with pollution abatement , began to call for more federal funding .

such calls for federal dollars were accompanied with appeals for enhanced flexibility: fewer strings , less federal control .

states , it was argued , "should be allowed to maintain the flexibility to establish priorities ... and to deploy available funds for the most pressing problem on a timely basis. .

continued capitalization by the federal government "through fy1994 and beyond ," it was asserted , "is essential. .

appeals for "increased federal funding" were coupled with pleas for relief from the "administrative burdens and regulatory roadblocks" of the l987 legislation , including the section 602 ( b ) ( 6 ) specific requirements .

in early 1992 , senator chafee reminded his colleagues that "[u]nder current law , there is to be no federal role , no additional federal dollars , after 1994. .

"that date is now in sight," he pointed out , and "... it is time to reconsider that decision .

i have come to the floor of the senate today to urge that federal support for the state revolving loan funds be continued at current levels for the foreseeable future . .

 ( italics added. ) .

the nature of a continuing federal presence was now at issue .

the baucus / chafee bill would not have terminated the federal role in construction of treatment plants .

rather , it would have created a series of new categorical grant programs to be placed under the srf umbrella .

but this , it seems , was opposed by certain state authorities hostile to the idea of "a proliferation of new federal categorical grants. .

instead , they wanted "the flexibility already available to them" in the srfs "to effectively address their highest priorities as they see them. .

since the bush administration had not yet announced a firm policy with respect to srf funding , epa administrator reilly was not then able to address the issue definitively .

the baucus / chafee bill was not marked - up .

reauthorization to provide for sustained and comprehensive cwa / srf funding did not move forward .

after 1994 , there appears to have been some ambiguity with respect to cwa's davis - bacon provision .

each side sought to have their interpretation prevail .

davis - bacon is not self - enforcing .

if an agency determines not to apply the statute , someone must take exception , move through the appeals process — and , potentially , through the courts .

it's not a simple procedure , nor is it quick .

few individuals would be in a position to take such action — nor might they be inclined to do so where wages and conditions of employment are reasonably good .

organized labor ( the building and construction trades department , afl - cio — the bctd ) will normally support a prevailing wage requirement .

conversely , some employers ( often open shop firms ) may be hostile to davis - bacon and seek to avoid its applicability or enforcement .

federal agencies , contracting for various types of construction ( and operating on tight budgets ) , may find themselves the natural allies of the contractor / employer as they seek to reduce wages ( labor costs ) .

even within an administration , there may be different perspectives among agencies on a prevailing wage requirement .

in the case of dba and srf projects , various factors come into play .

congress might have spoken with greater clarity if stalemate had not occurred with non - dba issues blocking further authorizing legislative .

but stalemate did occur: congress made no immediate cwa authorizations beyond 1994 .

similarly , changes within the congress and at the white house may have brought a shift of philosophies .

this could ( and , likely , would ) result in new policies both at dol and in epa .

conceived prior to the depression , the davis - bacon act ( 1931 ) was passed at the urging of the hoover administration .

the intent was to bring stability to the construction industry and , at the same time , to prevent construction wages from spiraling downward as part of the depression - era decline .

after the act was refined and expanded in 1935 , subsequent amendment has been largely technical — though the davis - bacon principle has been extended to more than 50 program statutes .

through more than a decade , authorization for funding of the cwa / srfs has been a matter of contention with the authorizing committees of both the house and the senate .

each time a bill has been brought up for consideration , various other factors were raised — among them , coverage under the davis - bacon act — and ultimately , the several bills died .

in the 110 th congress , there has once again been consideration of clean water bills .

almost immediately after the congress convened , the process commenced in the house .

as with prior congresses , the issue of davis - bacon remained an essential ingredient in the proceedings .

on january 19 , 2007 , the house subcommittee on water resources conducted an oversight hearing on investment in clean water infrastructures .

j. kevin ward , speaking for the council of infrastructure financing authorities ( cifa ) , did not refer to the davis - bacon act in his prepared testimony but he did urge that "more operating flexibility" be allowed for the states ( a concept sometimes associated with an anti - davis - bacon stance ) .

ward continued: "certainly states must be fully accountable for their use of federal dollars but an excessive overlay of mandates and set asides and operational requirements will only serve to stifle innovation and interfere with the ability of states to best respond to local needs .

the success of this program derives from the flexibility of the srf model...." with a view to prospective legislation of the 110 th congress , ward affirmed that there are "a number of specific program changes that we would want to see included in cwsrf reauthorization...." jim stutler , representing the national utility contractors association ( nuca ) , noted that there "are several policy issues that will no doubt be debated during the legislative process" but urged the committee "to focus on the big picture. .

stutler continued: "...the impasse over prevailing wage requirements under the davis - bacon act has stymied this legislation for too long. .

he continued: "...nuca represents both union and non - union contractors" and "davis - bacon is not an issue of contention for our members. .

on january 30 , representative james oberstar ( d - mn ) introduced h.r .

720 , the "water quality financing act of 2007. .

the bill was referred to the subcommittee on water resources and environment , marked - up and promptly forwarded to the full committee on transportation and infrastructure .

in the subcommittee ( january 31 , 2007 ) , davis - bacon again became an issue .

representative richard baker ( r - la ) , in an amendment proposed by representative thelma drake ( r - va ) , urged that the davis - bacon language be stricken .

on a voice vote , the baker / drake amendment was rejected and the davis - bacon provision was retained .

on february 7 , the house committee on transportation and infrastructure took up the sewage and wastewater measure .

in each case ( in the subcommittee and in the committee ) , there had been controversy , but it had been overcome .

the bill was approved in the full committee by a vote of 55 yeas to 13 nays .

with the davis - bacon provision intact , the bill was ordered reported .

as reported , two provisions deal with davis - bacon .

section 513 , which had applied the act broadly to treatment construction , was retained .

it required that "all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or subcontractors on treatment works for which grants are made under this act shall be paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing for the same type of work on similar construction in the immediate locality. .

that authority ( section 513 ) had long been in place .

however , a new provision was added: section 602 ( b ) ( 17 ) .

the committee report explained: "new section 602 ( b ) ( 17 ) requires the application of the davis - bacon requirements for the construction of treatment works carried out in whole or in part with assistance made available from state revolving loan funds under title vi , funds from section 205 ( m ) of the act , or both .

this amendment authorizes the application of the prevailing wage requirements to construction projects carried out with any financial assistance from the state revolving fund , whether the source of assistance originates from federal capitalization grant funds , state matching funds , repayments to the fund , interest payments , or other sources of income to the state revolving fund , and whether the character of the assistance is through loans , loan guarantees , or other types of assistance authorized by section 603 ( d ) . .

the report continued .

"by establishing the davis - bacon prevailing wage requirement for the construction of treatment works , the committee continues its long - standing practice of ensuring the application of davis - bacon where federal funds are provided for construction...." it added: "for the clean water srfs , the most significant source of revenue in the state revolving funds is the federal capitalization grant .

as congress has done in 63 separate instances for federally - funded construction , the davis - bacon act should apply to the reauthorization of the clean water srfs. .

the committee went on to discuss the varied rationale for support of the davis - bacon act: to "attract more experienced and better trained workers," workers who "are often more productive than workers with less training and experience," that davis - bacon work results often "in the completion of construction projects ahead of schedule," "reducing the overall cost of the project," and "offsetting any increased costs due to higher hourly wage rates. .

conversely , representative john mica ( r - fl ) , together with several others , suggested a strong opposition .

mr. mica stated that the bill "represents an important step forward for clean water" but "it also takes a significant step backwards by mandating and expanding upon the past application of davis - bacon act prevailing wage requirements in the srf program. .

davis - bacon , he stated , would add "to the cost of public construction" and have a disproportionate impact on "small , rural , and disadvantaged communities , which can least afford to pay the higher cost of projects. .

he stated that the act was "discriminatory" in that "[f]ew small and minority - owned firms can afford to pay the higher wages that the davis - bacon act requires .

as a result," he observed , "they are rarely awarded davis - bacon contracts , and many of them stop applying for those contracts. .

he concluded: "there is no precedent here for applying the davis - bacon act to state funds.... .

on march 9 , the "water quality financing act of 2007" was called up for debate in the house .

davis - bacon was a significant part of the discussion that followed .

in discussing the rule , representative pete sessions ( r - tx ) brought up davis - bacon coverage , stating: "... the democrat leadership is bringing legislation to the house floor that benefits big labor bosses at someone else's expense. .

sessions continued: "... in order to help big labor bosses pad their dwindling ranks , they would apply these same provisions [davis - bacon regulations] to all non - federal funds , such as loan repayments , state bond revenues , interest and state - matching funds. .

sessions objected to "this depression era wage subsidy law" and "its associated inflation" which means that local budgets cannot build "schools , hospitals , prisons , roads and other vital projects. .

he continued: "if you support fiscal responsibility , small business , states' rights , rural communities , women - and minority - owned businesses , and the environment , you will join with me in opposing this rule .

"if , however , instead , you support environmental harm , market distortion , wasteful federal spending , and stacking the deck in favor of labor bosses , i wholeheartedly encourage you to vote for this legislation. .

representative kathy castor ( d - fl ) responded that some were "...unable to criticize the heart of this legislation" ( that is , authorization for "an important part of the clean water act" ) .

thus , she suggested that the member from texas "instead reverts to attacking a portion of this legislation that is vital to workers across america , the davis - bacon provisions. .

castor noted that "it has become all too familiar from the other side of the aisle to attack workers across america. .

she then affirmed that "[i]t is our policy , in fact , it is congress's long - standing continuing tradition of applying prevailing wage requirements to federally funded construction projects .

studies have shown that by attracting more experienced , better - trained workers , that wage requirements lead to higher productivity and they reduce overall costs , which offset any higher wages. .

castor argued that davis - bacon "protects communities by ensuring that wage determination" is based "solely on the local workforce costs" — the locally prevailing wage rate .

further , she argued , with davis - bacon in place , oftentimes "projects come in under budget and on time. .

throughout floor consideration of h.r .

720 , davis - bacon was of continuing interest with members , some taking strong positions either for or against the statute .

as discussion moved on to amendments , representatives baker and steve king ( r - ia ) proposed an amendment .

king explained: "... really all this amendment does is it just stops the expansion of the davis - bacon , and it says we are not going to move this davis - bacon into a revolving fund. .

baker added with respect to davis - bacon: "it will make the compliance of the rules for rural and lower income communities much more difficult to achieve .

compliance with the davis - bacon provisions," he stated , "is a difficult and cumbersome task. .

speaking against the baker / king amendment was the chairman of the committee on transportation and infrastructure , mr. oberstar , who noted the difference between a union wage and a prevailing wage .

"this davis - bacon provision is [a] prevailing [wage] , not [a] union wage. .

oberstar added: "it is the prevailing local wage. .

on a roll - call vote , the baker / king amendment was defeated: 140 ayes to 280 noes .

thus , the davis - bacon act would apply to the srfs under the house - passed version of the water quality financing act of 2007 — whether on a first use basis or , repeatedly , throughout the program .

following discussion of other issues , the bill was adopted and was dispatched to the senate .

in the senate , on march 12 , 2007 , h.r .

720 was read and referred to the committee on environment and public works .

the bill remains in committee , no further action having been reported .

