in april 2001 budget submissions , president bush requested $882.29 million in fy2002economic and counter - narcotics assistance for colombia and regional neighbors in an initiativecalled the "andean regional initiative," with $731 million of the counter - narcotics assistance calledthe "andean counterdrug initiative. .

according to the administration , there are two distinctivefeatures of this program , compared to plan colombia assistance , ( 1 ) both of which aim to promotepeace and to stem the flow of cocaine and heroin from the andean region .

the differences are thatthe assistance for economic and social programs is roughly equal to the assistance forcounter - narcotics programs , and that more than half of the assistance is directed at regional countriesthat are experiencing the spill - over effects of illicit drug and insurgency activities .

 ( 2 ) in the presentation of the international affairs budget , the administration noted that the andean counterdrug initiative would build upon the resources provided in the fy2000 emergencysupplemental appropriations for plan colombia and ongoing regional funding .

it set ascounter - narcotics goals to reduce colombian coca production by 30% in 2000-2002 , to eliminate allillicit coca production in bolivia by the end of 2002 , to negotiate revised coca and poppy controlgoals with the new peruvian government , and to set aggressive and achievable goals by mid - august2001 with other countries in the region .

in presenting the broader andean regional initiative to andean regional leaders at summit of the americas iii in quebec city , canada , in mid - april 2001 , president bush said: "the united statesis responsible to fight its own demand for drugs .

and we will expand our efforts to work withproducer and transit countries to fortify their democratic institutions , promote sustainabledevelopment , and fight the supply of drugs at the source ... .

the united states appreciates thedifficult challenges [andean countries] face in fighting drugs - and stands ready to be their partner. .

 ( 3 ) requested ari funding of $882.29 million for fy2002 is to be distributed as follows , taking into account only international affairs funding: colombia: $399 million socio - economic aid: $146.5 million for programs such as alternativedevelopment , judicial reform , human rights , anti - corruption measures , and support for the peaceprocess .

counter - narcotics aid: $252.5 million for aviation and infrastructure supportfor air assets provided under plan colombia , training and equipping security forces , and interdictionand eradication efforts .

peru: $206.15 million socio - economic aid: $128.15 million for alternative development , promotionof democracy , health and education programs .

counter - narcotics aid: $78 million for upgrading helicopters and riverineinterdiction efforts , eradication , and demand reduction and policydevelopment .

bolivia: $143.48 million socio - economic aid: $88.48 million for programs such as alternativedevelopment , judicial reform , poverty alleviation , health and environment .

counter - narcotics aid: $55 million for ground - based and air interdictionsupport , eradication efforts , counter - narcotics training , and narcotics awareness and preventionprograms .

ecuador: $76.48 million socio - economic aid: $56.48 million for border area development , povertyreduction , judicial reform , and environmental programs .

counter - narcotics aid: $20 million for northern border security , lawenforcement and border checkpoints , and sea and airport control efforts .

brazil: $26.18 million socio - economic aid: $11.18 million for health and environmental programs .

counter - narcotics aid: $15 million for training and equipping bordercounter - narcotics forces , and for drug awareness and demand reductionprograms .

panama: $20.5 million socio - economic aid: $8.5 million for judicial reform , watershed management,and economic growth opportunities .

counter - narcotics aid: $12 million for upgrading interdiction and lawenforcement forces , and for modernizing criminal justice institutions .

venezuela: $10.5 million socio - economic aid: $0.5 million for legal and judicialreform .

counter - narcotics aid: $10 million for law enforcement and interdictionreforms , efforts to counter money - laundering , and demand reduction .

another aspect of the andean regional initiative is u.s. support for the extension and broadening of the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) , expiring in december 2001 , that givesduty free or reduced - rate treatment to the products of bolivia , peru , ecuador and colombia .

thiswas the centerpiece appeal of colombian president pastrana at his mid - april 2001 meeting with thepresident bush , and the u.s. president replied that he favored extension of the act and would workwith congress to broaden the coverage .

president bush repeated that pledge when he met withandean leaders at the summit of the americas meeting in canada .

colombia especially wantstextiles and apparel to be covered , while ecuador wants tuna to be covered .

the countries arelooking for parity with central american and caribbean preferences , provided in the u.s. - caribbeantrade partnership act approved in 2000 , in order to prevent a diversion of trade and investment fromthe andean region to mexico , central america , or the caribbean .

 ( 4 ) in a mid - may 2001 briefing on the andean regional initiative , administration spokesmen noted that democracy is under pressure in all regional countries , that economic development is indoubt , and that andean countries pose a direct national security threat because they produce virtuallyall of the world's cocaine and increasing amounts of heroin .

the policy makers suggested threeoverarching goals in the andean ridge that could be called the three d's - democracy , development,and drugs .

the first goal is to promote and support democracy and democratic institutions bysupport for judicial reform , anti - corruption measures , human rights improvement , and the peaceprocess in colombia .

the second goal is to foster sustainable economic development and tradeliberalization through alternative economic development , protection of the environment , and renewalof the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) .

the third goal is to significantly reduce the supply ofillegal drugs to the united states at the source , while simultaneously reducing u.s. demand , througheradication , interdiction and other efforts .

 ( 5 ) the administration's andean regional initiative if enacted as requested will significantly increase funding to some latin american drug producing countries .

it would place colombia , peru,and bolivia among the top eight u.s. foreign aid recipients in fy2002 , with colombia in thirdplace , peru in fifth place , and bolivia in eighth place .

 ( 6 ) critics of the andean regional initiative argue that it is a continuation of what they regard as the misguided approach of plan colombia approved in 2000 , with an overemphasis on military andcounter - drug assistance , and with inadequate support for human rights and the peace process incolombia .

they argue that support for the military will weaken and undermine the peace processas the only viable solution , particularly if the military's ties to the para - military groups and humanrights abuse are not ended .

they also argue that forced eradication of crops through aerial sprayingwill cause environmental damage and internal displacement in the entire region , and is likely to failultimately as new sources of supply emerge elsewhere .

supporters argue that the andean regionalinitiative continues needed assistance to colombia when plan colombia assistance is just beginningto take effect , while providing more support for endangered regional neighbors and more assistancefor social and economic programs .

 ( 7 ) .

the andean regional initiative is designed to provide assistance to seven important countriesin the broadly defined andean region ( 8 ) , or what theadministration has called the andean ridge: colombia ( the major producer of cocaine and the central challenge ) ; peru and bolivia ( where pastsuccesses in reducing cocaine production could be threatened by expected progress in colombia ) ; ecuador ( the most exposed neighbor because of its proximity to colombian areas controlled by drugproducers and guerrillas ) ; and brazil , venezuela and panama ( where the threat is primarily confinedto common border areas with colombia ) .

this area has some of the most heavily populated countries in latin america , including the first ( brazil ) , third ( colombia ) , fifth ( peru ) , sixth ( venezuela ) , and eighth ( ecuador ) most populous .

itincludes three major drug producing countries ( colombia , bolivia , and peru ) where virtually all theworld's cocaine , and more than two thirds of the heroin consumed in the u.s. east coast areproduced .

it also includes two major oil producing countries ( venezuela and ecuador ) which supplysignificant quantities of oil to the united states and are members of the organization of petroleumexporting countries ( opec ) .

while the designated countries have diverse trading relationships , theunited states is the major trading partner by far for all of them .

for the five traditional andeancountries ( colombia , venezuela , ecuador , peru , and bolivia ) the andes mountain range that runsthrough south america poses geographical obstacles to intra - state and inter - state integration , but thecountries are linked together in the andean community economic integration pact .

while colombiaand venezuela have largely european - indian mixed race ( mestizo ) populations , bolivia , peru , andecuador have significant indigenous populations .

source: ari reference sheet , 150 account , provided by the department of state , may 14 , 2001 .

note : for detail on plan colombia and pre - plan colombia funding , see crs report rl30541 , colombia: plan colombia legislation and assistance ( fy2000-fy2001 ) .

sources: general accounting office ( gao - 01-26 ) , department of state , congressionalbudget justification for foreign operations for fy2001 ; u.s.agency for international development budget justification for fy2001 , annex iv ; and information provided bydepartment of state and departmentof defense officials .

this chart includes direct u.s. foreign assistance ( i.e. , the categories usually counted as u.s.foreign aid , which are in italics ) , aswell as the costs of goods and services provided to colombia from other u.s. government programs supportingcounternarcotics efforts in colombia .

the united states also provides a small amount of dod excess defense articles ( eda ) to colombia .

other fundsare spent in colombia oncounternarcotics and other activities that are considered part of u.s. programs: for instance , the drug enforcementadministration ( dea ) spends its ownfunds on joint operations in colombia .

figures on fy2000 and fy2001 state department inc funding providedjanuary 10-11 , 2001 .

figures on dodsections 1004 , 124 , 1004 / 124 , and 1033 funding provided june 29 , 2001 .

dod sections 124 , 1004 , and 1033funding is taken from regional accountsand the tentative allocations for colombia can be shifted to respond to developing needs in other areas .

 ( section124 covers u.s. operated radar systemsin colombia and elsewhere , and other costs of u.s. detection and monitoring of drug flights. ) .

a fy2000 non - dod plan colombia supplemental funds were all assigned to the state department inc account ; the state department is transferring themto the other agencies carrying out programs in colombia with those funds .

the aid fy2000 and fy2001 figuresare all esf .

these aid figuresdo not include funds provided to aid from the inc account .

the following discussion of the controversy over spray eradication ( i.e.,fumigation ) of illegal coca crops in southern colombia was prepared in response tothe controversy over this effort in southern colombia .

this short synopsis of available information on the effects of fumigation of coca crops in colombia is onlymeant to provide a summary of various claims ; it is not a judgment on their validity .

in its u.s. - supported coca eradication program , the government of colombia sprays coca crops from aircraft with a mixture of the herbicide glyphosate,manufactured by the u.s. company monsanto and marketed as "roundup," and twoadditives or "adjuvants. .

 ( 15 ) according to the statedepartment ( in its report ofjanuary 23 , 2001 , submitted to congress consistent with the provisions of thestatement of managers accompanying title iii , chapter 2 of the emergencysupplemental appropriations act .

p.l .

106-246 , which provided funding for plancolombia ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has found that "the use ofglyphosate , as labeled for use in the u.s. , is acceptable provided that the regulatorycontrols required by the epa - the labeled instructions - are followed. .

the statedepartment also claims that the ingredients in the two additives ( cosmoflux - 411f , a surfactant , and cosmo - in - d , an anti - foaming additive ( 16 ) ) , bothproduced in colombia , are on an epa list of acceptable chemicals "for use on foodcrops when the label instructions are followed. .

this report states an epa review of "adequate scientific studies" shows that when properly used glyphosate "will notcause adverse effects in humans," and "does not cause risks of concern for birthdefects , mutagenic effects , neurotoxic effects , reproductive problems , or cancer. .

itdoes , however , state that "splashes" of glyphosate "can cause transient irritation toskin and eyes,"although at the same level of irritation as baby shampoo according toone cited study .

for its conclusion that there are "no grounds to suggest concern forhuman health" from the spray mixture used in colombia , the state department citeda recent study published in regulatory toxicology and pharmacology .

 ( 17 ) since spraying began in december 2000 in colombia's putumayo province ( where it is now indefinitely suspended ) , however , there have been many allegationsthat the spray mixture has caused extensive harm to humans , other crops , andlivestock .

the ill health effects on thousands of children and adults most commonlyreported in the areas of putumayo fumigation include fever , eye and gastrointestinalirritation , and skin and bronchial irritation and infections .

there have also beenallegations of increased incidence of brain damage in children in these areas sincefumigation was started .

in addition , critics claim , many crops other than coca havebeen sprayed , depriving peasants of food crops and other sources of income , andlivestock reportedly have suffered ill effects , including hair loss in cattle frommoderate exposure , abortion among pregnant cows ( possibly due , one source notes,from stampedes caused by the noise of overhead helicopters ) and the death of fowlfrom spraying or drinking contaminated water .

 ( the effects on livestock and fowlare taken from the "counter - fact sheet" of february 9 , 2001 , prepared by acciã³nandina , which is a non - governmental organization , and posted online at http: / / usfumigation.org / literature / factsheets / contrados / aa - ips - rapal%20fact%20sheet%20-english.htm . ) .

supporters of aerial fumigation , however , state that negative health and environmental effects can be attributed to drug producersthemselves , whom , they claim , also use roundup to suppress weeds around cocabushes , and who pollute colombian rivers with chemicals used in processing andrefining coca into cocaine in their drug labs .

some u.s. officials assert that many of the complaints come from those with an interest in continuing coca production , especially as aerial spraying of coca crops hastaken place for many years in other areas of colombia without the outcry that thespraying in putumayo has produced .

however , according to a washington post article of january 7 , 2001 , about the spraying in putumayo: "until recently , sprayingfocused almost entirely on remote industrial - sized coca and poppy plantations....nowthe planes are targeting more populous farming areas ... where coca ... is often grownside by side with corn , yucca , pineapple and livestock .

often it shares a plot next tothe farmer's tin - roofed shack. .

 ( "aerial attack killing more than coca," by scottwilson. ) .

regarding crop damage , the post reporter stated that his "inspection offields in the area suggested that food crops have been hit at least as hard as coca. .

critics have attributed food crop damage to the side - by - side plantings of legal andillegal crops in putumayo , but also charge that spray planes fly higher than normal for crop dusting operations elsewhere in order to avoid ground fire , and underunacceptable wind conditions , thus leading to the dispersion of spray beyondintended targets .

 ( 18 ) some analysts , however , have noted that complaints of ill effects to humans and animals may not be entirely inconsistent with state department assertions of safetyunder controlled circumstances as the health and environmental effects could varydepending on the exact formulation of the spray mix , the manner of its application,and the conditions under which it was used .

some critics have argued that roundupis not being applied in a manner consistent with u.s. usages and with themanufacturer's recommendations , and that not all issues related to ingredients usedin the mixture applied in colombia have been explored .

the world wildlife fund , in an october 30 , 2000 statement , "comments on glyphosate," states that existing studies "may not be adequate toassess the impacts resulting from plan colombia's actual use of glyphosate ( aerialapplications , product formulation , frequency and rate of application , etc .

 ) , especiallygiven the soils , topography , climatic conditions ( temperature , rainfall , etc. ) .

plant andanimal species found in colombia. .

 ( available online from the wwf at: http: / / www.ciponline.org / colombia / 103001.htm ) .

in a february 9 , 2001 statement calling for the end of aerial eradication , representatives of three non - governmental organizations claimed that"there is evidence that herbicide concentrations much higher than ones recommendedare being applied in colombia" and that "there are no toxicological studies ...regarding the effects of mixing the cosmoflux - 4111f surfactant with pesticides. .

 ( 19 ) the statement also noted that roundup ultra ( which opponents say is the actualvariety of roundup being used in colombia , although the state department reportcited above does not refer to either trade name ) "contains other ingredients besidesglyphosate and the two adjuvants. .

the world wildlife fund , in the october 2000statement cited above , found that studies on the effects of roundup "focus on thepesticide active ingredient alone , not the combination of inert ingredients actuallyapplied , thereby giving an incomplete assessment of the toxic threat," and assertedthat "the inert ingredients mixed with the roundup to increase its effectiveness canbe as , or more , toxic to humans , wildlife and foodwebs than the pesticide itself. .

themonsanto website states that the "new ingredients" in roundup ultra are on an epaapproved list ( #4b ) , but the specific "new" ingredients are notnamed .

an analysis by agronomist elsa nivia , identified as associated with the non - governmental red de acciã³n en plaguicidas y alternativas - amã©ricalatina , rap - al .

pan - colombia ( pesticide action network ) , claims that the aerialfumigation of illegal crops in colombia with roundup is "very different from therecommended agricultural use in the united states," citing the concentration as 26times greater than that recommended , with negative effects intensified by the use ofcosmoflux 411f .

even though the authors of the report cited by the statedepartment had found glyphosate and roundup to be at most mildly toxic , ms.nivia's conclusion from their discussion of the effects of accidental and occupationalexposures to higher concentrations , and of the doses that proved lethal in peopleattempting suicide , is that higher than recommended concentrations or applicationscould help to explain the severe ill effects reported in the fumigated areas .

 ( see lasfumigaciones aã©reas sobre cultivos ilã­citos si son peligrosas - algunasaproximaciones , by elsa nivia .

paper given at a conference on the wars incolombia: drugs , guns and oil , held at the university of california at davis , may17-19 , 2001 , accessible through http: / / www.usfumigation.org . ) .

the state department is funding a study , with design assistance supplied by the center for disease control ( cdc ) and the epa , of the health effects of aerialeradication in putumayo department .

results are anticipated by late 2001 .

source: office of the secretary of state .

international affairs function 150 fiscal year 2003 budget request summary and highlights .

february 2002 .

the ari does not include international military education and training ( imet ) funds .

these will range in fy2002from an estimated $170,000 forpanama to an estimated $1,180,000 for colombia .

prepared by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in internationalsecurity affairs , crs , february 12 , 2002 .

* the ari for fy2002 also did not include foreign military finance funding ( fmf ) .

the small amount for bolivia is included here , even though it wasnot specifically for counternarcotics purposes , in order to facilitate comparisons with the fy2003 request , whichincludes fmf for andean regionalinitiative countries .

**na = not available .

a breakdown by purpose is not available for brazil , panama and venezuela as the inlfigures for those countries was not brokendown by purpose .

source: office of the secretary of state , resources , plans and policy .

international affairs function 150 summary and highlights , fiscal year 2003budget request .

the ari totals do not include international military education and training funds , which rangein the fy2003 request from $200,000for panama to $1,180,000 for colombia .

prepared by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in international security affairs,february 12 , 2002 .

* includes funds previously cited under child survival and diseases .

