in february 2002 , controversy erupted over the bush administration's proposal , which congress accepted , to not request renewal of the superfund taxes in its fy2003 budget submission —a decision repeated in each subsequent budget proposal ( fy2004-fy2009 ) .

the tax authority expired in 1995 , but the fund's balance remained positive until fy2003 .

although several members of congress have introduced bills to reinstate the taxes during these years , such efforts have lacked the necessary support .

the superfund trust fund is used to clean up sites contaminated by releases of hazardous substances .

without dedicated taxes , and with a relatively small balance in the trust fund , congress has been using general revenues for a larger percentage of cleanup funds .

this report reviews income sources for the fund , provides superfund program funding estimates for fy2009 , and discusses whether this funding will be adequate to meet projected program needs .

the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ) , which was greatly expanded by the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara , p.l .

99-499 ) , created the superfund program to clean up the nation's worst hazardous waste sites and directed the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to prepare a national priorities list ( npl ) to identify sites that present the greatest risk to human health and the environment .

the superfund account in epa's budget funds the agency's efforts to remove contamination that presents an immediate risk and to remediate contamination for which there is a potential pathway of exposure .

although federal facilities are subject to cercla provisions , the costs of remediation at federal facilities are paid by the federal agency that caused the contamination , rather than out of the superfund account .

in a majority of cases , superfund cleanups are paid for by potentially responsible parties ( prps ) —usually current or previous owners / operators of the site .

according to epa , prps conduct cleanup at more than 70% of the sites on the npl .

at approximately 30% of the npl sites , either epa cannot locate prps for these properties , or the prps located do not have the necessary financial resources to assist with cleanup .

it is primarily at this group of npl sites that epa uses funds from the trust fund to conduct cleanup activities .

the superfund funding debate—that is , whether the trust fund should be supported by a dedicated tax or general treasury revenues—applies to this subset of npl sites .

the trust fund has had several sources of revenue over the years , the most important being dedicated taxes on petroleum , chemical feedstocks , and corporate income .

the taxes on petroleum ( 9.7 cents per barrel ) and on chemical feedstocks and imported chemical derivatives ( varying amounts , depending on the chemical ) were based on the assumption that many of the hazardous substances to be cleaned up were derived from these sources .

the third tax ( referred to as the corporate environmental income tax ) , pegged at 0.12% of corporate income in excess of $2 million , was meant to raise funds from a wide range of companies that may have used and disposed of hazardous substances .

proponents of the superfund taxes argue that the taxes are justified based on the "polluter pays" principle .

both the bush administration and its critics say they support the "polluter pays" principle , but they mean different things when using that phrase .

when administration spokespersons support "polluter pays," they mean cleanup funded by responsible parties at sites where such parties have been identified as owners , operators , or contributors of the waste requiring cleanup .

from this perspective , "polluters" would not include industrial sectors or corporations that may not have contributed directly to a specific site's contamination .

the administration's critics use the "polluter pays" term in a broader sense , however , to mean that the tax money that is used to clean up the other 30% of the sites should come from industries that profited from the sale or use of the chemicals being cleaned up , but who may not be directly related to a particular release of a hazardous substance .

thus , they support resumption of the dedicated taxes on petroleum and chemical feedstocks as well as the corporate environmental income tax , arguing that this approach is more appropriate than funding the trust fund through general treasury revenues .

lesser sources of income to the fund have included interest on the fund's balance ( which is invested in government securities until expended ) ; cost recoveries from prps ; reimbursements to epa from other federal agencies for emergency removal activities ; and collection of fines and penalties .

funds from general treasury revenues have also contributed to the superfund program to some degree , including years when the tax was active .

table 1 shows the sources of revenue to the fund from 1991 to 1995 ( the last five years before the taxes expired ) .

the three dedicated taxes provided an average of $1.45 billion per year , 65.8% of total revenues during the period .

the taxes generated nearly four times as much as the contribution from general revenues , which averaged $369 million per year , or 16.8% of total superfund revenues during the period .

the remainder of the fund's income came from interest on investments ( $200 million per year ) and cost recoveries ( $180 million per year ) .

the taxes that supported the trust fund expired at the end of 1995 .

the republican leadership , notably the chairman of the house ways and means committee during the 104 th through 106 th congresses , opposed reinstating the taxes except as part of a comprehensive cercla reauthorization that would remove or modify superfund's liability provisions .

no consensus was reached on reauthorization , and the taxes were not reinstated .

when the taxes expired , the office of management and budget ( omb ) reported that the fund had an unobligated balance of nearly $4 billion and , even after expiration of the taxes , money continued to be added to it from interest payments , cost recoveries , and other sources .

thus , the lapse in taxing authority initially had little effect on the ability to fund the program .

the clinton administration requested reinstatement of the taxes annually in its budget submission , but congress took no action on these requests .

congress continued to fund the program through a combination of the existing unobligated trust fund balance and general revenues .

to make the fund last longer , the contribution of general revenues to the annual appropriation was increased from $250 million annually in fy1993 to fy1998 to $634 to $700 million in fy2000 to fy2002 .

the bush administration requested $700 million from general revenues in fy2003 and $1.1 billion in fy2004 .

in fy2005 , the entire appropriation ( $1.25 billion ) came from general revenues .

although the superfund starting balance has improved in recent years , the vast majority of the annual appropriations continued to come from general revenues .

in fy2006 and fy2007 , the beginning year balance was $95 million and $178 million , respectively .

omb estimated that the fy2008 starting balance was $273 million ; the fy2009 balance is projected to be $176 million .

regardless , general revenues remain as the primary source of program funding for both fy2008 and fy2009 .

in recent years , attention has focused on the dwindling amount of unobligated funds in the superfund trust fund .

as shown in figure 1 , this balance began a steady decline starting in fy1998 .

by the end of fy2001 , the fund's unobligated balance had declined to $860 million .

the president's fy2003 and fy2004 budgets projected further declines , to $427 million at the end of fy2002 and to $159 million at the end of fy2003 .

these numbers were revised in the fy2005 budget submission ( and in figure 1 ) to reflect actual cost recoveries and other transactions in fy2002 and fy2003 .

the actual amounts show a balance of $564 million at the beginning of fy2003 and a zero balance at the beginning of both fy2004 and fy2005 .

although fy2005 started with a zero balance , it ended with $97 million in the account , creating a starting balance of $97 million in fy2006 .

this trend has continued in recent years: fy2007 started with a balance of $178 million ; omb estimated that fy2008 and fy2009 will begin with $273 million and $176 million , respectively .

however , these starting balances do not approach the balances that existed when the trust fund was supplied mainly by the superfund taxes .

based on omb estimates of starting balances in fy2008 and fy2009 , general treasury revenues will continue to supply the vast majority of the program needs .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) produces annual estimates of the superfund trust fund's starting and ending fiscal year balances and revenue from its funding sources .

omb includes these estimates in the appendix to the annual budget of the united states government ( hereafter referred to as the president's budget request for a particular fiscal year ) .

as shown in the annual budget request , funds that contribute to the trust fund fall into five categories: ( 1 ) corporate income taxes , ( 2 ) interfund transactions , ( 3 ) cost recoveries , ( 4 ) interest and profits on investments , and ( 5 ) fines and penalties .

as discussed above , the corporate income taxes category , originally a dedicated source of program revenue , expired at the end of 1995 .

therefore , this category is listed at zero .

the next category , interfund transactions , represents the estimated contribution from general treasury revenues , which is a function of both the level of congressional appropriation and the trust fund's fiscal year starting balance .

similar to recent years , the administration's fy2009 budget request proposed $1.26 billion for the superfund appropriation to consist of "sums available in the trust fund on september 30 , 2008" ( i.e. , the end of fy2008 , therefore the fy2009 starting balance ) and "up to [$1.26 billion] as a payment from general revenues," if the trust fund balance is not sufficient to fund the total appropriation .

therefore , any remaining balance from fy2008 would go toward the fy2009 appropriation , and general treasury revenues would fund the remainder of the appropriation , up to the maximum level enacted by congress .

the other three fund categories—cost recoveries , interest and profits , and fines and penalties—help generate the end - of - year balance that is used in the next fiscal year .

cost recoveries represent payments to the fund from potentially responsible parties to reimburse the government for cleanup expenditures at sites for which these private parties are legally responsible .

recoveries vary from year to year ; projecting them in advance is difficult and may have a larger potential margin of error than other categories of revenue .

during the six - year period of fiscal years 1997-2002 , they averaged $272 million per year , but they declined steadily from $147 million in fy2003 to $60 million in fy2006 .

although fy2007 saw recoveries of $234 million , omb estimated recoveries of $76 million for both fy2008 and fy2009 .

like other government trust funds , the superfund trust fund earns interest on its current balance until the money is actually expended .

expenditures can lag obligations by several years , so there can be a substantial difference between the unexpended and unobligated balances in the fund .

the unexpended superfund balance was estimated at $2.9 billion at the beginning of fy2008 .

due to the size of the unexpended balance , the fund is still earning substantial amounts of interest .

according to the president's fy2009 budget request , omb estimated $151 million in interest earned for fy2008 and $125 million for fy2009 .

these projections assume an interest rate that is historically low .

if interest rates are higher than omb expects , interest earned on the unobligated balance would be higher .

fines and penalties have generally contributed only a minor portion to the superfund trust fund .

epa collected $1 million in fy2007 , and omb forecasts $2 million in fines and penalties for both fy2008 and fy2009 .

the administration requested a $10 million increase in program funding for fy2009: $1.26 billion compared with the $1.25 billion appropriated in fy2008 .

omb estimated that of the total fy2009 appropriation , $1.09 billion would come from general treasury revenues in fy2009 .

if the appropriation language were enacted as proposed , the actual amount of general treasury revenues would depend on the fund's starting balance and the appropriation ceiling enacted by congress .

regardless , the vast majority of the fy2009 appropriation would come from general treasury revenues .

to estimate general revenue funding needs for superfund in 2008 and later years , it is first necessary to identify future program needs .

in july 2001 , resources for the future ( rff ) , as directed by congress in the fy2000 va - hud - independent agencies appropriation ( p.l .

106-74 ) conference report , released a comprehensive study to congress identifying those needs and projecting future costs for fiscal years 2000-2009 .

the study looked at all major elements of the superfund program , including the removal program ( for emergency and short - term cleanups ) ; the remedial program ( long - term cleanup ) ; site assessment activities ; program staff , management , and support costs ; program administration ; and superfund - related work of other programs and agencies .

the authors developed alternative scenarios for estimating the number , type , and cost of sites likely to be added to the program in coming years .

rff estimated the fy2009 program needs to be $1.6 billion .

this was the report's "base case"—described as "our best judgement of the future cost of the superfund program , given the full body of our research , analyses , and interviews. .

the report also estimated a high and low case , to reflect uncertainties about the factors used in their cost models .

the low estimate for fy2009 was $1.4 billion ; the high estimate was $1.8 billion .

there are at least three factors contributing to rff's increased need projections .

first , the fund's unobligated balance , which remained relatively high ( see figure 1 ) during the years of superfund taxes ( and the two fiscal years following the tax expiration ) , has decreased steadily since fy1997 , reaching zero at the end of fy2003 .

as discussed earlier , the current sources of the balance—cost recoveries , interest , and fees—provided significantly less funding support than the superfund taxes .

second , the amounts needed for cleanup were projected to increase beginning in fy2002 , as numerous "mega sites" moved beyond the analysis and design phases and into actual construction of remedies .

although mega sites are generally classified as sites with a projected cleanup cost of $50 million or more , rff projected the average cost at mega sites to be $140 million .

in the rff analysis , the cost of remedial action was projected to remain above historic levels through fy2007 , and the cost of the superfund program as a whole was projected to remain above fy2001 levels through at least fy2009 .

third , epa's office of inspector general ( ig ) highlighted the concern that hardrock mining sites may have a significant financial impact on the trust fund .

the ig identified "156 hardrock mining sites nationwide that have the potential to cost between $7 billion and $24 billion to cleanup. .

although the ig points out there is uncertainty regarding the risks to human health and the environment at these sites , there is also uncertainty concerning prps and their ability to pay for cleanup .

evidence from prior years indicates that in fy2002 through fy2004 , cleanup was delayed at numerous sites because of a lack of funds .

according to a report from the epa ig , "epa obligated a total of $320 million" to remedial action construction activities in fy2002 , "a difference of $97 million from the regions' total need of $417 million. .

the ig report identified seven sites for which the regions requested construction funding but got none , and five other sites that together received only $15 million of the $38 million requested .

in addition , the agency obligated only $43 million of the $60 million requested for long - term response actions at sites where construction was complete but a need for continuing treatment activities ( most likely for ground water ) remained .

in fy2003 , the remedial action program was $175 million short of the regions' total needs , according to the ig .

the ig identified an additional 11 sites that could not begin construction because of a funding shortfall , and at least five other sites that did not receive their full funding request in that year .

although the ig did not report on the subject in fy2004 , a survey of epa staff by the house energy and commerce committee democratic staff found a reported shortfall of $263.1 million .

epa challenged some of the committee data , but it confirmed in letters to house and senate democrats that it did not start construction at 19 sites that were ready for construction in fy2004 because of a lack of funding .

congress could increase appropriation levels , in order to meet the increased funding needs , such as those identified by rff .

the administration noted that it requested increases in funding in both its fy2004 request for $1.39 billion and its fy2005 request for $1.38 billion , which congress did not provide .

congress cut the fy2004 and fy2005 requests by $132 million and $134 million , respectively .

in fact , between fy2004 and fy2007 , the president's superfund budget proposals exceeded the annual amount that was subsequently appropriated by congress .

this trend halted in fy2008: congress appropriated $9 million more than was requested by the administration .

given rff's projected funding needs for the superfund program and the relatively minimal amounts available to the fund from sources other than general revenues , congress will face competing interests if it attempts to appropriate all of superfund's needs .

rff estimates that general treasury revenue contributions as high as $1.5 billion per year would be needed to finance superfund through the rest of the decade in the continued absence of superfund taxes .

this could prove difficult in light of current interest in deficit reduction .

the adequacy of funding for superfund and whether to reinstate the superfund taxes have generated substantial debate in recent years .

in the past two congresses , members introduced several bills or amendments that sought to increase superfund funding or reinstate the superfund tax .

interest in these issues will likely continue in the 110 th congress .

during a briefing for reporters on june 8 , 2005 , epa administrator stephen l. johnson said that he opposed reimposing the tax on the chemical industry that was formerly used to fund the trust fund .

instead , johnson said he will seek to fund additional cleanups through "additional efficiency to be gained in the program. .

johnson stated he will "keep the focus on responsible parties," noting that these are who should pay , "not the taxpayers. .

