drinking water and wastewater treatment systems treat and safeguard the nation's water resources .

drinking water utilities supply safe potable water to customers in both the proper quantity and quality .

wastewater utilities operate facilities that clean the flow of used water from a community .

the federal government has had significant involvement with these systems for many years , both through setting standards to protect public health and the environment and through funding to assist them in meeting standards .

while funding of water infrastructure programs has been addressed annually through the congressional appropriations process , authorizing legislation affecting policy and program issues was last enacted in 1996 ( for drinking water infrastructure ) and 1987 ( for wastewater infrastructure ) .

more recently , water infrastructure issues have been receiving increased attention by policymakers and legislators .

the renewed attention is due to a combination of several factors .

meeting regulatory requirements .

financial impacts of meeting regulatory requirements — some new , some long - standing — are a continuing issue for many communities .

in the case of drinking water systems , the most pressing rules are the result of standard - setting by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to implement the safe drinking water act amendments of 1996 and to update older standards .

these rules impose new or stricter drinking water limits on numerous contaminants , including arsenic , radioactive contaminants , microbials , and disinfection byproducts , among others .

additional rules for previously unregulated contaminants , such as perchlorate and radon , are pending .

for wastewater systems , principal regulatory requirements mandated by the clean water act have not changed since 1972 , and the majority of communities have achieved or are in the process of achieving compliance .

the newer issue for wastewater systems is the cost of controls and practices to manage what are termed wet weather pollution problems , such as urban stormwater runoff and overflows from municipal sewers .

these requirements are old in the sense that most wastewater utilities have not addressed long - standing wet weather problems , but they also are new because in many communities , specific measures and how to pay for them are only now being identified .

financing repair or replacement .

a more recent focus by stakeholders is on the need to repair and replace infrastructure that has been in place for decades and will soon fail , many believe .

according to the american water works association ( awwa ) , "we stand at the dawn of the replacement era ... replacement needs are large and on the way .

there will be a growing conflict between the need to replace worn - out infrastructure and the need to invest in compliance with new regulatory standards. .

over the long term , these stakeholders say , a higher level of investment than is occurring today is required .

for both wastewater and drinking water systems , a key concern is that epa's funding programs , the largest sources of federal assistance , do not , in the main , support repair and replacement ; their focus is upgrades and new construction needed to achieve wastewater and drinking water standards .

security .

beyond the traditional infrastructure needs related to regulatory compliance and system repair and expansion , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , generated new investment needs for drinking water and wastewater systems .

the national costs of addressing water and wastewater security needs have not been well quantified .

in 2002 , the awwa estimated that municipal water systems would have to spend more than $1.6 billion just to ensure control of access to critical water system assets .

this estimate did not include the capital costs of upgrades to address vulnerabilities that water system managers have identified in vulnerability assessments , or the costs facing wastewater systems and smaller drinking water systems .

epa's 2009 report on public water system infrastructure needs included $422.0 million for projects to address security needs .

epa concluded that security - related needs were underestimated , as many water systems incorporate these costs into the costs of broader construction projects rather than report them separately .

although epa has identified a range of security measures that are eligible for funding through traditional infrastructure assistance programs , competition already is severe for these funds , which are primarily used for projects needed to meet regulatory requirements .

problems that do not fit existing solutions .

some interest groups argue that traditional federal programs and financing approaches do not fit well with some current types of needs .

points at issue vary , but the common thread is that certain needs are not being well met by programmatic solutions that now exist .

in some cases ( metropolitan drinking water systems , for example ) , there is a perception that epa's programs are more geared to aiding small systems than large ones .

in other cases , the concern is how to fund projects with mixed elements ( eg , developing new community water supplies and treating that water , especially in rural areas ) that do not meet traditional program definitions , or are seemingly spread across jurisdictions of multiple federal agencies .

still others believe that expanding program eligibility to include water conservation or "green infrastructure" projects could reduce overall needs for capital investment .

another concern arises in small , dispersed communities where on - site treatment systems may be preferable to centralized facilities ; however , on - site treatment generally is not eligible for federal aid .

at issue for congress is whether to modify existing programs to address such problems , or to address them in legislation individually and case - by - case .

other legislative models and activity .

legislative approaches for other types of infrastructure — especially surface transportation and aviation — have suggested possible new models for water infrastructure financing .

the federal highway and mass transit and aviation programs generally are supported by trust funds derived from fees and taxes paid by users of those systems and facilities .

some proponents of water infrastructure spending , concerned about a gap between needs and available funds , believe that a federal water trust fund could supplement existing federal resources .

however , unlike surface transportation and aviation , there is no comparable dedicated trust fund for water infrastructure , or easily identifiable revenue source for such a fund .

other possible new sources of assistance also have recently been discussed , including a national infrastructure bank or a program of federal assistance similar to the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program .

who should pay .

every level of government is facing tremendous budgetary pressures to reduce spending while still funding priorities .

historically , federal programs provided much of the support for local water infrastructure projects , but that role has changed , particularly as a result of shifting of federal programs from grants to loans , but also due to declining federal resources .

at issue is what role can the federal government play in local project financing , and what should the federal role be in setting and supporting local priorities .

this report identifies a number of issues receiving attention in connection with water infrastructure .

it begins with a brief review of federal involvement , describes the debate about funding needs , and then examines key issues , including what is the nature of the problems to be solved ; who will pay , and what is the federal role ; and questions about mechanisms for delivering federal support , including state - by - state allotment .

recent congressional and administration activity on these issues also is briefly reviewed .

the federal government has a lengthy history of involvement with wastewater and drinking water systems .

the history of financial assistance is longer for wastewater than for drinking water , however .

epa has the most significant role , both in terms of regulation and funding .

some of the factors that have led to increased attention to water infrastructure reflect long - standing concerns ( for example , how cities will meet federal regulatory requirements ) , while others are more recent ( such as analyses of broader funding needs , including maintenance and repair of older systems ) .

a number of interest groups — many with long - standing involvement , as well as new groups and coalitions — have assisted in bringing attention to these issues .

one such group is the water infrastructure network ( win ) , a coalition of state , municipal , environmental , professional , and labor groups organized in 1999 .

two win reports on funding needs and policy have received considerable attention .

in 2000 , win issued a report estimating a $24.7 billion average annual investment gap for the next 20 years for municipal wastewater and drinking water systems to address new problems and system deterioration .

over the 20-year period , according to win's analysis , $940 billion is required for wastewater and drinking water investments , and more than $1 trillion in o&m spending is required .

a second win report , issued in 2001 , recommended a multibillion dollar investment program in water infrastructure .

win's initiatives are now more than a decade old , and their reports have not been updated , but the group's members continue to advocate for expanded infrastructure investments .

an alternative view on infrastructure investments is reflected by companies in the private water industry , including the national association of water companies , and the national council for public - private partnerships .

these groups support continued funding for the drinking water and clean water srf programs , but they also advocate policies to encourage greater private sector participation in water infrastructure projects , such as making clean water srf funding available to private entities ( as is the case with drinking water srf funding ) and eliminating restrictions in federal tax law ( see " federal funds for private infrastructure systems " ) .

traditionally , setting priorities for infrastructure spending is based on a combination of factors .

estimates of funding needs are one factor that is commonly used as a measure of the dimension of a problem and to support spending on some activities relative to others , as in: funding needs for x are much greater than for y , therefore , society should spend more heavily on x .

in the infrastructure context , funding needs estimates try to identify the level of investment that is required to meet a defined level of quality or service .

essentially , this depiction of need is an engineering concept .

it differs from economists' conception that the appropriate level of new infrastructure investment , or the optimal stock of public capital ( infrastructure ) for society , is determined by calculating the amount of infrastructure for which social marginal benefits just equal marginal costs .

one of the major difficulties in any needs assessment is defining what constitutes a "need," a relative concept that is likely to generate a good deal of disagreement .

for this reason , some needs assessments are anchored to a benchmark , such as current provision in terms of physical condition and / or performance .

this current level of provision may be judged to be too high by some and too low by others , but nonetheless it provides a basis for comparison , as future spending needs can be estimated in terms of maintaining or improving the current condition and performance of the infrastructure system .

in some cases , estimates are intended to identify needs for categories of projects that are eligible for assistance under various federal programs .

by being defined in that manner , assessments based solely on funding eligibility may not take into consideration needs for non - eligible categories , such as replacement of aging infrastructure or projects to enhance security .

some federal agencies estimate the funding necessary to bring the current infrastructure system to a state of good repair .

the resulting funding estimate is sometimes referred to as the infrastructure "backlog. .

again , among other problems , such as inventorying the current condition of infrastructure and calculating repair costs , the needs estimate is affected by judgments about what constitutes a state of good repair .

while estimates of funding needs have become one focal point for discussion , some argue that trying to focus on precise needs estimates is not as important as recognizing the general need .

for example , cbo's reports and epa's gap analysis caution that projections of future costs associated with water infrastructure are highly uncertain and could lie outside of the ranges that they present .

different assumptions could increase or decrease the results .

cbo explained this point in 2003: because available data are limited , the agencies must use many assumptions to develop their projections , and the 20-year projection window provides ample opportunity for unforeseen developments to influence costs .

data limitations make it impossible for the agencies to know even baseline investment costs with certainty .

as is evident from their analyses of various investment scenarios , cbo and epa believe that funding gaps are not inevitable , if other steps are taken .

both emphasize that funding gaps occur only if capital and o&m spending remain unchanged from present levels .

future spending and other measures that systems could adopt to reduce both types of costs , such as asset management processes , could significantly alter estimates of future needs .

how a gap would be filled raises a number of other issues .

whether water infrastructure needs over the next 20 years are $200 billion or $1 trillion , they are potentially very large , and the federal government is unlikely to provide 100% of the amount .

questions at issue include what is the precise problem to be solved ; who will pay , and what is the federal role in that process ; and how to deliver federal support .

momentum in congress to consider the issues discussed in this report has grown since the 107 th congress , partly in response to urgings of stakeholder groups , but no legislation other than appropriations has been enacted .

during this period , the administration has promoted a number of steps to ensure that investment needs are met in an efficient , timely , and equitable manner .

the preceding discussion identifies a number of issues that congress , the administration , and stakeholders have been debating regarding water infrastructure needs and concerns , many of which are the subject of advocates' recommendations and policy positions .

in addition , recently some have begun to address the long term challenge of actually paying for the larger financial commitment that many of them seek and , in particular , of identifying alternatives to finance a larger , sustained federal role .

while some may wish to fund a larger amount of federal spending for water infrastructure entirely out of general revenues in the u.s. treasury , such proposals have faced numerous hurdles and competition with many other government priorities .

thus , several questions arise: if a substantial financing gap exists that cannot be met by improved efficiencies or local revenue enhancement , and if a larger federal financial role is determined to be appropriate , where would that money come from ? .

are there alternative revenue sources that could be identified to support increased federal involvement ? .

some analytic work has been done on these questions in the past , including research by academics and interest groups .

epa has contributed analysis in various ways , including a study requested by congress in the mid - 1990s that examined financial mechanisms to enhance the capability of governments to fund mandated environmental goals .

in addition , the epa's environmental finance advisory board has developed various publications , including a guidebook of financial tools , which provides a comprehensive review of financing mechanisms , and related tools that may help communities pay for environmental projects and lower compliance costs .

still , with funding needs believed to be so high and federal funding limited , some interest groups have been exploring other options .

consensus exists among many stakeholders — state and local governments ; equipment manufacturers , construction companies , and engineers ; and environmental advocates — on the need for more investment in water infrastructure .

many in these varied groups support one or more options for doing so , ranging from water - related fees that could be dedicated to water infrastructure , or some sort of new federal credit assistance program such as a national infrastructure bank .

increased public / private partnerships are advocated by some , and other options also may merit exploration .

there is no consensus supporting a preferred option or policy , and many advocate a combination that will expand the financing "toolbox" for projects .

most agree that there is no single method or "silver bullet" that will address needs fully or close the financing gap completely .

at least for the near term , communities will continue to rely on the srf programs , tax - exempt governmental bonds , and available tax - exempt private activity bonds to finance their water infrastructure needs .

the 112 th congress focused extensively on cutting federal spending , and this emphasis is expected to continue in the 113 th congress .

unclear for now is whether such actions will be applied to infrastructure programs equally with others , or whether infrastructure investments will be perceived as supporting economic activity by increasing the capital stock and raising productivity and thus be protected from major reductions , or even be provided with greater federal resources .

