there are two basic antitrust laws in the united states — the sherman act and the clayton act ; both are enforceable either by the antitrust division of the department of justice , the federal trade commission or private persons alleging economic injury caused by violation of either of them .

in addition , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) act and the robinson - patman act may also be utilized by the commission and private persons ( only the commission , however — i.e. , neither the antitrust division nor private persons — may enforce the ftc act ) .

together , they spell out the conduct and activities prohibited in economic , market transactions .

there are also some statutes directed to specific industries or types of transactions which indicate the likely antitrust consequences for economic conduct in those areas .

this report briefly summarizes ( 1 ) the primary united states antitrust statutes , and ( 2 ) some of the activities which are generally considered to be violations of those laws .

there is also some reference to the prohibition against unfair competition and the "unfairness" jurisdiction of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

there is not , however , any discussion of the extraterritorial reach of the united states antitrust laws ( save the cursory material in footnote 4 ) , a subject which is beyond the scope of this brief report .

further , the laws whose descriptions follow do not constitute all of the statutes which may be applicable to , or implicated in antitrust issues , but rather , are those which are most often utilized .

in reading the information presented , readers should bear in mind that the antitrust laws are concerned with the functioning of the marketplace — i.e .

competition and not the protection of any individual competitor .

per se offenses are those for which there is no justification .

as the supreme court has expressed it: ... there are certain agreements or practices which because of their pernicious effect on competition and lack of any redeeming virtue are conclusively presumed to be unreasonable and therefore illegal without elaborate inquiry as to the precise harm they have caused or the business excuse for their use .

the kinds of activities which are most generally found to be per se antitrust offenses , and are most likely to be criminally prosecuted , include: 1 .

horizontal price fixing 2 .

vertical price fixing ( sometimes referred to as "resale pricemaintenance" ) 3 .

bid rigging 4 .

market division ( customer or territorial allocation ) 5 .

boycotts ( concerted refusals to deal ) 6 .

tying arrangements ( "if you want x , you must also take y" ) all of the per se offenses , as concerted activity in restraint of trade , are violations of section 1 of the sherman act .

any antitrust - violative conduct which does not consist of a per se offense is judged by the reasonableness of the activity .

even when an otherwise unlawful action is found , if it is also determined that the action is ancillary to some lawful activity , and that its procompetitive consequences outweigh its anticompetitive effects , the action may well be found to be a not unreasonable violation of the antitrust laws .

in other words , the rule of reason involves a balancing test .

there is not , for example , any per se rule against monopolization , or attempted monopolization .

there is no "no fault" monopolization , i.e. , no situation exists in which there is some "magic" number beyond which a firm may not increase its size or market share ; the determining factors will include the means by which those numbers were reached — in other words , the reasonableness of the actions which produced the final entity .

most rule of reason offenses involve a single entity , and do not usually violate section 1 of the sherman act .

