since the beginning of operation iraqi freedom in march 2003 , there has been considerable interest in legislation to expand the citizenship benefits of aliens serving in the military .

the reported deaths in action of noncitizen soldiers drew attention to provisions of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) that grant posthumous citizenship to those who die as a result of active - duty service during a period of hostilities and to the advantages of further expediting naturalization for noncitizens serving in the united states military , beyond the former special naturalization rules for aliens with service in the u.s. military .

title xvii of p.l .

108-136 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 ( november 24 , 2003 ) , entitled "naturalization and other immigration benefits for military personnel and families," amended military naturalization and posthumous citizenship statutes and provided immigration benefits for immediate relatives ( spouses , children , and parents of citizens ) of u.s. citizen service members who die as a result of actual combat .

between september 11 , 2001 , and december 31 , 2008 , about 45,000 service members were naturalized ; 6,196 service members were naturalized in ceremonies held abroad and on navy ships at sea ; and posthumous citizenship was granted to 118 service members .

as of june 2008 , there were 4,255 pending military naturalization applications ; almost 60% of military naturalization cases are completed within 120 days .

this report gives an overview of the history of naturalization based on military service , discusses current law and policy , analyzes data on noncitizens in the military today and prior to the enactment of p.l .

108-136 , and discusses current legislative proposals and related issues .

there are currently two sections of the ina that provide for expedited naturalization based on military service , during peace time and during war time ( "a period of hostilities" ) , and one section that provides for posthumous naturalization based on military service .

another provision permits the immediate relatives of a u.s. citizen who died as a result of active - duty service during a period of hostilities to be naturalized without being subject to any specific required residency or physical presence in the united states .

these provisions are discussed below .

a uscis fact sheet on military naturalizations ( march 16 , 2008 ) is available at http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / article / mil_natz_051608.pdf .

the following overview of legislative activity since the beginning of the war on terrorism on september 11 , 2001 , may provide guidance for future legislation based on the types of legislation that have been considered but have not yet been enacted , as well as those that have already been enacted .

there continues to be congressional interest in further streamlining and expediting the naturalization process for military personnel and in providing immigration benefits specifically for immediate relatives of such personnel .

p.l .

108-136 , the defense department fy2004 authorization bill ( h.r .

1588 ) , was the culmination of congressional efforts begun in the 107 th congress .

during the 107 th congress , there was renewed legislative interest in amending the various naturalization provisions based on military service as a result of the bush administration's launching of the war on terrorism , the campaign in afghanistan , and the prospect of an armed confrontation in iraq .

this interest continued in the 108 th congress and developed momentum in the wake of operation iraqi freedom .

of the many bills introduced during the 108 th congress that contained provisions concerning expedited or posthumous citizenship as the result of military service , h.r .

1588 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 , became p.l .

108-136 on november 24 , 2003 .

title xvii of h.r .

1588 , entitled "naturalization and other immigration benefits for military personnel and families," amended existing military naturalization statutes by: reducing the period of service required for naturalization based on peacetime service from three years to one year ; waiving fees for naturalization based on military service during peacetime or wartime ; permitting discretionary revocation of naturalization granted on or after the date of enactment through peacetime or wartime service if the citizen were discharged from military service under other than honorable conditions before serving honorably for an aggregate period of five years ; permitting naturalization processing overseas in u.s. embassies , consulates , and military bases ; providing for priority consideration for military leave and transport to finalize naturalization ; extending naturalization based on wartime service to members of the selected reserve of the ready reserve .

additionally , the secretary of defense or the secretary's designee within the uscis is authorized to request posthumous citizenship immediately upon obtaining permission from the next - of - kin .

the law also expanded immigration benefits available to the immediate relatives of citizens , including posthumous citizens , who die from injuries or illnesses resulting from or aggravated by serving in combat .

such relatives may remain classified as immediate relatives of a u.s. citizen for immigration purposes , notwithstanding the death of the service member , and can self - petition for immigrant status .

to qualify for such treatment , immediate relatives must self - petition within two years of the date of the service member's death or , in the case of posthumous citizens , within two years of the date on which posthumous citizenship is granted .

certain adjustment requirements and the public charge grounds for inadmissibility are waived .

children and parents , as well as spouses , of u.s. citizens who died during honorable active - duty service are eligible to naturalize without prior residence or a specified period of physical presence in the united states .

this includes survivors of posthumous citizens who died on or after september 11 , 2001 .

references to the attorney general in the relevant sections of the ina act were changed to references to the secretary of homeland security .

the effective date of the provisions is retroactive to september 11 , 2001 , except for the fee waivers and provision for naturalization proceedings abroad , which took effect on october 1 , 2004 .

after the enactment of p.l .

108-136 , other bills were introduced that would have further expedited naturalization based on military service or linked military service to immigration benefits .

h.r .

4873 , the active duty naturalization accommodation act of 2004 , would have provided additional flexibility in the naturalization process to enable applicants in active - duty status abroad to satisfy the procedural requirements .

any requirement or deadline for naturalization would have been suspended for a service member stationed abroad in active duty service , until the service member had had at least 30 days after his or her return to the united states to comply with the requirement or deadline .

this relief could have been waived by the service member .

similar relief would have been retroactive for those service members who were stationed abroad in active duty service between september 11 , 2001 , and the effective date of h.r .

4873 , had it been enacted .

h.r .

3928 / h.r .

4532 would have permitted u.s. nationals , that is , non - citizen nationals ( american samoans ) to attend military service academies and receive reserve officers' training corps ( rotc ) scholarships on condition that they naturalize before graduation .

s. 1545 and title xviii of s. 2863 , the development , relief , and education for alien minors act of 2007 ( the dream act ) , would have provided that two years of military service may satisfy one of the requirements for achieving full - fledged lpr status after being in conditional lpr status .

section 542 of p.l .

109-163 amended 10 u.s.c .

504 and repealed 10 u.s.c .

§§3253 , 8253 to establish uniform standards for enlistment in the several armed forces service branches .

aside from lprs , the only foreign nationals permitted to enlist are nationals of the former trust territories , micronesia , the marshall islands , and palau , which all have compacts of free association with the united states providing that the united states will provide defense for those countries and that their nationals may enlist in the u.s. defense forces .

the secretary of the relevant service branch may authorize the enlistment of others if the secretary determines that such enlistment is vital to the national interest .

sections in title vii of the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2006 ( s. 2611 / s. 2612 ) as passed by the senate would have built on the expansion of expedited naturalization and other citizenship - related benefits for aliens serving in the u.s. military enacted by title xvii of p.l .

108-136 .

among other things , §§711 to 715 , the kendell frederick citizenship assistance act , would have waived the fingerprint requirement for members of the armed forces who were fingerprinted by the dod upon enlistment if they submit a naturalization application within 12 months of enlistment .

similar legislative proposals included other versions of the kendell frederick citizenship assistance act ( h.r .

4533 , s. 2097 , s. 2165 ) and the soldiers to citizens act ( s. 3947 ) .

section 751 of s. 2611 / s. 2612 would have provided that aliens shall not be denied the opportunity to serve in the u.s. armed forces , and that , during a period of hostilities , aliens may be granted u.s. citizenship after at least two years of honorable and satisfactory service on active duty and have other requirements waived , if they file an application , demonstrate english and civics knowledge and good moral character to their chain of command , and take the oath of allegiance .

similar legislative proposals were included in the soldiers to citizens act ( s. 3947 ) and the riayan tejada memorial act of 2005 ( h.r .

661 , based on service in a combat zone ) .

the bruce vento hmong veterans' naturalization act of 2005 ( h.r .

3018 ) would have amended the hmong veterans naturalization act of 2000 by eliminating the deadline for applying for naturalization .

h.r .

3911 would have further expedited military - service - based naturalization during peacetime by providing that the requirements for english and civics knowledge , good moral character and allegiance to the united states and its constitutional principles do not apply ; by eliminating any required specific period of service ; and by permitting a veteran to apply for such naturalization at any time , not just within six months of termination of service .

several bills would have provided immigration benefits to the spouses and children of u.s. citizen military personnel and veterans .

in addition to provisions expediting military naturalizations , h.r .

661 would have provided certain immigration benefits for the spouses ( regardless of length of marriage ) , children , and parents of a u.s. citizen who served in a combat zone designated in connection with operation iraqi freedom and died as a result of injury or disease caused by such service .

these provisions would have established specific guidelines for the immigration benefits ; however , it appears that these were similar to the provisions of §1703 of p.l .

108-136 , div .

a , codified as notes to 8 u.s.c .

§1151 , regarding family - based immigrant petitions and adjustment - of - status applications , and as amendments to ina §319 ( 8 u.s.c .

§1430 ) , which provides that the surviving spouse , child , or parent of a u.s. citizen ( including a person granted military - service - based posthumous citizenship ) who dies during a period of honorable service in an active duty status in the u.s. armed forces may be naturalized upon compliance with all the ina requirements except for the residence and physical presence requirements .

however , the provisions of p.l .

108-136 were not limited to survivors of service members who died as a result of combat in operation iraqi freedom , but were extended to survivors of service members who died as a result of service during periods of hostilities .

section 509 of s. 2611 / s. 2612 would have provided that numerical limits on immigrant visas shall not apply to the adult sons and daughters of u.s. citizens naturalized under a statute benefitting filipino world war ii veterans .

h.r .

901 would have given priority to the issuance of immigrant visas to the children and adult sons and daughters of these naturalized filipino world war ii veterans .

h.r .

4498 would have authorized the case - by - case waiver of certain naturalization requirements for a child adopted outside the united states by military personnel who at the time of adoption was stationed outside the united states .

sections 673 and 674 of p.l .

110-181 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( january 28 , 2008 ) , respectively , ( 1 ) ensure reentry into the united states by lprs who are spouses and children accompanying a military service member abroad who might otherwise be deemed to have abandoned their lpr status and ( 2 ) provide for the treatment of periods abroad accompanying the service member as periods in the united states for residence and physical presence purposes and also provide for overseas naturalization for such spouses and children .

p.l .

110-251 , the kendell frederick citizenship assistance act ( june 26 , 2008 ) permits the use in military - service naturalization applications of fingerprints taken by the dod at the time of enlistment , rather than requiring service members to obtain and submit separate fingerprints in accordance with the naturalization requirements of the dhs , provided that the naturalization application was filed within 24 months after enlistment or the fingerprints had been submitted with an application for adjustment to lpr status within 24 months of enlistment .

the secretaries of homeland security and defense are required to cooperate to make fingerprints and other biometric data more accessible for naturalization purposes , by determining a data format , making fingerprints available without charge for naturalization purposes , and otherwise facilitating military naturalizations .

rapid electronic transmission of biometric data is to be implemented within one year of enactment .

the secretary of homeland security is to centralize data processing for military naturalization applications filed by service members serving abroad on active duty .

the secretary of homeland security , the directory of the fbi , and the directory of national intelligence are to ensure that military naturalization applications and associated background checks are processed and adjudicated within 180 days of receiving responses to all background checks .

the act also requires timely updates to agency websites and application forms after changes to regulations on military naturalization .

various reports are required under the act .

the secretary of homeland security is required to submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees within 120 days of enactment on the entire adjudication process for a military - service - based naturalization application , including a description of ( 1 ) the methods used by the dhs and the dod to prepare , handle , and adjudicate such applications ; ( 2 ) the effectiveness of the chain of authority , supervision , and training of employees ( whether of the federal government or other entities ) who have any role in the process ; and ( 3 ) the ability of the dhs and the dod to use technology to execute any aspect of the process and to safeguard privacy and civil liberties .

the comptroller general ( gao ) and the inspector general ( ig ) of the dhs are required to conduct a study , including an assessment of any technology that may be used to improve the efficiency of the military naturalization process and an assessment of the impact of the act on privacy and civil liberties .

gao and the ig are required to submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees on this study , including recommendations for improving implementation of this act , within 180 days of the date on which the report on the adjudication process is submitted by the secretary of homeland security .

"appropriate congressional committees" is defined as including the senate committees on armed services , homeland security and governmental affairs , and the judiciary , and the house of representatives committees on armed services , homeland security , and the judiciary .

the comprehensive immigration reform bills , s. 1348 ( §§711-715 as placed on the senate calendar ) , s. 1639 ( §701 , as placed on the senate calendar ) , and h.r .

1645 ( §§711-715 , as introduced ) , also contained versions of this legislation .

s. 1348 and h.r .

1645 would also have provided for a dedicated toll - free telephone information service to assist military service members with military - service - based naturalization .

the issue of requiring fingerprints from military service members had already been partly addressed by uscis .

the fingerprint requirement is not in the statutes or regulations governing naturalization ; rather , it is the practice to submit these to be used in conducting the criminal background check on naturalization applicants .

in testimony before the senate committee on armed forces , director emilio gonzalez of the uscis noted that uscis , in collaboration with the dod and the fbi , had instituted a change in the fingerprinting process permitting u.s. military personnel to sign a release authorizing the use of fingerprints provided at enlistment for immigration purposes .

however , congressional hearing testimony in 2008 alleged that fbi processing of fingerprints still accounts for significant delays despite the permitted use of dod fingerprints in lieu of fingerprints taken and submitted in accordance with uscis procedures for civilians .

p.l .

110-382 , the military personnel citizenship processing act , expedites certain military service - related applications by establishing a fbi liaison office in uscis to monitor the completion of fbi background checks and setting a deadline for processing such naturalization applications .

the fbi monitoring and the processing deadline apply to naturalization applications filed by or on behalf of: current and former service members based on military service , the spouses of current service members posted abroad , surviving spouses and children of service members who died on active - duty service , and deceased service members eligible for posthumous citizenship .

if uscis cannot meet the deadline , it is required to give the applicant an explanation for the delay and an estimate for the completion date .

the director of uscis is required to submit to the relevant congressional oversight subcommittees annual reports identifying every application covered by these statutory requirements that is not processed and adjudicated within one year after filing due to delays in required background checks .

within 180 days of enactment , the comptroller general must submit to congress a report regarding the average length of time taken by uscis to process and adjudicate applications for naturalization filed by or on behalf of members of the u.s. armed forces , deceased members of the armed forces , and their spouses and children .

the act and amendments made by the act to current law sunset five years after the date of enactment ( october 9 , 2013 ) .

although not directly involving military service , with regard to the naturalization of lprs originally admitted into the united states as special immigrant iraqi or afghani translators or interpreters , p.l .

110-36 provides that time spent abroad as a translator or interpreter for the u.s. department of state or armed forces shall not be considered to break any period for which continuous residence in the united states is required for naturalization .

aside from these public laws , there were several notable bills introduced in the 110 th congress .

the immigration needs of america ' s fighting men and women was the subject of a may 2008 hearing by the house subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law , and was the focus of h.r .

6020 , a bill to further facilitate and expand immigration benefits for military service members and their families .

h.r .

6020 , the lance corporal jose gutierrez act of 2008 , was reported by the house judiciary committee and placed on the calendar in october 2008 .

h.r .

6020 would have expanded the scope of military naturalizations by , inter alia , ( 1 ) providing that persons who serve honorably in the armed forces in support of contingency operations ( defined at 10 u.s.c .

§101 ( a ) ( 13 ) ) that are not covered by an executive order designating a period of hostilities would be eligible for naturalization based on ina §329 ; ( 2 ) increasing the period within which a person may file an application under ina §328 ( 8 u.s.c .

§1439 ) after leaving military service from six months to one year ; and ( 3 ) eliminating the need to allege satisfaction of certain naturalization requirements during periods when service was not continuous .

the bill would have permitted service members who have conditional lpr status to wait until they are discharged from service to apply for removal of the condition and eliminated the requirement that a service member petitioning for removal of the conditional status for an alien spouse , son , or daughter must appear for a personal interview .

the bill would have provided for special consideration in removal proceedings .

removal proceedings could not be initiated against an alien who has served or is serving honorably in the armed forces without the approval of the director of the uscis or the assistant secretary of homeland security for u.s. immigration and customs enforcement after consideration of certain factors .

aliens who have served or are serving honorably in the armed forces would not be subject to expedited removal proceedings or reinstatement of removal orders .

certain inadmissibility or deportation grounds would not apply to aliens who have served or are serving honorably in the armed forces or who are the spouse , minor child , adult son / daughter , parent , or minor sibling of a member of the armed forces .

other grounds of inadmissibility or deportation ( except for certain criminal and national security grounds , alien smuggling , unlawful voting , and parental kidnapping ) could be waived at the discretion of the secretary of homeland security or the attorney general .

certain factors could be considered in the waiver determination .

the bill would have included certain legal admission benefits .

spouses and children of an lpr serving in the armed forces would not be subject to the numerical limits on visas for the spouses and children of lprs , so immigrant visas would be immediately available for them .

for undocumented aliens , the status of an alien spouse , minor child , adult son / daughter , parent , or minor sibling of an eligible member of the armed forces would be adjusted to that of an lpr if such alien ( 1 ) applies for adjustment and is in the united states on the date of filing such application ; ( 2 ) is admissible as an immigrant ; and ( 3 ) pays a fee , determined by the secretary of homeland security .

certain grounds of inadmissibility would not apply to such adjustment of status , and certain other grounds could be waived at the discretion of the secretary of homeland security .

this benefit would be available for two years after the death of an eligible member of the armed forces whose death resulted from injury / disease incurred in or aggravated by his / her service in the armed forces .

an eligible member of the armed forces would include a u.s. citizen who is serving or has served honorably as a member of the selected reserve of the ready reserve or on active duty in the armed forces during the vietnam war or any period of hostilities subsequently designated by executive order .

s. 1348 , one of the comprehensive immigration reform bills , included the dream act ( §§621-632 ) with its provision that two years of military service ( honorable discharge if discharged ) may satisfy one of the requirements for achieving unconditional lpr status .

this would be available to an undocumented alien who has initially been granted conditional lpr status as a person who has been continuously physically present in the united states after initially entering while under the age of 16 years , among other qualifications .

section 751 of s. 1348 would have amended ina §329 to provide that persons who are not u.s. citizens shall not be denied the opportunity to serve in the u.s. armed forces and that , with the approval of the chain of command , an alien who has performed two years of honorable , satisfactory , active - duty service shall be granted u.s. citizenship without regard to other naturalization requirements , processes , or procedures upon the satisfaction of three conditions .

the three proposed conditions were ( 1 ) the alien must have filed a naturalization application , ( 2 ) the alien must demonstrate english and civics knowledge and good moral character to the military chain of command , consistent with the requirements of the ina , and ( 3 ) the alien must take the naturalization oath of allegiance .

the alien would be required to be naturalized not later than 90 days after satisfying the requirements of this provision .

h.r .

1745 would have provided immigration benefits to the immediate relatives of an active duty or reserve member of the armed forces .

it would have waived inadmissibility of such immediate relatives based on misrepresentation of material fact in order to procure an immigration benefit or on a false claim of citizenship for any purpose or benefit under any federal or state law .

the bill would also have extended the v nonimmigrant visa to military families .

v visas enable the spouses and children of lprs , who filed family - based immigrant petitions before december 21 , 2000 , and are awaiting the availability of an immigrant visa , to enter and wait in the united states for the immigrant visa if the petition ( or the visa availability , if the petition was approved ) has been pending for three years or longer .

the bill would have permitted the spouses and children of active duty or reserve military personnel to receive a v visa regardless of when the petition was filed or how long the petition or visa had been pending .

as of the date of this report , there appeared to be no legislation in the 111 th congress concerning immigration benefits related to military service .

although some bills providing such benefits were enacted during the 110 th congress , several issues and proposals remain unresolved and may be addressed during the 111 th congress .

although p.l .

108-136 and close cooperation between the dod and uscis of the dhs appear to have facilitated the naturalization of military service personnel , particularly of those serving abroad , supporters of military service members advocate further streamlining of the process , beyond the provisions enacted in the 110 th congress .

some proposals would make naturalization automatic for persons who are deployed to a combat zone , waiving any requirement for demonstrating good moral character or knowledge of civics or english .

critics of such proposals , although acknowledging the sacrifice and contribution of military personnel in a combat zone , urge caution when considering eliminating substantive requirements such as good moral character .

supporters of such proposals argue that persons serving in the military can be assumed to have a working knowledge of english and that an allegiance to the principles of u.s. government and good moral character can be fairly attributed to persons serving honorably in a combat zone , justifying the waiver of any technical test of civics and english or necessity of demonstrating good moral character independently .

furthermore , supporters argue , once a person is deployed to a combat zone , the timely processing of a naturalization application becomes more urgent .

other proposals would not waive requirements for good moral character , civics , and english , but would authorize the chain of command in the dod to determine whether a military service member satisfies these requirements .

proponents assert that the commanding officers of a military service member would be better able than a uscis adjudicator to judge whether that service member satisfies the requirements .

opponents note that it would burden military officers with having to learn immigration law and act as immigration adjudicator , and that commanding officers may inadvertently take into account factors that are not relevant to a naturalization adjudication or may even interject personal knowledge and biases in the process .

more limited proposals would permit certain requirements for naturalization processing to be satisfied by equivalent requirements or functions satisfied by the dod , such as medical physical examinations .

there is currently no special relief from removal nor special consideration for permitting aliens waiting for an immigrant visa to enter or remain in the united states based on whether the alien is an immediate relative of a military service member .

advocates of special immigration benefits for family members of military personnel frame such benefits as consideration extended to the military personnel , to relieve them of anxiety and uncertainty concerning the status of family members while they are on active duty , particularly if they are deployed abroad in a hostile area .

supporters of current law argue that family members should not receive special treatment because they happen to be related to a u.s. military service member .

they warn that expansion of removal relief and other immigration benefits to family members would have implications beyond the desire to assist u.s. military personnel .

in addition to the absence of such substantive relief for family members of military service members , there apparently are certain procedural complications or delays .

reportedly , medical examinations required for application for an immigrant visa , for admission to the united states as an immigrant , or for adjustment of status to lawful permanent residence , cannot be performed by most military physicians because they are not recognized by dhs as being qualified to perform such examinations , thus imposing on military families the time and expense of obtaining examinations from dhs - designated physicians .

under ina §232 ( 8 u.s.c .

§1222 ) , 8 c.f.r .

§ 232.2 , and 42 c.f.r .

part 34 , medical officers of the u.s. public health service and dhs - designated civil surgeons with at least four years of professional experience are authorized to conduct medical examinations of aliens for immigration purposes .

civil surgeons with fewer than four years of experience may be designated at the discretion of dhs .

u.s. military physicians with at least four years of professional experience are considered to be civil surgeons for the purpose of physical examinations required by ina §232 ( b ) for special immigrants described in ina §101 ( a ) ( 27 ) ( k ) ( 8 u.s.c .

1101 ( a ) ( 27 ) ( k ) defining certain aliens who enlisted in the u.s. armed forces abroad as special immigrants ) .

aside from this limited purpose , it appears that military physicians are not considered to be "civil surgeons" for the purpose of conducting immigration - related medical examinations ; therefore , legislation would be necessary to mandate that military physicians be considered "civil surgeons" for medical examinations required for the family of service members .

current policy guidelines of u.s. customs and immigration enforcement ( ice ) direct that military service be taken into consideration in determining whether prosecutorial discretion should be exercised in favor of any alien subject to removal , particularly an alien eligible for naturalization based on military service .

the policy disfavors but does not absolutely preclude initiating and pursuing removal actions against members of the u.s. armed forces , and reportedly some ice officers are doing so .

in any case , the policy is not grounded in a statutory requirement ; therefore , ice officials could choose to rescind or modify the policy at their discretion .

legislation would be necessary to make such a policy a permanent part of the immigration statutes and / or to strengthen favorable exercise of discretion or prohibit prosecution of removal proceedings against current or former service members .

proponents of such legislation argue that removal actions unnecessarily subject service members who are likely to be granted military - service - based naturalization to the time , expense , and stress of having to defend against such actions ; burden the federal government and u.s. taxpayers with the expense of prosecuting such actions which are likely moot ; and undermine the needs and effectiveness of the u.s. armed forces when active service members must take time away from their duties to defend against such actions and potentially could be removed .

appendix a .

active duty and selected reserve noncitizen accession locations , by state , as of january 2006 appendix b .

active duty citizenship status , by country of birth: top 50 countries appendix c. reserve citizenship status , by country of birth: top 50 countrie .

