two public resources provide answers to many of the most often - asked questions on the berry amendment .

dod's office of defense procurement and acquisition policy ( dpap ) has prepared a "frequently asked questions" compendium of general information on the berry amendment .

the questions and answers ranged from origin and history , authority , policy , and exceptions ; comparisons with other domestic source restrictions like the buy american act ; the policy governing determinations of non - availability ( dnad ) ; and many questions often raised by suppliers and other industry personnel .

also , the u.s. department of commerce has launched a website to provide textile and other manufacturers a resource for the latest information on the berry amendment .

according to the website , this resource was compiled with the support of the commerce's international trade administration's office of textiles and apparel , dod , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , and dpap ; army , air force , and navy acquisition offices .

the berry amendment contains a number of domestic source restrictions that prohibit dod from acquiring food , clothing , fabrics ( including ballistic fibers ) , specialty metals , stainless steel , and hand or measuring tools that are not grown or produced in the united states .

congress and dod have long debated the need to protect the u.s. defense industrial base by restricting certain federal procurement to u.s. markets through legislation known as "domestic source restrictions. .

many defense appropriations bills passed since 1942 have included some mention of a preference for u.s. articles , supplies , and materials .

one particular group of domestic source restrictions was first enacted into law on april 5 , 1941 , as part of the fy1941 fifth supplemental national defense appropriations act , p.l .

77-29 .

during the second session of the 82 nd congress , elias y. berry , representative from south dakota , introduced two bills to amend the buy america act to include wool as a product or material , produced or manufactured in the united states .

reportedly , this amendment would come to be known as the berry amendment .

on december 13 , 2001 , the passage of the fy2002 national defense authorization act codified and modified the berry amendment , making it a permanent part of the united states code .

under the berry amendment , the secretary of defense has the authority to waive the requirement to buy domestically , under certain conditions .

the 2001 controversy over the procurement of black berets and the waiver authority of the secretary of defense , as well as the presence of other domestic source provisions , have created considerable interest in the berry amendment .

some policy makers believe that the berry amendment's restrictions ( like the specialty metal clause ) contradict free trade policies , and that the presence and degree of such competition is the most effective tool for promoting efficiencies and improving quality .

others believe that u.s. - based companies need the protections afforded by the berry amendment .

these two views have been the subject of ongoing debate in congress .

on october 17 , 2000 , the army chief of staff , general eric shinseki , announced that the black beret would become the standard headgear for the u.s. army .

the army planned to issue a one - piece beret to each of the 1.3 million active duty and reserve soldiers during the spring of 2001 , while a second beret would be issued to each soldier in the fall of 2001 .

the army was to pay approximately $23.8 million for about 4.7 million berets .

dod awarded the first contract to bancroft , an arkansas - based company that had manufactured military headgear since world war i .

other contracts were awarded to several foreign manufacturing firms ; five of the foreign firms had production facilities in the people's republic of china , romania , sri lanka , and other low - wage countries .

to purchase the black berets , the defense logistics agency ( dla ) granted two waivers of specific restrictions in the berry amendment .

the first waiver was granted to dod so that the department could purchase military uniforms from foreign sources .

dla granted this waiver when it determined that no u.s. firm could produce a sufficient quantity of one - piece , black berets by the army's deadline .

as a result , there were protests from some segments of domestic manufacturing , military and veterans groups , members of congress , and the public .

the house small business committee held a hearing on may 2 , 2001 , to discuss the statutory authority to waive berry amendment restrictions , as well as the concerns of the small business community regarding the contract award process .

dla granted the second waiver to allow bancroft to retain its contract and continue to produce the black berets for the army , even though bancroft used materials from foreign sources .

bancroft , the sole u.s. manufacturer of the one - piece beret , had procured materials from two overseas suppliers , who , in turn , had procured material from other foreign sources .

bancroft's president reported that , as early as 1976 , dod had been notified that some beret materials were procured from foreign sources .

on october 4 , 2002 , dod announced that the bancroft cap company of cabot , ar , was awarded a $14.8 million dollar firm - fixed - price contract to manufacture up to 3.6 million black , wool berets for the united states army and the united states air force .

the contract was a two - year contract with three one - year options .

there were 154 proposals solicited , and 13 vendors responded .

the contract was administered through the defense supply center , philadelphia , pa. by some , where dod purchases its berets is viewed as a relatively minor matter , when compared to where it purchases its electronics ; specialty metals ; and other hardware used for logistics support , communications , and weapons modernization .

however , to others small businesses' loss of such a contract to foreign sources can be seen as unacceptable .

the army's black beret controversy , which revealed that the berets are not 100% domestic in origin , and the resulting waiver of berry amendment restrictions to allow dla to procure the berets from foreign sources raised questions which have not been settled , as to the original purpose , intent , and value of the berry amendment .

congress may choose to examine the domestic source restrictions under the berry amendment and other procurement provisions and to determine whether they help or hurt the defense industrial base , including relationships with foreign trading partners .

several domestic source provisions concerning the berry amendment were introduced during the 110 th - 113 th congresses .

some were proposed , others enacted into law .

one common theme was the broadening of the secretary of defense's waiver authority ( authority to waive the berry amendment ) when the secretary believed that there was an unusual and compelling reason to procure items from foreign sources .

other provisions sought to broaden the provisions of the berry amendment to cover new items not currently covered ( like athletic footwear ) or additional agencies ( like the department of homeland security ) .

on september 30 , 2013 , dod issued an interim rule which would amend the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) to implement provisions of h.r .

4310 ( p.l .

112-239 ) , the national defense authorization act of 2013 , that require compliance with the berry amendment .

section 826 of h.r .

4310 requires that textiles procured by dod for the production of military uniforms for the afghan national army or the afghan national police must be in compliance with the berry amendment .

related to section 826 , section 842 amends section 886 of h.r .

4986 ( p.l .

110-181 ) to reflect the authority to acquire products and services from iraq and afghanistan .

on may 23 , 2013 , two bills were introduced with similar purposes .

s. 1051 was introduced in the senate while h.r .

2188 was introduced in the house .

both bills would amend title 37 , u.s.c .

to ensure that footwear furnished or obtained by allowance for enlisted members of the armed forces upon their initial entry would meet the requirements of the berry amendment .

the two bills would require dod to comply with the berry amendment by purchasing athletic footwear in the same way as other military uniform purchases .

currently , enlisted members receive a stipend through vouchers to buy athletic footwear , and there is no requirement that the footwear be domestic in origin .

s. 2114 , the berry amendment extension act , was introduced on february 15 , 2011 , and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and government affairs .

h.r .

679 , a similar bill , was introduced on february 11 , 2011 , and was referred to the house homeland security subcommittee on oversight , investigations , and management .

similar bills have been introduced in previous congresses .

h.r .

2955 , the "american shoes for american service members act," was introduced on september 15 , 2011 , and referred to the house armed services committee .

this provision would amend title 10 u.s.c .

section 2533a ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) by clarifying that the berry amendment includes athletic footwear as well as the materials and components of the footwear .

p.l .

112-81 , the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( h.r .

1540 ) contained a provision ( §821 ) which clarified the intent of the berry amendment when applied to the purchase of tents , tarpaulins , or covers from domestic sources .

p.l .

112-81 also contained a provision ( §822 ) which repealed the sunset of the authority to procure fire resistant rayon fiber , from foreign sources , used for the production of uniforms .

s. 2114 , the berry amendment extension act , was introduced on february 15 , 2012 , by senator john d. rockefeller and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and government affairs .

h.r .

679 , a similar bill , was introduced by representative larry kissell on february 11 , 2011 , and referred to the house homeland security subcommittee on oversight , investigations , and management .

both bills seek to extend the provisions of the berry amendment to the department of homeland security .

similar bills have been introduced in previous congresses .

h.r .

2955 , the "american shoes for american servicemembers act," was introduced on september 15 , 2011 , by representative mike michaud .

this provision would amend title 10 u.s.c .

section 2533a ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) by clarifying that the berry amendment includes athletic footwear as well as the materials and components of the footwear .

the bill was referred to the house armed services committee .

h.r .

6262 , the jobs through procurement act , was introduced on september 29 , 2010 , by then - representative phil hare .

the proposed bill sought to strengthen the domestic sourcing requirements of the berry amendment and the buy american act .

the bill was referred to the committees for house oversight and government reform and the house armed services committee .

h.r .

5013 , the implementing management for performance and related reforms to obtain value in every acquisition act of 2010 , was introduced on april 14 , 2010 , by representative robert andrews and referred to the senate armed services committee .

the proposed measure would have contained a provision ( §409 ) that expressed a "sense of congress" that in order to create jobs , level the playing field for domestic manufacturers , and strengthen economic recovery , it is the sense of congress that the department of defense should — ( 1 ) ensure full contractor and subcontractor compliance with the berry amendment ( 10 u.s.c .

2533a ) and the buy american act ( 41 u.s.c .

10a et seq .

 ) ; and ( 2 ) not procure products made by manufacturers in the united states that violate labor standards as defined under the laws of the united states .

h.r .

5013 also included two amendments ( h.amdt .

615 and h.amdt .

617 ) that propose to strengthen the application of the berry amendment to defense procurement .

h.amdt .

615 would have required gao to conduct a study of certain procurement items to determine if there is sufficient domestic production to adequately supply the armed forces , and to evaluate whether such items could be made in the united states under the berry amendment .

h.amdt .

617 would have expressed the sense of congress that dod should operate in full compliance through the acquisition process of the berry amendment and the buy american act , and that dod should not procure products made by manufacturers in the united states that violate u.s. labor standards .

h.r .

3116 , the berry amendment extension act , was introduced on july 7 , 2009 , by representative larry kissell .

the proposed measure would have prohibited the purchase of clothing , tents , tarpaulins , and certain other textiles unless the items are grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states .

the bill was referred to the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee .

no further action was taken .

h.r .

917 , the berry amendment extension act , was introduced on february 8 , 2007 , by representative robin hayes .

the proposed measure would have prohibited dhs from the purchase of clothing , tents , tarpaulins , and certain other textiles unless the items are grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states .

the bill was referred to the house homeland security subcommittee on management , investigations , and oversight .

no further action was taken .

