economists have gained notoriety for their differences of opinion on a variety of policy issues .

notable examples include the long - term economic effects of large , permanent tax cuts ; the impact of illegal immigration on domestic wages ; and the best ways to lessen income inequality .

but on two issues there is little , if any , disagreement: ( 1 ) the impact of technological innovation on economic growth in the long run and ( 2 ) the proper role of government in the development and commercial uses of new technologies .

among economists , it is widely believed that technological innovation has accounted for a major share of long - term growth in real per - capita income in the united states and certain other developed countries .

economists who study the forces driving economic growth see innovation as a convoluted and uncertain process that encompasses the acquisition of new scientific and technical knowledge and its application to the development of new goods and services or methods of production through a process of research and experimentation .

learning - by - doing and learning - by - using play critical roles in this process .

in market economies , technological innovation is driven by the efforts of competing firms to gain , sustain , or reinforce competitive advantages by being the first to introduce or use new or improved products or services ; more efficient production processes ; or more effective strategies for management , marketing and promotion , and customer service and support .

most economists also recognize that private r&d investment is likely to be less than the amounts that are warranted by its overall economic benefits .

the reason for this shortfall lies in the nature of these benefits .

it seems probable that the average company investing in r&d cannot capture all the returns to their r&d investments , even in the presence of patents , trademarks , and other forms of intellectual property protection .

there are several channels through which the returns from innovation may elude full capture by innovating firms and spill over to society at large .

the most common ones are reverse engineering by other firms , migration of research scientists and engineers from one firm to another , and the availability of new or improved goods and services at prices below what most consumers and companies would be willing to pay .

economists refer to an excess of total ( or social ) returns to r&d investments over private returns as the spillover effects or external benefits of r&d .

numerous studies have found that the average social returns to private r&d investments greatly exceeded the average private returns .

the ratio of the former to the latter from available estimates averages two to one .

this finding held true regardless of whether a firm invested in research projects narrowly focused on its existing lines of business , or in research projects aimed at extending the boundaries of knowledge in particular scientific disciplines in ways that had no obvious or immediate commercial applications .

when seen through the lens of standard economic theory , the external benefits from technological innovation resemble a market failure .

they signal that too few resources are being allocated to the activities leading to the discovery and commercialization of new technical knowledge and know - how .

as a remedy for this failure , most economists recommend the adoption of public policies aimed at boosting or supplementing private investment in r&d .

the u.s. government supports r&d in a variety of ways .

direct support comes mainly in the form of research performed by federal agencies and federal grants for basic and applied research and development intended to support specific policy goals , such as protecting the natural environment , exploring outer space , advancing the treatment of deadly diseases , and strengthening the national defense .

indirect support is more diffuse .

the chief sources are federal funding of higher education in engineering and the natural sciences , legal protection of intellectual property rights , special allowances under antitrust law for joint research ventures , and tax incentives for business r&d investment .

federal tax law offers two such incentives: ( 1 ) an expensing allowance for qualified research expenditures ( qres ) under section 174 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , and ( 2 ) a non - refundable tax credit for qres above a base amount under irc section 41 — also known as the research and experimentation ( r&e ) tax credit , the research tax credit , the r&d tax credit , or the credit for increasing research activities .

the expensing allowance has been a permanent irc provision since it was first enacted in 1954 .

its main advantages are that the allowance simplifies tax accounting for r&d expenditures , reduces the likelihood of irs challenges of the expensing of qres , and encourages business r&d investment by taxing the returns to such investment at a marginal effective rate of zero and increasing cash flow among companies claiming the allowance .

a similar policy objective lies behind the research tax credit , which was a temporary provision of the irc from july 1981 until 2015 , when the protecting americans from american tax hikes ( path ) act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-113 ) permanently extended the credit .

the credit is intended to stimulate more business r&d investment than otherwise would take place by lowering the after - tax cost of engaging in qualified research .

but unlike the deduction , it complicates tax compliance for firms investing in qualified r&d .

in fy2016 , the combined revenue cost of the expensing option and the credit could total an estimated $13.5 billion .

this report examines the current status of the r&e tax credit , describes its legislative history , and discusses some of the key policy issues raised by the current credit .

many think of the research tax credit as a single unified credit .

but it actually has four discrete components: a regular research credit , an alternative simplified credit ( asc ) , a basic research credit , and a credit for energy research .

each is non - refundable .

in any tax year , taxpayers may claim no more than the basic and energy research credits , plus either the regular credit or the asc .

to prevent taxpayers from benefiting twice from the same expenditures , any research tax credit claimed must be subtracted from deductible research expenses .

the four components of the research tax credit were extended permanently in december 2015 by th .

the research tax credit entered the tax code as a temporary provision through the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) .

in adopting the credit , the 97 th congress was seeking , in part , to stem a decline in business r&d spending as a share of u.s. gross domestic product that commenced in the late 1960s .

around the time the credit was enacted , more than a few analysts thought the decline was a primary cause of both the slowdown in u.s. productivity growth and the loss of competitiveness by a variety of u.s. industries in the 1970s .

a majority in congress concluded that a "substantial tax credit for incremental research and experimental expenditures was needed to overcome the reluctance of many ongoing companies to bear the significant costs of staffing and supplies , and certain equipment expenses such as computer charges , which must be incurred to initiate or expand research programs in a trade or business. .

the initial credit was equal to 25% of a company's qres above a base amount , which was equal to its average qres in the three previous tax years , or 50% of current - year spending , whichever was greater .

it is not clear why congress chose a statutory rate of 25% .

there is no evidence that the rate was chosen on the basis of a rigorous assessment of the gap between the private and social returns to r&d investment , or the sensitivity of r&d expenditures to declines in their after - tax cost .

any taxpayer that claimed the credit and could not apply the entire amount against its current - year federal income tax liability was allowed to carry the unused portion back as many as three tax years , or forward as many as 15 tax years .

the credit was to remain in effect from july 1 , 1981 , to december 31 , 1985 .

congress made the first significant changes in the original research tax credit with the passage of the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 , p.l .

99-514 ) .

among the many significant changes it made to the federal tax code , the act extended the credit through december 31 , 1988 , and folded it into the general business credit under irc section 38 , thereby subjecting it to a yearly cap .

in addition , the act lowered the credit's statutory rate to 20% , modified the definition of qres so that the credit applied to research intended to produce new technical knowledge deemed useful in the commercial development of new products and processes , and created a separate 20% incremental tax credit for payments to universities and certain other nonprofit organizations for the conduct of basic research according to a written contract .

the reduction in the credit's rate was not based on an analysis of the credit's effectiveness in the first five years .

rather , it seemed to reflect the overriding goals of tra86 , which were to lower income tax rates across the board , broaden the income tax base , and shrink the differences in tax burdens on the return to investment among the major categories of depreciable business assets , including intangible assets .

the regular and university basic research credits were extended through 1989 by the technical and miscellaneous revenue act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-647 ) .

in addition , the act curtailed the overall tax preference for business r&d investment by requiring companies to reduce any deduction they claimed for qres under irc section 174 by half of the sum of any regular and basic research credits they claimed .

this new rule decreased the maximum effective rate of the regular research tax credit by a factor equal to 0.5 times a taxpayer's marginal income tax rate .

growing dissatisfaction with the design of the original credit among interested parties led to the enactment of several additional changes in the regular credit under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989 ( obra89 , p.l .

101-239 ) .

much of the dissatisfaction concerned the formula for determining the base amount of the credit .

critics rightly pointed out that under the formula , which was based on a three - year moving average of a firm's qres , an increase in a company's research spending in one year would boost its base amount in each of the following three years by one - third of that increase , perhaps making it more difficult to claim the credit in those years .

some argued that such a design would be less cost - effective in raising business r&d investment than a design that made a firm's base amount completely independent of its current - year qres .

to response to this concern , obra89 changed the formula for the base amount so that it was equal to the larger of two options: ( 1 ) 50% of a firm's current - year qres or ( 2 ) the product of the firm's average annual gross receipts in the previous four tax years and a "fixed - base percentage. .

the act set this percentage equal to the ratio of a firm's total qres to total gross receipts in four of the tax years from 1984 to 1988 , capped at 16% .

obra89 also made the credit available on more favorable terms to start - up firms , which it defined as firms without gross receipts and qres in three of the four years from 1984 to 1988 ; these firms were assigned a fixed - base percentage of 3% .

in addition , the act effectively extended the credits to december 31 , 1990 ( by requiring companies to prorate qres incurred before january 1 , 1991 ) , made it clear that firms could apply the regular credit to qres related to current lines of business and possible future lines of business , and required firms claiming the regular and university basic research credits to reduce any deduction they claim under irc section 174 by the entire amount of the credits .

in 1990 and 1991 , congress passed two bills that , among other things , temporarily extended the credits .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) extended the credits through december 31 , 1991 and repealed the requirement that companies prorate qres incurred before january 1 , 1991 .

the tax extension act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-227 ) moved the expiration date for the credits to june 30 , 1992 .

a major obstacle to longer extensions of the credits at the time lay in a congressional budget rule that required the revenue cost of lengthy or permanent extensions be scored over 10 fiscal years and offset with tax increases or cuts in non - defense discretionary spending .

although congress passed two bills in 1992 that would have extended the credits beyond june 30 of that year , president george h. w. bush vetoed both for reasons that had nothing to do with the desirability of the credits .

as a result , the credits expired and remained unavailable from july 1 , 1992 until the enactment of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra93 , p.l .

103-66 ) in august 1993 .

that act retroactively extended the credits from july 1 , 1992 through june 30 , 1995 .

it also modified the fixed - base percentage for start - up firms .

a company that had no gross receipts in three of the tax years from 1984 to 1988 was assigned a percentage of 3% for the first five tax years after 1993 in which it reported qres .

starting in the sixth year , the percentage gradually adjusted so that , by the 11 th year , the percentage would reflect the company's actual ratio of total qres to total gross receipts in five of the previous six tax years .

congress allowed the credits to expire again on june 30 , 1995 .

they remained in abeyance until the enactment of the small business job protection act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-188 ) in august 1996 .

that act reinstated the credits from july 1 , 1996 to may 31 , 1997 , leaving a one - year gap in the credit's coverage since its inception in mid - 1981 .

the act also expanded the definition of a start - up firm to include any firm whose first tax year with both gross receipts and qres was 1984 or later , added a three - tiered alternative incremental research credit ( airc ) with rates of 1.65% , 2.2% , and 2.75% , and allowed companies to include 75% of their payments for qualified research performed under contract by nonprofit organizations "operated primarily to conduct scientific research" in the qres eligible for the regular credit and the airc .

the credits expired yet again in 1997 , but they were extended retroactively from june 1 , 1997 to june 30 , 1998 by the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) .

a further extension of the credits , to june 30 , 1999 , was included in the revenue portion of the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act , 1998 ( p.l .

105-277 ) .

under circumstances reminiscent of 1997 , the credits expired in 1999 .

but the revenue portion of the ticket to work and work incentives improvement act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-170 ) extended them from july 1 , 1999 to june 30 , 2004 .

it also increased the three rates of the airc to 2.65% , 3.2% , and 3.75% and expanded the definition of qualified research to include qualified research performed in puerto rico and the other u.s. territorial possessions .

on october 4 , 2004 , president george w. bush signed into law the working families tax relief act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-311 ) , which extended the research tax credit through december 31 , 2005 .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) added a fourth component to the research tax credit by establishing a credit equal to 20% of payments for energy research performed under contract by qualified research consortia , colleges and universities , federal laboratories , and eligible small firms .

under the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) , the research tax credit was extended retroactively through the end of 2007 .

the act also raised the three rates for the airc to 3% , 4% , and 5% , and established yet another research tax credit: the alternative simplified credit ( asc ) .

this fifth component of the credit was equal to 12% of qres in excess of 50% of average qres in the past three tax years ; but for businesses with no qres in any of the three preceding tax years , the credit was equal to 6% of qres in the current tax year .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) retroactively extended the research credit through 2009 .

it also raised the rate of the asic from 12% to 14% and repealed the airc .

under the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) , corporations gained the option for the 2008 tax year only of claiming a limited , accelerated , refundable credit for unused research and amt credits from tax years before 2006 , in lieu of taking any bonus depreciation allowance they could claim for qualified assets placed in service between march 31 , 2008 , and december 31 , 2008 .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) extended that option through 2009 .

as a result of the tax relief , unemployment compensation reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 , ( p.l .

111-312 ) , the research credit remained available through 2011 .

after a one - year lapse , congress retroactively extended the credit through 2013 and made some minor changes in the rules governing the allocation of research credits among members of controlled groups of companies and the use of the credit by the parties to business acquisitions by passing the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) extended all four components of the credit through 2014 .

after years of being a temporary provision , the 114 th congress permanently extended the credits , starting with the 2015 tax year , through the protecting americans from tax hikes act of 2015 ( path act , p.l .

114-113 ) .

the act also addressed two other concerns raised by the credit by allowing qualified small businesses to apply the research tax credits against any alternative minimum tax they may owe and against the employer share of the social security tax owed for each employee .

the latter option is capped at $250,000 for a qualified employer in a tax year .

a key question raised by the research tax credit concerns how effective it has been in encouraging businesses to invest more in r&d than they otherwise would have .

among economists , the preferred approach to assessing the effectiveness of a research tax credit is to compare the social benefits from the added r&d induced by the credit with the social costs of the credit .

the social benefit of the added r&d spending encompasses any additional profits received by the company investing in r&d from the use of the new technologies developed through the investment , the profits earned by other companies from adopting and adapting those technologies , and the welfare gains to consumers from any price declines or quality improvements arising from the new products , processes , and services derived from those technologies .

the social cost of an additional unit of r&d is the loss of tax revenue because of the credit , the opportunity cost of the forgone revenue , and the public and private costs of administering the credit .

such an assessment of the credit's effectiveness has not been undertaken because of several intractable problems associated with measuring the social returns to r&d investments .

as a result , analysts have relied on two other measures of effectiveness: ( 1 ) the amount of business r&d investment in a given year that can be attributed to the research credit and ( 2 ) the added r&d induced by one dollar of the credit .

each measure focuses on the direct benefits ( added r&d investment ) and the direct costs ( revenue loss ) of the credit ; no secondary effects are considered .

the results of the studies that have been done using each measure are discussed below .

most economists and lawmakers endorse the use of tax incentives to stimulate greater domestic business r&d investment .

nonetheless , the research tax credit has been the target of considerable criticism since it was established in 1981 .

a primary concern of critics has been that the credit is not as effective as it could or should be .

they attribute this outcome to certain problems with the credit's design .

more specifically , they argue that the credit would be likely to generate its intended benefits only if the following four problems are remedied: the regular credit and the asc have weak and uneven incentive effects .

neither credit is refundable , though for eligible small companies , the credit may be used to lower their employment tax liabilities .

the definition of qualified research remains a major source of legal disputes between the irs and numerous companies investing in r&d .

the credit is not targeted at r&d investments that are likely to generate economic benefits far in excess of their social cost .

each potential difficulty is discussed in some depth below , along with possible remedies .

a tax subsidy's incentive effect refers to the magnitude of the benefit it offers eligible taxpayers .

the greater the benefit , the greater the likelihood the subsidy will influence their behavior in the intended ways .

in the view of some critics , the research credit's incentive effect varies among firms conducting qualified research in ways that are not supported by economic theory and that might defeat the credit's purpose .

they also contend that the maximum incentive effect of the regular credit and the asc is too small to offset the predisposition of firms in general to invest less in research than its potential spillover benefits would warrant .

is there any evidence to support these claims ? .

the regular credit's incentive effect appears to vary widely among firms investing in qualified research , including those that gradually but steadily increase their investment over an extended period .

evidence for such variation can be found in a number of sources , including a 1996 study by economist william cox that identified the corporations from a large group of domestic corporations with sizable research budgets in 1994 that should have been able to claim the regular credit .

 ( the asc did not exist at that time. ) .

the study was based on a sample of 900 publicly traded u.s. - based companies with the largest r&d budgets , culled from a database maintained by compustat , inc .

under the reasonable assumption that qres for these firms were equal to 70% of their reported r&d spending for 1994 , cox determined that 62.5% of the firms could be considered established firms for the purpose of claiming the regular credit , as they had both business revenue and qres in three of the years from 1984 to 1988 ; the remainder were treated as start - up firms .

cox found that 78% of the 900 firms in the sample ( 44.4% were established firms and 33.5% start - up firms ) could have claimed the credit in 1994 , while 22% could have claimed no credit ( 18% of established firms and 4% of start - up firms ) .

he also found that 34% of all firms ( 32.3% were established firms and 1.7% start - up firms ) had qres greater than their base amounts but less than twice those amounts , allowing them to claim credits with a marginal effective rate of 13% , and that 43.8% of all firms had qres greater than double their base amounts , allowing them to claim credits with a marginal effective rate of 6.5% .

these rates measure the reduction in the after - tax cost of an additional dollar of qualified research as a result of taking the regular credit .

in addition , cox found that some of the most research - intensive firms ( as measured by their spending on r&d as a share of revenue ) could claim either no credit or credits with a marginal effective rate half as large as the rate for the credits that could be claimed by firms with much lower propensities to invest in r&d .

the results showed that the regular credit was most beneficial to firms whose research intensities had risen since their base periods , and least beneficial to firms whose research intensities had changed little or not at all , or had shrunk , since their base periods .

most of the firms whose research intensities had declined found themselves in that position for two reasons: ( 1 ) their r&d spending was lower in 1994 than it was in their base period , or ( 2 ) their sales revenue had grown faster than their r&d expenditures over the same period .

critics of the design of the regular credit argue that the pattern of r&d subsidization found in the cox study seems unfair and arbitrary , has no justification in standard economic theory , and undercuts the intended purpose of the credit , which is to encourage all research - intensive firms to spend more on r&d than they otherwise would .

according to cox , the wide variation in the marginal effective rates of the credit among the firms in his analysis suggested "that society places a higher value on adding r&d at certain firms than at others and on adding r&d of certain types than others , when little or no basis for such different valuations exists. .

two rules governing the use of the regular credit are responsible for most of the variation in its incentive effect .

one is the requirement that the base amount for the regular credit cannot be less than 50% of qres .

the other rule is the requirement that older firms use gross receipts and qres from 1984 to 1988 to calculate their fixed - base percentages .

in combination , the rules can produce dissimilar outcomes in the use of the regular credit among firms that spend substantial amounts on qualified research .

of particular concern to critics are firms whose research - intensity has shrunk over time .

the structure of the u.s. economy can and does change markedly in a period of 20 or so years .

so it is likely that economic and competitive conditions in research - intensive industries today bear little resemblance to the conditions that prevailed in the 1980s or 1990s .

most of the firms that have remained in business as independent entities and invested considerable amounts in r&d relative to revenues since then now face different climates for r&d investment .

in some cases , the change in circumstances has led established firms to invest less in r&d as a share of revenues .

firms in this position may not be able to claim the regular credit , even if they spend relatively large sums on r&d .

in claiming that the regular credit's incentive effect is inadequate , critics have in mind two different measures of the effect .

one deals with the credit rate deemed essential to inducing companies to increase their r&d investments , perhaps to socially optimal levels ; the other measure concerns differences between the regular credit's statutory rate and its average marginal effective rate .

both measures are examined here .

critics maintain that the average effective rate of the regular credit is too low to support levels of business investment in research commensurate with its economic benefits .

to substantiate this claim , they point to another study by cox , one that focused on the efficacy of the research tax credit .

cox built the analysis around the premise that tax incentives can overcome the private sector's predilection for investing suboptimal amounts in the creation of new technical knowledge and know - how .

for tax incentives to have this effect , they must be designed so they subsidize r&d spending above and beyond what firms would undertake on their own , and they must be large enough to "raise private after - tax returns on r&d investments to the levels that would result from applying the same rate of taxation to the social rate of return from r&d. .

a variety of studies from the past 50 years or so have concluded that the median private rate of return on r&d investment is roughly 50% of the median social rate of return .

thus , assuming that the average social pre - tax rate of return is two times the average private pre - tax rate of return , the optimal r&d tax subsidy would double the private after - tax rate of return to r&d investment .

for example , given a corporate tax rate of 35% , after - tax returns would equal 65% of pre - tax returns for corporations in the presence of no tax subsidies or preferences .

in this case , the optimal r&d tax subsidy would double the private after - tax returns to r&d investment by increasing them to 130% of pre - tax returns: [2 x ( 1-0.35 ) ] .

cox's analysis implied that the optimal average effective rate for an r&d tax subsidy , or a combination of such subsidies ( eg , a research tax credit combined with the expensing of research expenditures ) , was 30% .

in discussing the policy implications of this finding , cox noted that such a rate was an average and thus would not address the considerable variation among r&d investments in the difference between their private and social returns .

using tax incentives to boost pre - tax returns on r&d investment by 30% across all industries would inevitably provide excessive subsidies for projects with below - average spillover benefits and insufficient subsidies for projects with above - average spillover benefits .

according to cox , lawmakers should be aware that "this imprecision is unavoidable , and its consequences are hard to assess. .

how do existing federal tax subsidies for r&d investment compare with cox's assessment of the optimal r&d tax subsidy ? .

to determine the incentive effect of those subsidies , he estimated the pre - tax and after - tax rates of return under 1995 federal tax law for a variety of hypothetical r&d projects .

the projects differed in the share of r&d expenditures devoted to depreciable assets like structures and equipment , the share of r&d expenditures eligible for both expensing under irc section 174 and the regular research credit , and the economic lives of the intangible assets created by the investments .

cox compared the combined effect of expensing and the credit on after - tax returns to investment in capital - intensive , intermediate , and labor - intensive r&d projects producing intangible assets with economic lives of 3 , 5 , 10 , and 20 years .

expensing equalizes the pre - tax and after - tax rates of return on an investment , since it taxes the income earned by affected assets at a marginal effective rate of zero .

for the typical business r&d investment , only part of the total cost may be expensed under irc section 174 , as tangible depreciable assets like structures and equipment do not qualify for such treatment .

therefore , how expensing affects an r&d investment's after - tax rate of return depends on two factors: ( 1 ) the percentage of the total cost that may be expensed , and ( 2 ) the marginal effective tax rate on income earned by the assets ( including labor ) eligible for expensing .

the regular research credit raises the after - tax rate of return for a portion of current - year qres: those above a base amount .

so its effect on the after - tax returns to an r&d investment depends on both the percentage of the investment's total cost that qualifies for the credit and the effective tax rate on income earned by assets eligible for the credit .

in light of these limitations on the benefits of expensing and the regular credit , cox estimated that expensing and the credit together produced median after - tax rates of return ranging from 101.0% of pre - tax returns for a hypothetical capital - intensive project yielding intangible assets with an economic life of 20 years to 124.7% for a hypothetical labor - intensive project yielding intangible assets with an economic life of three years .

as these percentages are less than the threshold tax subsidy of 130% , he concluded that the research tax subsidies in existence in 1995 did not increase private after - tax returns to r&d investments to the "levels warranted by the spillover benefits that are thought to be typical" for these investments .

some critics of the regular credit and the asc assess their incentive effects using a different measure .

for them , a more important concern than either credit's potential to boost business investment in research to socially optimal levels is discrepancies between the regular credit and asc's average effective rates and their statutory rates .

the discrepancies are not the same for all companies , and they are largely a product of several of the rules governing the use of the credit .

one of those rules is the basis adjustment under irc section 280c ( c ) ( 1 ) .

under this rule , taxpayers investing in qualified research must reduce their deduction for research expenditures under irc section 174 by the amount of any research credit they claim .

this adjustment effectively adds the credit to a firm's taxable income and taxes it at the firm's income tax rate .

this means that for business taxpayers subject to the maximum corporate tax rate of 35% , the basis adjustment decreases the marginal effective rate for the regular credit from 20% to 13% , and the marginal effective rate for the asc from 14% to 9.1% .

firms have the option of computing the regular research credit with a statutory rate of 13% in exchange for not reducing their section 174 deduction by the amount of the credit .

a second rule is the requirement that the base amount for the regular credit must equal 50% or more of a firm's current - year qres .

this rule applies to the computation of the asc .

one implication of the rule is that it curtails the credit's potential benefit to established firms whose ratio of current - year qres to gross income is more than double their fixed - base percentages , or more than double the 16% cap on the fixed - base percentage .

basically , these are firms that historically have invested heavily in qualified research .

start - up firms , whose current - year ratio of qres to gross income exceeds 6% during their first five tax years , or whose current - year ratio is more than double their fixed - base percentages in the ensuing six tax years , also are affected by the rule .

for both sets of firms , the rule further reduces the marginal effective rate of the regular credit to 6.5% .

the third rule is the exclusion of expenditures for equipment and structures and overhead costs from the expenses eligible for the two credits .

many business research projects involve the acquisition of elaborate buildings and sophisticated equipment , and all research projects have overhead costs .

as a result , the rule's effect on the marginal effective rate for the two research credits depends on the share of an r&d investment's cost that is ineligible for the credit .

as this share increases , the credit's marginal effective rate declines , all other things being equal .

for example , if expenditures for physical capital account for half of the cost of an r&d investment , then the marginal effective rate of either credit for the entire investment would be half of what it would be if the entire cost were eligible for the credit .

for firms subject to the 50% rule that invest in research projects where physical capital represents 50% of the total cost , the marginal effective rate for the regular credit would fall to 3.25% .

another factor shaping the marginal effective rate of the regular credit and the asc is delays in using the credit .

in a 2009 report on problems with the credit's design and possible solutions , the gao considered the impact of delays in the use of the credit on the credit's marginal effective rate .

in essence , such delays lower the present value of the credit , and such a reduction in turn lowers the rate .

the longer the delay and the larger a taxpayer's discount rate , the larger the rate decline .

gao estimated the marginal effective rate for all the corporations in the irs database that claimed the credit from 2003 to 2005 and used them to compute a weighted average rate for all taxpayers .

it found that the rate ranged from 6.4% to 7.3% , depending on the assumptions about the discount rate and the length of any delay in using the credit .

as these considerations suggest , the key to bolstering the incentive effect of the regular credit is to increase its marginal effective rates .

there are three ways to do so: ( 1 ) keep the current statutory rate and relax or repeal one or more of the three rules ; ( 2 ) retain the rules but raise the credit's statutory rate to offset their effects ; and ( 3 ) relax the rules and raise the statutory rate .

cox analyzed the effects of both options on after - tax rates of return for the same hypothetical r&d investments discussed above .

in the case of labor - intensive r&d projects , he estimated that the 1995 research tax preferences produced a median after - tax return that was 124.7% of the pre - tax return for projects yielding intangible assets with an economic life of three years , and 115.5% for projects yielding intangible assets with an economic life of 20 years .

repealing the basis adjustment for the credit caused median after - tax return to increase to 146.0% of the pre - tax return for assets with a three - year economic life , and 130.1% for assets with a 20-year economic life .

increasing the statutory rate of the credit to 25% but retaining existing rules ( including the basis adjustment ) led to similar results: the median after - tax return for assets with a three - year economic life was an estimated 133.9% of the pre - tax return , and an estimated 121.9% of the pre - tax return for assets with a 20-year economic life .

as one might expect , increasing the rate to 25% and removing the basis adjustment led to the biggest boost in the ratio of the median after - tax return to the re - tax return: 165.8% for assets with a three - year economic life , and 143.4% for assets with a 20-year economic life .

if it is true that the optimal r&d tax subsidy would raise after - tax returns to 130% of pre - tax returns and no more , then cox's analysis suggested that keeping the regular credit's statutory rate at the current level of 20% but eliminating the basis adjustment would be the preferred approach on efficiency grounds to boosting the credit's incentive effect .

the research tax credit is non - refundable .

this means that only firms with sufficient income tax liabilities may benefit from the full amount of the credit allowed in a tax year .

in addition , the credit is a component of the general business credit ( gbc ) under irc section 38 and therefore subject to its limitations .

for firms undertaking qualified research , a key limitation is that the gbc cannot exceed a taxpayer's net income tax liability , less the greater of its tentative minimum tax under the alternative minimum tax or 25% of its regular income tax liability above $25,000 .

unused gbcs may be carried forward 20 years or back one year .

although there are some advantages to having an unused tax credit to apply against future or past tax liabilities , the advantages do not necessarily outweigh the disadvantages for firms investing in r&d .

one disadvantage is that a business taxpayer is better off using the full amount of a credit today , rather than 5 or 10 years from now , when its present value will be lower than the credit's value in the year it is claimed .

critics contend that the credit's lack of refundability can pose a special problem for small young firms that invest heavily in r&d relative to their income .

in recent decades , numerous new technologies have been launched by such firms , many of which spend substantial sums on r&d during their first few years while losing money .

some argue that a non - refundable research credit could do more harm than good for the typical small start - up firm , as it cannot count on having access to the credit when it is needed to help the firm stay afloat .

to remedy this shortcoming , some advocate making the credit wholly or partially refundable for firms under a certain asset or employment size or age .

other options include allowing small start - up firms that cannot use the current - year credit to sell it to other firms or use it to offset their employment taxes .

under current law , companies that are less than five years old and have less than $5 million in gross receipts in the current tax year are allowed to apply up to $250,000 of any research tax credit they claim against the employer share of the social security tax .

this means that eligible companies making this election on their tax returns could have as much as $250,000 in additional funds to spend on r&d , or any other activity for that matter .

it is unclear how beneficial this option will be for small research - intensive start - up firms that otherwise would be unable to use the full credit owing to insufficient tax liability or a net operating loss .

some critics maintain that another reason the current research tax credit's incentive effect is not as robust as it could or should be lies in the many disputes in each tax year between the irs and companies claiming the credit over the definition of qualified research and the expenditures that qualify for the credit .

for the large corporations that account for most of the credit allowed in a year , these disputes can take five or more years to resolve and impose substantial costs on both the irs and the affected companies .

the credit is now permanent , which erases the uncertainty over the availability of the credit that prevailed from july 1981 until december 2015 .

but there is continuing uncertainty over which expenditures will qualify , and this doubt can weaken the credit's incentive effect , especially among companies that undertake long - term r&d projects requiring multi - year planning .

irs audits of claims for the credit result in some companies receiving smaller credits than the amount they claimed .

in addition , the prospect of having a claim audited , having to provide the required documents to support the claim , and engaging in a lengthy dispute with the irs over its legitimacy deters an unknown number of firms from even claiming the credit .

under the original credit , which was in effect from 1981 through 1985 , research expenditures generally qualified for the credit if they were also eligible for expensing under irc section 174 .

there were three exceptions to this general rule: no credit could be claimed for ( 1 ) research conducted outside the united states , ( 2 ) research in the social sciences or humanities , and any portion of research funded by another entity .

section 174 allows business taxpayers to deduct all "research or experimental expenditures" incurred in connection with their trade or business in the year they were incurred .

in regulation 1.174-2 ( a ) , the irs defined research or experimental expenditures as "research and development costs in the laboratory sense," especially "all such costs incident to the development or improvement of a product. .

expenditures can be considered r&d costs in the "experimental or laboratory sense" if they relate to activities intended to discover information that would eliminate uncertainty concerning the development or improvement of a product .

uncertainty exists in the r&d process when the information available to researchers does not clearly show how they should proceed in developing a new product or improving an existing one .

according to the regulation , the proper standard in determining whether research expenditures qualify for expensing under section 174 is the "nature of the activity to which the expenditures relate , not the nature of the product or improvement being developed. .

in practice , the expenditures that qualify for expensing under section 174 are all the direct and indirect costs a company incurs in developing or improving a product or process , including allowances for the depreciation of tangible assets like buildings and equipment .

expenditures for the cost of acquiring land and depreciable assets used in conducting r&d and certain other costs do not qualify .

responding to a concern that businesses were claiming the credit for activities that had more to do with product development than technological innovation , congress tightened the definition by adding three tests in the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) .

under the act , qualified research still had to match the activities eligible for expensing under section 174 , but those activities also had to satisfy the following criteria: they were directed at discovering information that is "technological in nature" and useful in the development of a new or improved business component for the taxpayer .

they constituted "elements of a process of experimentation. .

they were intended to improve the function , performance , quality , or reliability of a business component .

tra86 defined a business component as "a product , process , computer software , technique , formula , or invention" held for sale or lease or used by a taxpayer in its trade or business .

it also specified that research aimed at developing new or improved internal - use software could qualify for the credit only if it met the general requirements for the credit , was intended to develop software that was innovative and not commercially available , and involved "significant economic risk. .

the significant changes in the definition of qualified research made by the tra86 put pressure on the irs to issue final regulations clarifying the meaning and limits of the three new tests for qualified research .

but for reasons that are not entirely clear , the irs did not issue proposed regulations ( reg - 105170-97 ) on the tests until december 1998 , more than 12 years after the enactment of tra86 .

the regulations set forth guidelines for determining whether or not a business taxpayer has discovered information that is "technological in nature" and "useful in developing a new or improved business component of the taxpayer" through a "process of experimentation that relates to a new or improved function , performance , reliability , or quality. .

the irs proposed that a research project would meet the "discovery test" if it were intended to obtain "knowledge that exceeds , expands , or refines the common knowledge of skilled professionals in the particular field of technology or science. .

at the same time , according to the proposed regulations , such a standard did not necessarily mean the credit would be denied to companies that made technological advances in an "evolutionary" manner , that failed to achieve the desired result , or that were not the first to achieve a particular technological advance .

in addition , the irs proposed that research would meet the experimentation test if it relied on the "principles of physical or biological sciences , engineering , or computer science ( as appropriate ) " to evaluate "more than one alternative designed to achieve a result where the means of achieving the result are uncertain at the outset. .

such an evaluation should entail developing , testing , and refining or discarding hypotheses related to the design of new or improved business components .

the release of the proposed regulations seemed to attract more criticism than praise from the business community .

many of the critical comments addressed the proposed guidelines for the discovery test .

a widely shared objection was that the "common knowledge" test violated the intent of congress and would prove burdensome and unworkable for tax practitioners because it was too subjective .

most of the tax practitioners and businesses that commented on the proposal urged the irs to scrap the test .

after reviewing the comments it received and examining recent case law and the legislative history of the research tax credit , the irs issued what was supposed to be a final set of regulations ( t.d .

8930 ) on the definition of qualified research in late december 2000 .

the final regulations differed in several significant ways from the proposed regulations .

while the final regulations retained the common knowledge test for determining if information gained through research was technological in nature and useful in the development of a new or improved business component , they clarified how the test could be met by specifying that the "common knowledge of skilled professionals in a particular field of science or engineering" referred to information that would be known by those professionals if they were to investigate the state of knowledge in a field of science or engineering before undertaking a research project .

the final regulations also stipulated that a taxpayer was presumed to have passed the common knowledge test if the taxpayer could prove it had been awarded a patent for a new or improved business component .

they also established new standards for determining when the development of computer software for internal use qualified for the credit .

specifically , research on internal - use software was eligible for the regular credit only if it satisfied the general requirements for the credit , entailed "significant economic risk," and resulted in the development of innovative software that was not commercially available .

in spite of these changes , the final regulations aroused almost as much opposition within the business community as the proposed regulations .

a principal objection was the irs's insistence on retaining the discovery test .

many tax practitioners also complained that a number of the provisions in the final regulations were not included in the proposed regulations , precluding public comment on them .

this second round of criticisms spurred the irs to take an unusual procedural step .

about one month after the release of the regulations , the treasury department retracted them ( notice 2001-19 ) .

treasury also requested further comment "on all aspects" of the suspended regulations , promised that the irs would carefully review all questions and concerns , and committed the irs to issue any changes to the final regulations in proposed form for additional comment .

in december 2001 , the irs issued another set of proposed regulations ( reg - 112991-01 ) .

they departed in some significant ways from previous guidance .

among other things , the regulations did not include the requirement set forth in t.d .

8930 that qualified research should seek to discover "knowledge that exceeds , expands , or refines the common knowledge of skilled professionals in a particular field of science or engineering. .

the regulations also modified the definition of the experimentation test so that it became a "process designed to evaluate one or more alternatives to achieve a result where the capability or the method of achieving that result , or the appropriate design of that result is uncertain as of the beginning of the taxpayer's research activities. .

the determination of whether a taxpayer engaged in such a process would be made on the basis of facts and circumstances .

in addition , the proposed regulations stipulated that internal - use software could not to be sold , leased , or licensed to third parties and was eligible for the credit only if it is intended to be novel in its design or applications .

tax practitioners and businesses generally endorsed the proposed changes .

about two years later , the irs published a second set of final regulations ( t.d .

9104 ) intended to clarify the definition of qualified research and certain other matters related to use of the credit .

the regulations noted that information is technological in nature if the process of experimentation used to discover it relies on the principles of the physical or biological sciences , engineering , or computer science .

though they discarded the discovery test included in t.d .

8930 , the regulations made it clear that taxpayers would be deemed to have discovered information that is technological in nature by applying "existing technologies.... and principles of the physical or biological sciences , engineering , or computer science" in the process of experimentation .

such a discovery would not depend on whether a taxpayer succeeded in developing a new or improved business component .

at the same time , having a patent for a business component would be deemed "conclusive evidence that a taxpayer has discovered information that is technological in nature that is intended to eliminate uncertainty concerning the development or improvement of ( such a ) component. .

in addition , t.d .

9104 shed additional light on what constituted a "process of experimentation. .

basically , the regulations specified that such a process had three critical aspects .

first , the actual outcome must be uncertain at the outset .

second , the process must allow researchers to identify more than one approach to achieving the desired outcome .

and third , researchers must use scientific methods to evaluate the efficacy of these alternatives ( eg , modeling , simulation , and a systematic trial - and - error investigation ) .

the regulations noted that a process of experimentation "often involves refining throughout much of the process a taxpayer's understanding of the uncertainty the taxpayer is trying to address. .

a taxpayer's facts and circumstances should be considered in determining whether it had engaged in such a process .

according to a variety of sources , including a 2009 report on the efficacy of the credit by the gao , several issues related to the definition of qualified research and qres have long served as sources of contention between numerous companies investing in r&d and the irs .

these issues are the following: the interpretation and application of the key tests for determining which activities constitute qualified research , particularly with regard to improvements in existing products and processes and the testing that is done to determine the appropriate design for a new product once the development process has ended .

continuing uncertainty over the criteria for determining when expenditures for the development of internal - use software qualify for the credit .

the criteria for determining the amount of wages paid to employees involved in the direct supervision and direct support of qualified research activities that are eligible for the credit .

the criteria for determining which activities are deemed to have commenced after commercial production of a new product has begun ; expenditures for those activities are ineligible for the credit .

the eligibility of research aimed at achieving significant cost reductions .

substantiation of claims for the credit: many companies complain that the irs expects them to provide supportive evidence without giving useful guidance on the required documentation standards .

some critics think that the best way to minimize time - consuming and costly disputes over claims for the research tax credit is to jettison the current definition of qualified research and qres and replace it with the broader and simpler definition of research expenses that qualify for the section 174 expensing option .

others argue that to reduce the frequency of disputes , the treasury department should issue regulations that clarify the following issues: ( 1 ) the conditions under which expenses for the development internal - use software qualify for the credit , ( 2 ) the activities that offer direct support for qualified research , and ( 3 ) when the commercial production of a new product commences .

the same critics recommend that treasury form working groups that include businesses to develop standards for the substantiation of claims for the credit .

another problem with the current research credit , according to some critics , is that it does a poor job of targeting research projects with significant potential to generate substantial economic benefits over time .

they note that the economic rationale for the credit lies in underinvestment in r&d that produces greater social returns than private returns .

and yet , in their view , the design of the credit makes it likely that one dollar of the credit creates less bang for the buck in the long run than does one dollar of a federal research grant , on average .

in general , businesses seek the highest possible return on their investments .

so in selecting research projects to fund , they can be expected to assign a higher priority to projects that are likely to earn substantial profits in the short run than to projects directed at expanding the frontiers of knowledge in a scientific field that seem to have relatively low prospects of yielding profits in the short run .

such pattern of r&d investment is consistent with several significant trends in u.s. research spending stretching back to the 1950s .

as figure 1 illustrates , the federal government has long served as the major source of funding for basic research performed in the united states ; from 1955 to 2008 , its share of total spending ( in current dollars ) for this purpose was about three times greater than the share for businesses , though the gap has narrowed somewhat since the early 1980s .

at the same time , u.s. and foreign - based companies steadily expanded their share of total domestic funding for applied research and development in that period ; by 2008 , the business share was 88% greater than the federal share for applied research and more than five times greater for development .

these trends show that the most companies are inclined to invest much more in applied research and development than in basic research .

this is to be expected , as the returns on investment in basic research tend to be more difficult to appropriate and more uncertain at the outset , than are the returns to investment in applied research and development .

the trends also suggest that the credit mainly subsidizes research projects with relatively small spillover benefits .

one option for increasing the spillover benefits from the credit is to modify it so that the credit expressly targets investment in research aimed at developing "breakthrough products that create new product categories or innovative enhancements to existing products. .

among the ways to accomplish this would be to ( 1 ) create a larger incremental credit ( say 30% ) for such business spending on basic research , ( 2 ) establish a flat credit for such expenditures , and ( 3 ) allow the nsf to administer the new basic research credit .

a possible advantage of using the nsf rather than the irs to administer the credit is that the nsf would be likely to have more of the expertise required to evaluate the potential social returns of basic research projects .

