the federal government has numerous programs to support forest management on state and private forestlands , primarily administered by the forest service ( fs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the house and senate agriculture committees often examine these programs in the periodic legislation to reauthorize agriculture programs , commonly known as farm bills .

both the house ( h.r .

2642 ) and senate ( s. 954 ) versions of the 2014 farm bill contain a forestry title ( as did four of the previous five enacted farm bills ) and also address forests and forestry practices in several other titles .

both bills would repeal , reauthorize , and modify existing forestry assistance programs by setting authorization sunset dates and funding limits .

this report describes current forestry assistance programs mostly funded and administered through the state and private forestry ( s&pf ) branch of the fs .

following a brief overview , this report presents basic information on the programs to assist forestry practices , forest protection , forest recovery , and rural economies — the purposes of the programs , types of activities funded , eligibility requirements , and authorized program duration and funding level , with recent program appropriations .

federal forestry assistance for nonfederal landowners has been a part of usda programs for more than a century .

initial forestry assistance efforts began with the creation of the usda division of forestry in 1881 ( to complement forestry research begun with funding in 1876 ) .

forestry assistance and research programs grew slowly , and in 1901 the division was upgraded to the usda bureau of forestry .

in 1905 , the usda bureau merged with the interior department's division of forestry ( which administered the forest reserves , later renamed national forests ) and became the usda forest service ( fs ) .

forestry assistance , the primary mission of the state and private forestry ( s&pf ) branch , together with forestry research and management of the national forest system , comprise the three primary fs missions .

authority for the forestry assistance programs was reestablished and coordinated in the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 .

this law guided these programs for more than half a century , until it was revised in the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( cfaa ) .

the cfaa has been amended several times , including in the four most recent farm bills .

the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 — the 1990 farm bill — added and rewrote several of the cfaa sections .

the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 — the 1996 farm bill — made a few additions and modifications to the cfaa ( as amended ) .

the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 — the 2002 farm bill — replaced two cfaa provisions ( as amended ) with a new provision , and created another new program .

finally , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 — the 2008 farm bill — established national priorities and a process for states to address them , while adding and modifying other programs .

there are currently more than a dozen forestry assistance programs , as shown in table 1 .

the programs are primarily administered by the fs , with permanently authorized funding but without specified funding levels .

no forestry assistance programs have mandatory spending ; all require annual funding , and all are funded in the annual interior appropriations acts .

table 1 identifies the u.s. code citation , the authorized duration and level of funding , and fy2013 post - sequester funding for each program .

the fy2013 funding includes appropriations to the fs s&pf account and transfers from wildland fire management account .

note that some programs are combined for funding purposes .

programs are listed in decreasing order of fy2013 appropriations .

many of the forestry assistance programs provide different types of aid to the states for undertaking forestry practices to improve timber productivity or to enhance other resource values .

these are shown in table 2 as forest management programs .

for the first time since at least 1978 , no federal forestry program exists to provide direct cost - sharing for forestry practices on private lands .

however , the 2008 farm bill expanded the definition of authorized conservation practices for agricultural conservation programs generally to include forestry practices , and thus financial assistance to private forest landowners may be feasible through the conservation programs .

some programs provide assistance for protecting forestlands from wildfire , insects , diseases , and for preventing conversion of forests to non - forest uses ( eg , agriculture , residences ) .

table 2 shows these as forest protection programs .

forest health and community fire protection activities can be applied on private lands with the cooperation of the landowner .

most other forest protection programs provide financial and / or technical assistance to government or quasi - government entities — states , local governments , communities , volunteer fire departments , and indian tribes .

the community forestry and open space conservation program also allows grants to nonprofit organizations .

two forest recovery and restoration programs provide funding directly to private landowners in response to disasters .

the emergency reforestation program was created in 1990 , and has not been funded since 1993 .

the emergency forest restoration program was created in the 2008 farm bill as an amendment to an existing agricultural conservation program to assist landowners in recovering from natural disasters .

in addition , international forestry has been included in this report , because ( a ) it provides technical assistance to other nations on forestry matters , and ( b ) it has often been funded out of s&pf appropriations .

table 2 also shows the type of assistance available under each program .

some programs provide only technical assistance , which can range from relevant existing information to advice and aid on specific projects .

other programs provide financial assistance .

typically these programs are grants ( with or without contributions from recipients ) or cost - sharing ( with varying levels of matching contributions from recipients ) , although two programs have other "financial" provisions: ( 1 ) forest health protection funds fs activities to survey and to control insects or diseases on state or private lands ( with the consent and cooperation of the landowner ) ; and ( 2 ) forest legacy includes federal purchase of lands or easements as well as grants to states .

many programs include both technical and financial assistance .

four forestry assistance programs provide financial and / or technical aid for planning and implementing forestry practices ( establishing and managing stands of trees ) on nonfederal lands .

two of the programs ( rural assistance and assistance to states ) have been funded through a third fs program ( forest stewardship ) .

historically , forestry assistance has included programs with cost - share assistance to private landowners for forestry practices on their lands , but the forestry - specific landowner assistance program created in the 2002 farm bill ( the forest land enhancement program ) was not reauthorized in the 2008 farm bill , and both the house and senate versions of the 2014 farm bill propose to repeal the program .

there are currently five authorized programs to provide financial and technical assistance for protecting nonfederal forests .

two programs are funded in multiple expanded budget line items .

forest health and rural fire protection both have two funding components , and both receive funds through s&pf appropriations and wildland fire management appropriations .

to date , the community fire protection program has not been funded separately ( though states can use rural fire protection funds for the program ) .

lastly , the community forest and open space conservation program was created in the 2008 farm bill .

the programs are discussed below in descending order of fy2013 funding .

two programs — one new and one long - standing — are authorized to provide financial assistance to landowners whose private lands have been damaged by natural disasters .

neither program has provided funding for landowners in recent years — the long - standing program ( the emergency reforestation assistance program administered by fs ) has not received any appropriations in 15 years , while the new program ( emergency forest restoration program administered by usda ) was created in the 2008 farm bill .

in addition to these several cooperative forestry assistance programs , the cfaa authorizes consolidated payments to the states ( i.e. , a single payment for all the programs ) and establishes three groups to oversee certain programs .

the 2008 farm bill replaced an existing oversight committee with a new structure and purposes .

these are described below .

the u.s. department of agriculture — mostly through the forest service — administers numerous programs to support the management of state and private forestlands .

several programs provide financial and / or technical assistance through the states for planning and implementing forest management practices ( eg , tree planting , site preparation for reforestation , thinning , pruning , fertilizing , prescribed burning , and other activities ) and sometimes practices to enhance other resources ( eg , restoring watersheds , improving wildlife habitat , and other activities ) .

some programs have been combined through the appropriations process .

additional programs provide financial and technical support for protecting nonfederal forests from wildfire , insects , diseases , and clearing for non - forest uses .

these programs cover many continuing threats to forests , although global climate change could exacerbate the effects of these threats .

furthermore , for the forest health program , more funds are used to protect federal lands than cooperative lands .

forest legacy can help prevent forest clearing .

the community fire protection program can assist communities to prepare for wildfires , while the two emergency programs can help landowners restore forests after the disaster .

these programs , as well as many of the forest management programs noted above , can help to protect and restore state and private forestlands from catastrophic wildfires and other damaging agents .

appropriations for forestry assistance programs have fluctuated greatly since fy2000 .

in response to the severe wildfires in the summer of 2000 , funding more than doubled from $213.3 million in fy2000 to a peak of $493.8 million the next year in fy2001 .

however , since fy2008 , overall forestry assistance funding has averaged around $367 million , with $354 million appropriated in fy2013 post - sequester funds .

most forestry assistance programs , with the exception of the forest stewardship and international forestry programs , were reduced in fy2013 appropriations for the third year in a row .

the largest sustained levels of funding have been for the forest protection programs — forest health ( for insect and disease identification and control ) , wildfire assistance , and forest legacy ( for easements to prevent forest clearing ) .

however , funding for all of those programs has been declining since fy2010 .

in particular , funding for rural fire protection is 30% below fy2010 levels , despite the severe wildfire seasons of 2011 and 2012 .

in comparison , forest management assistance funding has remained relatively constant .

both the forest stewardship and urban and community forestry programs have received appropriations around $30 million since fy2009 .

in total , these forestry assistance programs make up less than 10% of the forest service's total $4.9 billion in discretionary appropriations .

overall forest service funding has also been declining , although at a slower rate than the decline in forestry assistance funds .

however , the number , extent , and severity of wildfires continue to exceed historical levels , as does the reported incidence of forest insect and disease infestations on both federal and nonfederal forests .

some may argue that both federal and nonfederal forest owners are thus facing increasing management challenges with decreasing dollars , while others may argue that decreased funding fosters innovative and cost - effective management solutions .

