on january 22 , 2002 , the congressional research service sponsored a seminar on the possiblelessons for u.s. policy from the experiences of other countries in handling their own terrorismchallenges .

although other countries generally have not experienced international terrorist incidentsresembling the events of september 11 , 2001 in concept and in devastating execution , many haveconfronted very severe and prolonged domestic threats .

to discuss whether there are policy lessonsthat the united states might draw from those countries , crs invited several experts on internationalterrorism , and others with particular experiences in one or more cases to discuss the topic .

although this seminar was held over two and a half years ago , several of the topics of discussion and speakers' points of view are relevant to the recommendations made by the report ofthe 9 / 11 commission issued in july 2004 .

the following four paragraphs in this introductionsummarize pertinent points on the utility reform ( which was the major topic of discussion during theseminar ) , as well as on four subjects highly relevant to commission recommendations .

thesesubjects were ( 1 ) the possible tradeoffs between security and civil liberties ; ( 2 ) the tradeoffs betweensecurity risks and costs ; ( 3 ) international cooperation ; and ( 4 ) terrorist financing .

the remainder ofthe text is unchanged from the original publication of july 24 , 2002 .

several of the commission's recommendations dealt with a perceived need for reforms within muslim countries: economic reforms , political reforms , and social reforms , most particularlyeducation .

one of the most controversial topics of discussion at the crs seminar was the utility ofsuch reforms .

the debate centered upon the accuracy of the findings of a 1984 study by one of thespeakers that demonstrated that levels of terrorism did not decrease when economic reforms wereundertaken or when selected economic indicators improved , but rather that violence worsened wheneconomic indicators were better .

other speakers and discussants raised several considerations as towhy this finding may have been true: ( 1 ) terrorists may have intensified their activities as they foundreforms counterproductive to their objectives ; ( 2 ) if negotiations were going on they might haveintensified activities to produce more concessions ; ( 3 ) the government was unable to deliver thedegree of reform needed or had undertaken reforms too late ; ( 4 ) other government actions , such asstopping people on the streets , may have undermined the positive effects of reform ; or simply ( 5 ) that the time frame covered by the study ( four to eleven years , depending on the case ) may have notbeen long enough to demonstrate the true results of reforms .

one speaker pointed out that thetimeframe over which one evaluates a situation can affect perceptions of a policy's effectiveness andoutcome .

 ( see pp .

11-14. ) .

there was some discussion as to whether islamist terrorism was better addressed through long - term programs , such as secularized education , and whether changed circumstances could modify thesocial and psychological context which feeds terrorism .

speakers could not recall a precedent wherethe united states sought to change an educational system abroad to prevent the emergence ofterrorism , but thought perhaps a domestic example , the influence of education in diminishing overtime the power of the ku klux klan , might provide insight into the possible utility of such anapproach .

one speaker said that he found the educational system to be one of the most significantfactors in predicting the occurrence of terrorism .

he attributed a large difference in the degree ofterrorism in quebec , canada , and northern ireland , both of which have separatist movements withinbritish cultures , to the deliberate nationalist indoctrination in northern ireland's schools .

he alsopointed to an example regarding northern ireland where a long term cultural shift in perception hasbeen undermining the pro - terrorism culture there .

 ( see pp .

13-14. ) .

speakers debated the degree towhich the united states could affect islamist terrorism by a change in its policies in the middle east,particularly its policy towards israel .

 ( see pp .

15-16. ) .

the speakers also addressed two sets of tradeoffs that were raised by the 9 / 11 commission .

noting that many of its recommendations called for the government to "increase its presence in ourlives," the commission advanced several recommendations designed to protect civil liberties whilecautioning that security must be reconciled with liberty "since the success of one helps protect theother. .

one speaker opined that whether europe's "severe" anti - terrorism laws grantingextraordinary police powers in the 1970s and 1980s were effectively implemented depended uponthe collection of good intelligence that could minimize the use of intrusive , repressive tactics .

thecommission's recommendations also pointed to the dilemmas raised by evaluating risks within thecontext of limited resources , but concluded , in the case of transportation assets , that "terroristsshould perceive that potential targets are defended. .

discussion at the crs seminar suggested thatdecisions setting priorities in terms of risk may be a difficult - - if not futile - - task , as even thehighest degree of preparedness is not going to prevent terrorist incidents as terrorists turn to secondlevel targets when more desirable targets are well guarded .

the net result , according to one of thespeakers , is that the united states will have to decide what degree of risk it is willing to bear , muchas the united states decides to tolerate the risk of deaths on its highways and from smoking .

 ( seepp .

15-17. ) .

the commission report also indicated through several recommendations the need for international cooperation , with one recommendation calling for the development of a comprehensivecoalition strategy against islamist terrorism .

crs speakers pointed to international cooperation ashelpful in controlling sources of support for terrorist acts , in particular financing and arms .

 ( see pp.8-9. ) .

imad - ad - dean ahmad is president and director of the bethesda - based minaret of freedominstitute , a non - profit educational and policy research organization .

the institute's purposes are tocounter distortions and misconceptions about islamic beliefs and practices , demonstrate the islamicorigins of modern values , expose american and islamic - world muslims to free market thought , andadvance the status of muslim peoples .

dr. ahmad is an adjunct professor teaching courses onreligion and science , and on islamic science , politics and economics at the university of maryland,and an adjunct professor at the johns hopkins school for advanced international studies , wherehe has taught courses on theories of social change and on islam and development .

he is alsopresident of the islamic - american zakat foundation , a charitable organization .

he is the co - editorof islam and the west: a dialog ( 1998 ) , and the author of signs in the heavens: a muslimastronomer's perspective on religion and science ( 1992 ) , and "political economy of liberty in thearab and islamic middle east," in the middle east policy journal ( vol .

3 , 1994 ) .

he graduated cumlaude from harvard university , and holds a ph.d. in astronomy and astrophysics from the universityof arizona .

martha crenshaw is now the colin and nancy campbell professor in global issues and democratic thought at wesleyan university , where she has taught international politics and foreignpolicy since 1974 .

she is one of the first u.s. scholars to publish on terrorism with a case study ofthe national liberation front in the algerian war , revolutionary terrorism: the fln in algeria,1954-1962 ( 1978 ) .

she has published numerous comparative and policy - relevant books and articles .

her books include terrorism and international cooperation ( 1989 ) , and several edited works,among them terrorism , legitimacy , and power: the consequences of political violence ( 1983 ) , and terrorism in context ( 1995 ) .

her articles include theories of terrorism: instrumental andorganizational approaches in inside terrorist organizations , edited by david c. rapoport , newyork: columbia university press , 1988 .

she serves as president of the international society ofpolitical psychology , and is on the executive board of women in international security .

she hasa ph.d. from the university of virginia .

marc gopin is a consultant and researcher with a specialization in the relationship among culture,religion , and war and conflict , particularly as it pertains to the middle east , and a trainer in conflictresolution .

he is a senior associate with the preventive diplomacy program at the center forstrategic and international studies ( csis ) .

he is also a visiting associate professor of internationaldiplomacy with the fletcher school of tufts university and a senior researcher in its institute forhuman security .

he has taught conflict resolution in several countries , and at several academicinstitutions , including the conflict transformation program of eastern mennonite university andthe institute for conflict analysis and resolution of george mason university .

dr. gopin's hasworked extensively on conflict resolution between arabs and jews , and in multi - faith cooperationon global problems .

he is the author of between eden and armageddon: the future of worldreligions , violence , and peacemaking ( 2000 ) , and holy war , holy peace: religion's role insolving the israeli - palestinian conflict ( forthcoming 2002 ) .

he has a b.a .

from columbiauniversity , rabbinic ordination from yeshiva university , and a ph.d. from brandeis university .

christopher hewitt is a professor of sociology at the university of maryland , baltimore county,where he teaches courses on political violence .

in his earliest published work on terrorism , theeffectiveness of anti - terrorist policies ( 1984 ) , first prepared for the state department , he wrote onthe policy applications of other countries' experiences .

since then , he has done extensive work onterrorism and political violence , including comparative articles such as terrorism and publicopinion: a five country comparison ( 1990 ) , and two books: consequences of politicalviolence ( 1993 ) , and the encyclopedia of modern separatist movement s ( 2000 , with tom cheetham ) .

among his many articles and book chapters are "separatism , irridentism , and terrorism: acomparative survey 1945-2000" in countering terrorism through international cooperation ( 1991 ) , "the cost of terrorism: a six country study , " in terrorism: an international journal ( fall1988 ) , and "the dog that didn't bark: flq violence as an issue in canadian politics,: in conflictquarterly ( april 1990 ) .

his forthcoming book , understanding american terrorism: from the klanto al qaeda , will be available this summer .

he has a b.sc .

from the london school of economicsin economics , and a ph.d. in sociology from brown university .

peter s. probst served with the central intelligence agency and the office of the secretary ofdefense for most of his 30 year career .

he recently left government to establish a privateconsultancy , and joined the washington - based institute for the study of terrorism and politicalviolence as its vice - president and director of programs .

his work at dod primarily focused on thefuture terrorist threat and the development of strategies , tactics and policy initiatives to mosteffectively counter it .

while at dod , he co - authored a major study: terror - 2000: the future faceof terrorism .

recently , he participated in meetings with senior government officials held inmoscow in conjunction with a national academy of science symposium on how best to combatcatastrophic terrorism .

before joining dod , mr. probst served 20 years with the cia in both thedirectorate of operations and the directorate of intelligence .

during his later years there , he workedextensively in intelligence analysis and production , preparing reports and studies for use by seniorgovernment officials , including the president .

he is currently a member of the international researchgroup on terrorism , sponsored jointly by the british airey - neave trust and the u.s. institute ofpeace .

he also served with the u.s. air force intelligence service , retiring with a reserve rank oflt .

colonel .

he holds a b.a .

in history and a m.a .

in anthropology / archaeology from columbiauniversity .

hans - ulrich seidt joined the german foreign service in 1982 .

he has held assignments in moscow , nato headquarters in brussels , and the bosnia special task force .

from 1994-1997,he was lecturer for international security policy at the internationales studienkolleg der robertbosch stiftung ; from 1997-1998 he was a senior research fellow at the deutsche gesellschaftfã¼rauswã¤rtige politik .

at the time of this seminar , he was assigned to the embassy of germany inwashington , d.c .

