on march 25 , 2003 , the president sent a fy2003 supplemental request to congress , withrequests for additional funding in support of actions in the middle east .

accounts within theexecutive office of the president , as well as the department of homeland security would beaffected .

with the enactment of the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 ( p.l .

108-7 , division j ) , the accounts covered by the treasury and general government appropriations legislation arefunded through the end of fy2003 .

p.l .

108-7 requires an across - the - board rescission at a rate of0.65% .

during the interim period between the close of fy2002 and february 20 , 2003 the accountswere funded at fy2002 enacted levels under a series of continuing resolutions .

h.r .

5120 and s. 2740 were the legislative vehicles under which the regular appropriations were being considered for the affected accounts in the 107th congress .

thehouse passed h.r .

5120 ( h.rept .

107-575 ) on july 24 , 2002 and the senate committeeon appropriations reported s. 2740 ( s.rept .

107-212 ) on july 17 , 2002 .

no furtheraction was taken on either measure prior to 107th congress adjournment in november .

the president , through the office of management and budget ( omb ) , is required to submit tocongress annually the budget of the united states government .

the fy2003 budget was submittedto congress on february 4 , 2002 .

 ( 1 ) in late february2001 , the president and the office ofmanagement budget had released a blueprint for new beginnings , a responsible budget foramerica's priorities .

 ( 2 ) it is intended to presenta 10-year budget plan and provides more of anoverview than details on specific accounts .

 ( 3 ) insummary , the fy2003 proposed budget would fundthe accounts in the treasury and general government appropriations legislation at $18.7 billion ( discretionary ) .

 ( 4 ) this is just under $1 billion overthe estimated fy2002 funding levels , not takinginto consideration the supplemental funding subsequently enacted .

additionally , it must be kept inmind that terrorist and security events since early september 2001 have had enormous impact onplanning , spending , and funding for the federal government .

all comparison of figures between thefiscal years should take these circumstances into account .

the house passed h.r .

5120 on july 24 , 2002 , on a vote of 308-121 .

the bill , as passed , would fund the discretionary accounts at $18.5 billion , for a total of $35.1 billion .

thehouse committee on appropriations had presented its recommendations in h.rept .

107-575 .

 ( 5 ) thesenate committee on appropriations issued a report to accompany s. 2740 .

s.rept.107-212 shows that the bill , as reported , would fund the discretionary accounts at $18.5 billion , fora total of $34.8 billion .

 ( 6 ) no further action was takenon either measure prior to adjournment of the107th congress on november 22 , 2002 .

the accounts were funded through a series of continuingresolutions which funded them at fy2002 levels .

with enactment of p.l .

108-7 , ( 7 ) the accounts arefunded through the close of the fiscal year .

on march 25 , 2003 , the president sent a fy2003 supplemental request to congress , with requests for additional funding in support of actions in the middle east .

accounts within theexecutive office of the president , as well as the department of homeland security would beaffected .

usually under the budget procedures , congress adopts a concurrent resolution establishing the congressional budget for the government and setting forth budgetary levels for several years in thefuture .

the house and senate appropriations committees then allocate the discretionary fundinglevels ( 302 ( b ) ) allocations to each of the subcommittees .

those allocations are subject to change .

the house and senate have yet to reach agreement on such a congressional budget resolution forfy2003 .

appropriations for the department of the treasury , in addition to funding the operations of the department , fund the work of a group of law enforcement organizations , which include the bureauof alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ; the customs service ; the secret service ; the financial crimesenforcement network ; and the federal law enforcement training center .

treasury appropriationsalso cover the internal revenue service , the financial management service , and the bureau of the public debt .

several of those entities have transferred to the department of homeland security andthe department of justice .

for the most part , the u.s .

postal service operates outside federal funding support .

federal contributions are normally limited to payments to the postal service fund to compensate forrevenues forgone ( e.g . , free postal service for the blind. ) .

however , the postal service is receivingsignificant funding during the fy2002 period to support recovery costs subsequent to the terroristattacks , including the anthrax attacks .

appropriations for the executive office of the president provide salaries and expenses for the white house office , operations of the residences of the president and vice president , and most otheragencies within the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

organizations such as the council ofeconomic advisers , the national security council , the office of management and budget , and theoffice of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) are funded through these provisions .

specificfunding for drug control initiatives is appropriated for distribution to other entities by the ondcp .

in fy2003 , the office of homeland security is a new entity in this category .

among the independent agencies financed through this appropriation are the federal election commission , the general services administration , the national archives and recordsadministration , the office of personnel management , the office of special counsel , and the unitedstates tax court .

the treasury and general government appropriation always has at least two titles in addition to the four covering the funding for specific agencies .

these general titles apply restrictions or "rulesof the road" governmentwide and , quite often , contain authority for defined actions .

for example,each year , there is standard language which prohibits the use of any appropriated funds for thepurpose of employing individuals who are not u.s. citizens or citizens of nations either specified inthat section of the act or on the state department list of nations covered by treaties ; which requiresthat all agencies maintain drug - free workplaces ; and which authorizes the expenditure of fundsappropriated under any act to be used to pay the travel expenses of immediate family members if afederal employee serving overseas has died or has a life - threatening illness .

 ( 8 ) the committee on appropriations in both the house and senate have reorganized to reflect the funding needs for the department of homeland security .

there will be 13 appropriations bills .

however , the funding for the treasury , postal service , executive office of the president , and theindependent agencies will be consolidated into a subcommittee with the department oftransportation .

that subcommittee carry the name transportation , treasury and independentagencies .

bills are introduced in the house and senate when the committees on appropriations havecompleted markup on the provisions .

usually the subcommittees draft legislation and theaccompanying reports .

the full committees use these documents as a basis for discussion and markup .

from the time legislation is introduced , and through enactment , the status will be noted in table1 .

prior to the terrorist attacks of last fall , the office of management and budgethad identified several accounts under this appropriation ( department of the treasury,bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms , u.s. customs service , u.s. secretservice , and the general services administration ) as being funded for functionsrelated to countering terrorism .

with the exception of the counterterrorism fundaccount within the department of the treasury , none of the agencies carried a lineaccount specifically funding counterterrorism , or terrorism responses .

overlapping cyber - securityinitiatives .

in its report , the house committee on appropriationsindicated that it was "concerned about redundancies in developing and implementinggovernmental cyber - security initiatives for the protection of government informationtechnology" and directed omb to submit a report within 90 days of the enactmentof the appropriation bill detailing "the cyber - security initiatives undertaken by thevarious government departments and agencies," specifying "total costs , as of the dateof the report , by department or agency for cyber - security , an identification of thoseinitiatives that are being shared between departments or agencies , an identificationof those initiatives that respond to unique requirements , and an identification ofinitiatives that satisfy requirements of more than one department or agency yet arenot being shared. .

 ( 85 ) government web sites .

concerned "about the lack of uniformity of standards and user friendliness that affectusability of the various department and agency web sites," the house committee onappropriations , in its report , encouraged "the adoption by the administration ofuniform standards that can lead to more user friendly and usable government websites. .

 ( 86 ) government printing .

the house committee on appropriations took issue with a recent omb proposal for"disregarding the statutory requirement of title 44 , u.s. code , section 501 , thatexecutive - branch agencies produce or procure their printing through the governmentprinting office. .

 ( 87 ) in a may 3 , 2002,memorandum to the heads of all executivebranch departments and agencies , omb director mitchell e. daniels , jr. , set forthnew policy with respect to the use of gpo in handling departmental and agencyprinting and duplicating needs .

the new policy allowed that , 44 u.s.c .

501 notwithstanding , "executive branch departments and agencies should not be required to select gpo when more efficient and cost - effective options are available throughthe private sector or other avenues. .

continuing , the memorandum specified that"executive branch departments and agencies should select printing and duplicatingservices based upon the best quality , cost , and time of delivery. .

the memorandumimplied that this change in policy was effective immediately , and stated that guidancewould be forthcoming from omb's office of federal procurement policy and thata proposal would be made for amending the federal acquisition regulation to reflectthe new policy .

 ( 88 ) noting that prior "examinations of such proposals have questioned whether such a policy could result in significant increases in the cost of printinggovernment - wide and could substantially impair public access to governmentinformation through the federal depository library program," the house committeedirected omb to report within 30 days on how its proposal " ( 1 ) improves economyand efficiency in federal printing ; ( 2 ) improves public access to governmentinformation ; and ( 3 ) comports with the concern that unless and until title 44 ischanged by a constitutional process , executive - branch officials responsible forprinting are legally bound to uphold it. .

 ( 89 ) similarly , in its report , the senate committee on appropriations stated that it "strongly opposes the office of management and budget's plans , announced in amay 3 , 2002 , memorandum ( m - 02-07 ) , to ignore the statutory requirement that theprocurement of government publications must be conducted through thegovernment printing office ( gpo ) .

not only has the administration announced anintention to completely disregard a law which has been in place since 1895 andstrengthened in 1994," the report continued , "it has failed to consider theconsequences particularly in terms of government printing costs and public accessto government publications. .

the committee directed "the administration to abideby the statutory requirement , 44 u.s.c .

501 , that printing be done by or through thegovernment printing office. .

 ( 90 ) e - government initiatives .

in its report , the house committee expressed concern "about the establishment ofgovernment's proper role in providing digital services. .

noting that "the federalgovernment's investment in information technology is estimated to be $50 billion forfiscal year 2003 and rife with inefficiencies and redundancies," the report indicatedthat "the administration is to be strongly encouraged to leverage related governmentbusiness processes to improve productivity , eliminate redundant systems , andsignificantly improve the quality of government services," but added that "itse - government plans must be carefully evaluated and monitored to ensure that theydo not support government competition with market - based private providers ofdigital services. .

furthermore , the committee report expressed concern "that thegovernment needs a new blueprint for guiding e - government initiatives. .

consequently , the committee directed omb to provide within 90 days after theenactment of the appropriations bill a report detailing the blueprint used by thee - government task force in its review and adoption of the e - government initiativesmentioned in the president's budget .

 ( 91 ) othermatters to be addressed in the reportinclude "the process used by the task force to consider , and adopt or rejecte - government initiatives ; the evaluations of those and other e - governmentinitiatives that were already provided for , or were requested by an agency or from theprivate sector ; the reviews undertook [sic] by the task force for establishing anddeciding which digital activities and services are inherently governmental and shouldbe pursued as an e - government initiative and which are non - governmental andtherefore fall under private provider's domain ; and the support and guidance from theprivate sector used by the task force in its work. .

endowment for presidential libraries .

the report of the senate committee on appropriationsnoted that section 515 of the bill ( s. 2740 ) "is a new provisionincreasing the size of the endowment for future presidential libraries. .

 ( 92 ) current lawprovides that presidential libraries built after 1985 must have a privately fundedendowment equal to 20% of the facility's assessed value to defray operational costs .

 ( 93 ) the provision in the appropriations bill would increase the private endowmentrequirement to 40% .

presidential libraries are constructed at private expense and,when completed , are deeded to the federal government for operation by the nationalarchives .

the private endowment requirement provides an offset to the public costof maintaining the facility .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely ofefforts to isolate the communist government of fidel castro through comprehensiveeconomic sanctions , including a near total trade embargo and prohibitions on u.s.financial transactions with cuba .

the bush administration has continued this policyof isolating cuba .

restrictions on travel to cuba have been a key and oftencontentious component of the sanctions , as have restrictions on agricultural exportsto cuba .

the 106th congress passed the trade sanctions reform and exportenhancement act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-387 , title ix ) , which allows for one - year exportlicenses for shipping agricultural exports to cuba , although no u.s. privatecommercial financing is allowed .

numerous initiatives have been introduced to ease u.s. sanctions toward cuba , including efforts to ease restrictions on travel and the prohibition againstprivate commercial financing for agricultural products .

in the first session of the107th congress , the house debated two amendments to the fy2002 treasurydepartment appropriations bill , h.r .

2590 , that would ease u.s.sanctions on cuba , approving one , which would prohibit spending for administeringtreasury department regulations restricting travel to cuba , by a vote of 240-186 ( h.amdt .

241 , offered by representative flake ) and rejecting thesecond , which would prohibit treasury department funds from administering theoverall u.s. embargo on cuba , by a vote of 201-227 ( h.amdt .

242 ,offered by representative rangel ) .

ultimately , however , the provision regardingcuba travel restrictions was not included in final congressional action on the bill .

inthe second session , the senate approved its version of the 2002 "farm bill," h.r .

2646 , on february 13 , 2002 , which included a provision ( section335 ) that would have eliminated the prohibition on u.s. private commercialfinancing for agricultural sales to cuba .

the house version had no such provision,and it was not included in the conference report on the bill .

the issue of whether to ease cuba sanctions was part of the debate during consideration of the fy2003 treasury department appropriations measure ( h.r .

5120 and s. 2740 ) .

secretary of state colin powelland secretary of the treasury paul o'neill said they would recommend that thepresident veto legislation that includes a loosening of restrictions on travel to cubaor the prohibition on private financing for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

thewhite house also indicated that president bush would veto the treasury departmentappropriations bill if it had such provisions .

in july 23 , 2002 floor action on h.r .

5120 , the house approved three cuba sanctions amendments and rejected two .

the house approved a flakeamendment ( h.amdt .

552 ) , by a vote of 262-167 , that would providethat no funds could be used to administer or enforce the treasury departmentregulations with respect to travel to cuba .

the flake amendment would not preventthe issuance of general or specific licenses for travel to cuba .

the house alsoapproved a second flake amendment , ( h.amdt .

553 ) , by a vote of251-177 , that would prohibit funds from being used to enforce any restriction onremittances to nationals of cuba .

current regulations allow remittances , but theseare limited to $300 per quarter .

finally , the house approved a moran ( kansas ) amendment ( h.amdt .

554 ) , by voice vote , that would provide that nofunds could be used to implement any sanction on private commercial sales ofagricultural commodities or medicines .

some suggest that the practical effect of thisamendment would be to prevent the treasury department's office of foreign assetscontrol ( ofac ) from ensuring that sales to cuba do not include private financing .

 ( 94 ) some observers have also raised the issue of whether the effect of all three of theseamendments would be limited since the underlying embargo regulations wouldremain unchanged ; enforcement action against violations of the relevant embargoregulations could potentially take place in future years when the treasury departmentappropriations measure did not include the funding limitations on enforcing the cubaembargo .

 ( 95 ) the house also rejected two cuba amendments during consideration of h.r .

5120 .

a rangel amendment ( h.amdt .

555 ) , rejectedby a vote of 204-226 , would have prevented any funds in the bill from being used toimplement , administer , or enforce the overall economic embargo of cuba .

a gossamendment ( h.amdt .

551 ) , rejected by a vote of 182-247 , would haveprovided that any limitation on the use of funds to administer or enforce regulationsrestricting travel to cuba or travel - related transactions would only apply after thepresident certified to congress that certain conditions were met regarding biologicalweapons and terrorism .

the rule for the bill's consideration , h.res .

488 ( h.rept .

107-585 ) , had provided that the goss amendment would not be subject toamendment .

the senate version of the treasury department appropriations measure , s. 2740 , as reported by the senate committee on appropriations ( s.rept .

107-212 ) , includes a provision , in section 516 , that is similar although notidentical to the flake amendment described above regarding travel .

it provides thatno funds may be used to enforce the treasury department regulations with respectto any travel or travel - related transactions , but would not prevent ofac , whichimplements the travel regulations , from issuing general and specific licenses fortravel to cuba .

in addition , section 124 of the senate bill stipulates that no treasurydepartment funds for "departmental offices , salaries , and expenses" may be usedby ofac , until ofac has certain procedures in place to expedite the processing oflicense applications for travel .

final action on the fy2003 treasury department appropriations measure was not completed before the end of the 107th congress , but in the 108th congress , thefy2003 omnibus appropriations bill ( h.j.res .

2 ) included treasurydepartment appropriations .

the senate version of h.j.res .

2 , approvedjanuary 23 , 2003 , did not include the senate appropriations committee provision from the 107th congress that would have eased travel restrictions .

however , thesenate omnibus bill included a provision with the goal of expediting action by thetreasury department's office of foreign assets control on license applications fortravel within 90 calendar days ( division j , treasury appropriations , section 124 ) .

in the end , however , the conference report to the omnibus bill , h.rept .

108-10 , filedon february 13 , 2003 , did not retain the provision expediting action on travel licenseapplications .

for further information , see crs report rl31139 , cuba: u.s .

restrictions on travel and legislative initiatives ; crs issue brief ib10061 , exempting food andagricultural products from u.s. economic sanctions: status and implementation ; and crs report rl31740 , cuba: issues for the 108th congress .

the fy2003 funding cycle was unusual in several respects .

the house andsenate generally agree upon a congressional budget resolution which sets a ceilingfor overall spending .

the respective committees on appropriations then allocate tothe subcommittees what their spending limits are for the funding cycle .

during thefy2003 funding cycle , there was no formal agreement on such a resolution .

thehouse committee on appropriations issued so - called 302 ( b ) allocations for thehouse subcommittees on june 21 , 2003 .

 ( 96 ) asecond unusual aspect was that not onlydid the funding measures fail to be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year,there was no solution by the time the congress adjourned .

the funding for the fiscalyear was enacted almost two months into the next congress , one month short of thehalfway mark of the fiscal year .

during the interim period , the accounts were fundedat the fy2002 enacted levels .

p.l .

108-7 , the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 funded the treasury and general government accounts at $34,653,476,000 .

 ( 97 ) the conferencereport does not provide a breakdown of mandatory and discretionary funding .

the house committee on appropriations filed a report to accompany h.r .

5120 .

h.rept .

107-575 shows that the bill , as reported , would fundthe discretionary accounts at $18.5 billion , for a total of $35.1 billion .

 ( 98 ) the following summaries appeared in the press release from the house appropriations committee following their july 9 , 2003 mark up: ( 99 ) the subcommittee recommends $18.5 billion in support of fiscal year 2003 operations of programs under its jurisdiction .

this recommendation is above the president's request by $538 million and isconsistent with the subcommittee's 302 ( b ) spending allocation .

the committeeincludes $200 million for election administration reform and makes the availabilityof these funds subject to authorization .

excluding election administration reform , thesubcommittee's recommendation is $338 million above the president's request and$51 million below the fiscal year 2002 enactedlevels .

the subcommittee rejects the president's proposal to fund $250 million in base operations of the customs servicethrough an increase in passenger processing fees - estimated to generate only $167million in new revenue .

instead , the subcommittee funds base operations thru adirect appropriation , which accounts for most of the increase above the president'srequest .

the committee provides approximately $4.2 billion in support of homelandsecurity efforts ; $246.4 million for the high intensity drug trafficking areasprogram ; $439 million for customs service automation modernization , including$316.9 million to continue modernization of the antiquated automated commercialsystem ; $646 million for gsa's construction program , including $309 million forsite acquisition , design and / or construction of 11 courthouse ; and $436 million forcontinued upgrades to irs's information technologysystems .

the senate committee on appropriations filed s.rept .

107-212 to accompany s. 2740 .

the report shows that the accounts would befunded at $34,766,450,000 ( mandatory and discretionary ) , which exceeds the requestof $34,276,277,000 , an increase of almost $500 million .

it appears that a significantamount of the increase reflects the committee's recommendation that the pay parityprovision be funded .

table 3 .

appropriations for the treasury , postalservice , executive office of the president , and general government , fy1998 tofy2002 ( in billions of current dollars ) a source for fy2002: u.s. congress , house , committee on appropriations .

a these figures , in current dollars , include cbo adjustments for permanent budget authorities , rescissions , and supplementals , aswell as other elements factored into the cbo scorekeepingprocess .

for a brief presentation on cbo scorekeeping see: u.s.congressional budget office , maintaining budgetary discipline:spending and revenue options ( washington: gpo , 1999 ) .

theappendix beginning on p. 281 provides the "scorekeepingguidelines," as found in the conference report to the balancedbudget act of 1997 .

also available at http: / / www.cbo.gov / .

table 4 .

treasury , postal service , executive office of the president , and general government appropriations , fy2003 , by titleand major accounts ( in millions , without cbo scorekeeping ) source: "conference report on h.j.res .

2 , consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003," congressional record , vol .

149 , 108th cong.,1stsess. , feb. 14 , 2002 ( washington: gpo , 2003 ) , pp .

h639-h645 .

table 5 .

department of the treasury , postal service , executiveoffice of the president , and general governmentappropriations , 2003 ( in thousands of dollars ) sources: "conference report on h.j .

res .

2 , consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003," congressional record , vol .

149 , 108th cong. , 1st sess.,feb .

14 , 2002 ( washington: gpo , 2003 ) , pp .

h639-h645 .

figures for s. 2740 are from s.rept .

107-212 .

note that figures do not reflectthe 0.65% across - the - board rescission required by p.l .

108-7 .

the following definitions are selected from the "glossary of budgetary terms," asfound in crs report 98-720 ( pdf ) , manual on the federal budget process , by robertkeith in consultation with alan schick .

account .

a control and reporting unit for budgeting and accounting .

appropriation .

a provision of law providing budget authority that permits federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments , of the treasury for specifiedpurposes .

annual appropriations are provided in appropriations acts ; mostpermanent appropriations are provided in substantive law .

authorization .

a provision in law that authorizes appropriations for a program or agency .

budget authority .

authority provided by law to enter into obligations that normally result in outlays .

the main forms of budget authority are appropriations , borrowingauthority , and contract authority .

budget resolution .

a concurrent resolution passed by both houses of congress , but not requiring the signature of the president , setting forth the congressional budget forat least the next five fiscal years .

the budget resolution sets forth various budgettotals and functional allocations , and may include reconciliation instructions , todesignated house or senate committees .

continuing resolution .

an act ( in the form of a joint resolution ) that provides budget authority to agencies or programs whose regular appropriation has not beenenacted after the new fiscal year has started .

a continuing resolution usually is atemporary measure that expires on a specified date or is superseded by enactment ofthe regular appropriations act .

some continuing resolutions , however , are in effectfor the remainder of the fiscal year and are the means of enacting regularappropriations .

direct spending .

budget authority , and the resulting outlays , provided in laws other than annual appropriations acts .

appropriated entitlements are classified as directspending .

direct spending is distinguished by the budget enforcement act fromdiscretionary spending and is subject to the pago rules .

it is also referred to as"mandatory spending. .

discretionary spending .

budget authority , and the resulting outlays , provided in annual appropriations acts , but not including appropriated entitlements .

federal funds .

all monies collected and spent by the federal government other than those designated as trust funds .

federal funds include general , special , publicenterprise , and intragovernmental funds .

mandatory spending .

see "direct spending. .

obligation .

a binding agreement ( such as through a contract or purchase order ) that will require payment .

outlays .

payments made ( generally through the issuance of checks or disbursement of cash ) to liquidate obligations .

outlays during a fiscal year may be for payment ofobligations incurred in prior years or in the same year .

pago ( pay - as - you - go ) process .

the procedure established by the budget enforcement act to ensure that revenue and direct spending legislation does not addto the deficit or reduce the surplus .

pago requires that any increase in the deficitor reduction in the surplus due to legislation be offset by other legislation orsequestration .

pago is enforced by estimating the five - year budgetary effects of allnew revenue and direct spending laws .

reconciliation process .

a process established in the congressional budget act by which congress changes existing laws to conform tax and spending levels to thelevels set in a budget resolution .

changes recommended by committees pursuant toa reconciliation instruction are incorporated into a reconciliation bill .

revolving fund .

an account or fund in which all income derived from its operations is available to finance the fund's continuing operations without fiscal yearlimitation .

scorekeeping .

procedures for tracking and reporting on the status of congressional budgetary actions affecting budget authority , receipts , outlays , the surplus or deficit,and the public debt limit .

supplemental appropriation .

budget authority provided in an appropriations act in addition to regular or continuing appropriations already provided .

supplementalappropriations acts sometimes include items not included in regular appropriationsacts for lack of timely authorization .

trust funds .

accounts designated by law as trust funds for receipts and expenditures earmarked for specific purposes .

user fees .

fees charged to users of goods or services provided by the federal government .

in levying or authorizing these fees , congress determines whether therevenue should go into the u.s. treasury or should be available to the agencyproviding the goods or services .

