the collapse of enron corp. in late 2001 marked the beginning of a long series of scandalsinvolving major u.s. corporations .

this report lists civil suits filed by federal regulatory agenciescharging individuals and corporations with violations related to these scandals .

the list is limitedto companies and their officers or employees that fit within the enron pattern .

that is , these arecases that allege one or more of the following: irregular accounting and auditing , managementself - dealing , conflicts of interest between firms and financial advisors ( or wall street firms and theircustomers ) , and manipulation or abusive trading in energy markets .

small "garden variety" examplesof securities or accounting fraud are excluded .

a number of these cases , noted in the table , have also resulted in criminal indictments , somefollowed by guilty pleas .

these post - enron criminal charges are listed in crs report rl31866 , criminal charges in corporate scandals .

the civil cases listed here include only those filed by federal regulatory agencies - - principally the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , but also a few actions by thecommodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) .

private lawsuits , such as shareholder derivative actions , are not included , although manyof the companies listed are targets of multiple private suits brought by investors , employees , andothers .

the most common form of resolution of civil cases like these is the consent agreement,whereby the defendant neither admits nor denies any wrongdoing .

despite the formal nonadmissionof guilt , the consent agreement often imposes fines and other sanctions .

these are described in thelist .

descriptions of the charges are mostly drawn from government agency press releases or otherdocuments .

these are accessible on the agencies' websites .

for example , sec press releases areavailable at http: / / www.sec.gov / news / press.shtml , cftc press releases are available at http: / / www.cftc.gov / cftc / cftcpressoffice.htm , and ferc's at http: / / www.ferc.gov / press - room / press - releases.asp .

these press releases often contain links to theactual court filings , which provide more detailed descriptions of the cases .

additional abbreviations used in the following table are nasd ( national association ofsecurities dealers ) , nyse ( new york stock exchange ) , and nasaa ( north american securitiesadministrators association ) .

table 1 .

list of civil charges filed by federal regulators in corporate scandals source: the government agencies' press releases are accessible on their websites: sec at http: / / www.sec.gov / news / press.shtml , cftc at http: / / www.cftc.gov / cftc / cftcpressoffice.htm and ferc at http: / / www.ferc.gov / press - room / press - releases.asp .

abbreviations: nasd ( national association of securities dealers ) , nyse ( new york stock exchange ) , and nasaa ( north american securitiesadministrators association ) a .

cases also resulted in criminal indictments , some followed by guilty pleas .

return to contents section of this long report .

