article i , section 7 , clause 1 of the u.s. constitution , is known generally as the "origination clause" because it requires that all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representatives ; but the senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills .

as generally understood in both the house and senate , this clause carries two kinds of prohibitions .

first , the senate may not originate any measure that includes a provision for raising revenue , and second , the senate may not propose any amendment that would raise revenue to a non - revenue measure .

the senate , however , may generally amend a house - originated revenue measure as it sees fit .

these prohibitions can be enforced in either the house or the senate , and there are ample precedents for both .

as with many provisions of the constitution , the precise meaning and application of these few words has been refined through practice and precedent since it was first ratified .

this report examines the historical record with regard to the origins of the clause , and analyzes its evolution , describing congressional and court precedents , to provide a summary of how the clause is currently understood .

this report also examines the various procedures by which disputes concerning the origination clause have been resolved .

among the most significant issues debated at the constitutional convention in philadelphia were those relating to the respective roles for the proposed house of representatives and senate .

vesting the authority to originate revenue measures in the house exclusively was one aspect of the compromise whereby delegates from small and large states agreed in principle to a bicameral congress .

what role each chamber would play , and what authority each would exercise , was not easily arrived at .

in particular , how authority would be assigned with regard to legislation concerning money was one of the more salient aspects of that debate .

the idea that some or all money bills should originate in the popularly elected chamber of the legislature was a product of british and colonial experience , an experience that had been rekindled when the newly independent states adopted new constitutions in 1776 or shortly thereafter .

a number of delegates to the philadelphia convention felt strongly that , for the federal government , the power to originate money bills should also reside solely in the house of representatives , because it , unlike the senate , would be directly elected by people .

in the words of elbridge gerry , a delegate to the convention from massachusetts: taxation and representation are strongly associated in the minds of the people , and they will not agree that any but their immediate representatives shall meddle with their purses .

as first proposed by gerry on june 13 , 1787 , the convention rejected , 3-8 , a proposal to add language providing that "money bills ... shall originate in the first branch of the national legislature. .

the issue was addressed again by the compromise committee on representation , chaired by gerry , on july 3 .

the committee's report recommended that [a]ll bills for raising or appropriating money and for fixing the salaries of the officers of the government of the united states , shall originate in the first branch of the legislature , and shall not be altered or amended by the second branch — and that no money shall be drawn from the public treasury but in pursuance of appropriations to be originated by the first branch .

this proposal was paired by the committee with one providing that "in the second branch of the legislature each state shall have an equal vote. .

this time the convention voted , 5-3 , to retain the restriction .

on august 8 , the question was raised again on the grounds that the provision unnecessarily restricted the legislative role of the senate .

although george mason of virginia feared that striking the provision could "unhinge the compromise of which it made a part," the convention voted , 7-4 , to strike it .

edmund randolph of virginia subsequently suggested that the problem of the earlier language was that it could be interpreted so broadly that it could apply to legislation that only incidentally raised money , and proposed modifying it .

his proposal made the language more specific regarding what legislation the senate might originate , prohibiting only "bills for raising money for the purpose of revenue or for appropriating the same. .

however , the same proposal also included language to restrict the senate's role in considering such legislation by providing that it could not be "amended or altered by the senate as to increase or diminish the sum to be raised , or change the mode of levying it , or the object of its appropriation. .

randolph's arguments invoked the clause's part in the compromise which had given the smaller states equal representation in the senate , and called on them to support the proposal .

on august 11 , he successfully moved that the convention to reconsider the question , but on august 13 the new language was rejected , 4-7 .

on august 15 , caleb strong of massachusetts again raised the question of the original gerry language , this time altered to allow the senate to "propose or concur with amendments as in other cases. .

the convention postponed deciding the question that day , and again on september 5 .

finally , on september 8 , the language of strong's proposal was revised , and the origination clause was adopted by the convention , 9-2 , in the form that was later ratified .

although the application of the origination clause was discussed at the philadelphia convention , the constitution does not provide specific guidelines as to what constitutes a bill for raising revenue .

the meaning of a "bill for raising revenue" is therefore a question of interpretation .

as a result , congress and federal courts both have played roles in establishing the precedents that guide interpretation and application of the origination clause .

the system of government formulated by the framers of the constitution in 1787 incorporated an intricate balancing of authorities and prerogatives , between the federal and state governments , among the branches of the federal government , and within the legislative branch , between the house and senate .

on the issue of taxation , the framers sought to mirror british practice by requiring that "all bills for raising revenue" originate in the popularly elected house , but balanced this by allowing the senate the right to amend such bills .

left ambiguous was a precise definition about which measures would comprise revenue bills , and how far the senate's right to amend them extended .

over the course of more than two centuries of experience , the meaning of the origination clause has been honed by congressional and judicial precedents .

today , the clause applies unambiguously only to those bills that have as their primary purpose raising funds for the general operation of the federal government .

however , it remains for the house , senate , and federal courts to employ this understanding to enforce the application of the clause .

the primary method for ensuring the enforcement of the origination clause has historically been blue - slip resolutions adopted by the house of representatives .

this remains true today , although other avenues of enforcement , from simple house inaction on senate - originated bills to review by the supreme court , also play significant roles .

cannon , clarence .

cannon ' s precedents of the house of representatives of the united states including references to provisions of the constitution , the laws , and decisions of the united states senate , vol .

vi , chap .

clxxx .

washington: gpo , 1935 .

deschler , lewis .

deschler ' s precedents of the united states house of representatives including references to provisions of the constitution and laws , and to decisions of the courts , vol .

3 , chap .

13 , part c. washington: gpo , 1977 .

evans , michael w. , 'a source of frequent and obstinate altercations': the history and application of the origination clause , tax history project , 2004 ( accessible at http: / / www.taxhistory.org / thp / readings.nsf / artweb / 8149692c128 8 46ef85256f5f000f3d67 ? .

opendocument ) .

farrelly , marie t. "special assessments and the origination clause. .

fordham law review 58 ( december 1989 ) : 447-69 .

hoffer , john l. , jr. "the origination clause and tax legislation. .

boston university journal of tax law 2 ( may 1984 ) : 1-22 .

hinds , asher c. hinds ' precedents of the house of representatives of the united states including references to provisions of the constitution , the laws , and decisions of the united states senate , vol .

ii , chap .

xlvii .

washington: gpo , 1907 .

jipping , thomas l. "tefra and the origination clause: taking the oath seriously. .

buffalo law review 35 ( spring 1986 ) : 633-92 .

madara , f. g. "annotation: application of constitutional requirement that bills for raising revenue originate in lower house. .

in american law reports annotated , 2d series , editor - in - chief edwin stacey oakes , vol .

4 , 973-990 .

rochester , ny: the lawyers co - operative publishing co. , 1949 .

supp .

2002 .

medina , j. michael .

"the origination clause in the american constitution: a comparative survey. .

tulsa law journal 23 ( winter 1987 ) : 165-234 .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on the judiciary .

power of the senate to originate appropriations bills , 46 th congress , 3 rd session , 1881 , h.rept .

147 .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on ways and means .

report on the legislative and oversight activities of the committee on ways and means during the 1 11 th congress , 111 th congress , 2 nd session , 2011 , h.rept .

111-708 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on government operations .

create a joint committee on the budget: hearing before the committee on government operations on s. 537 .

88 th congress , 1 st session , march 19-20 , 1963 .

u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on government operations .

the authority of the senate to originate appropriation bills .

88 th congress , 1 st session , 1963 , s.doc .

17 .

