nearly half a million miles of oil and gas transmission pipeline crisscross the united states .

 ( 1 ) these pipelines are integral to u.s. energy supply and have vital links to other critical infrastructure,like power plants , airports , and military bases .

while an efficient and fundamentally safe means oftransport , many pipelines carry volatile or flammable materials with the potential to cause publicinjury and environmental damage .

the nation's pipeline networks are also widespread , runningalternately through remote and densely populated regions ; consequently , these systems are inherentlyvulnerable to terrorist attack .

pipeline operators have had security and emergency response programsin place for decades , but they have recently been taking steps to enhance those programs in responseto new terrorist threats .

congress passed legislation to further encourage the pipeline industry toadopt better security practices , and to provide federal oversight of operator security programs ( p.l.107-71 , p.l .

107-296 , p.l .

107-355 ) .

policy makers are now examining the progress and adequacyof these efforts .

this report provides an overview of recent federal activities related to pipeline security , including safety activities with links to security .

the report describes the u.s. gas and oil pipelinenetworks , the industry's safety record and security risks , and the industry's security activities sinceseptember 11 , 2001 .

it summarizes recent changes in federal pipeline security law and relatedchanges in the security roles of federal agencies .

the report discusses several policy concerns relatedto federal pipeline security efforts: 1 ) federal threat information for pipelines , 2 ) criteria foridentifying "critical"assets , 3 ) tsa funding for pipeline security , and 4 ) federal agency cooperationin pipeline security .

some 470,000 miles of oil and gas transmission pipeline crisscross the united states , with linksto mexico and canada .

these pipelines run throughout the country , but the greatest concentrationconnects the major energy - producing regions in the south with the major energy - consuming regionsin the northeast ( figure 1 ) .

source: energy information administration there are roughly 180,000 miles of oil pipeline in the united states carrying over 75% of the nation's crude oil and around 60% of its refined petroleum products .

 ( 2 ) some 180 companies operatethe inter state lines , which account for roughly 80 % of total pipeline mileage and transportedvolume .

 ( 3 ) the largest u.s. pipeline is the transalaska pipeline system ( taps ) , which transportscrude oil from alaska's north slope oil fields to the marine terminal in valdez .

taps runs some800 miles and delivers roughly 17% of united states domestic oil production .

 ( 4 ) like taps , majoroil pipelines generally terminate at logistics hubs which typically link multiple pipelines , maintainsubstantial storage facilities and serve as gateways for regional distribution by truck , tanker , barge,or other means .

the u.s. natural gas pipeline network consists of around 210,000 miles of inter state transmission , plus approximately 75,000 miles of intra state transmission .

 ( 5 ) around 80 systems makeup the inter state network .

another 60 or so systems operate strictly within individual states .

 ( 6 ) these inter state and intra state transmission pipelines feed around 1.1 million miles of regionallines insome 1,300 local distribution networks .

 ( 7 ) collectively , these gas pipelines transport nearly all of thenatural gas in the united states .

gas pipelines serve electric generation and industrial customersdirectly , and link through "city gates" to regional distribution mains which , in turn , feed the localservice lines of retail gas consumers .

some pipelines are also connected to liquefied natural gas ( lng ) storage tanks which augment pipeline gas supplies during peak demand periods .

accordingto the department of energy , there are 113 active lng facilities in the u.s. , mostly in the northeast , many located near populated areas .

 ( 8 ) .

the natural gas pipeline safety act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-481 ) and the hazardous liquid pipelineact of 1979 ( p.l .

96-129 ) are two of the key early acts that specify the federal role in pipeline safety .

under both statutes , the transportation secretary is given primary authority to regulate key aspectsof interstate pipeline safety: design , construction , operation and maintenance , and spill responseplanning .

pipeline safety regulations , some with security implications , are covered in title 49 of thecode of federal regulations .

 ( 25 ) this title: authorizes dot to inspect pipelines and enforce its regulations with fines , injunctions , and criminal penalties requires operators to report incidents , safety - related conditions and annualsummary data prescribes minimum pipeline safety requirements , including operatorqualifications for regulated functions imposes oil spill response plan requirements to reduce environmental impactof accidental discharges provides grants - in - aid to state pipeline safety compliance agencies that adoptdamage prevention programs requires operators to establish drug and alcohol programs .

dot administers pipeline regulations through the office of pipeline safety ( ops ) within the research and special programs administration ( rspa ) .

the ops has approximately 150 staff,including 100 inspectors generally located outside of washington , d.c. ( 26 ) the ops safety programis funded primarily by user fees assessed on a per - mile basis on each regulated pipeline operator ( 49usc60107 ) .

among other security - related provisions of p.l .

96-129 and subsequent laws , the ops requires general protection of "exposed" oil pipeline facilities from vandalism and unauthorized entry .

 ( 27 ) theops also requires specified pipeline operators to establish written procedures for communicatingwith governmental response agencies and other public officials during emergencies .

 ( 28 ) certainreleases from oil or gas pipelines must be reported to dot's national response center .

 ( 29 ) the opspractices emergency response to oil spills with federal , state , and industry representatives .

thelessons learned from these exercises , as well as the formal and informal relationships establishedduring these drills , help prepare for releases in deliberate attacks .

since 1997 , the ops has increasingly encouraged industry's implementation of "integrity management" programs on pipeline segments near "high consequence" areas .

integrity managementprovides for continual evaluation of pipeline condition ; assessment of risks to the pipeline ; inspection or testing ; data analysis ; and followup repair , as well as preventive or mitigative actions .

high consequence areas include population centers , commercially navigable waters , andenvironmentally sensitive areas , such as drinking water supplies or ecological reserves .

the integritymanagement approach directs priority resources to locations subject to the greatest consequencesrather than applying uniform treatment to the entire pipeline network .

 ( 30 ) integrity management riskassessments could be interpreted to include security , but the regulation does not explicitly addressterrorism , and the ops has provided "minimal" guidance to operators regarding terrorism risksexpected in their plans .

 ( 31 ) the ops made integritymanagement programs mandatory for mostoperators with 500 or more miles of regulated oil pipeline as of march 31 , 2001 ( 49cfr195 ) .

pipeline operators have always sought to secure their systems .

while their security programstraditionally tended to focus on personnel safety and preventing vandalism , some have been morecomprehensive .

for example , security at the trans - alaska pipeline during the gulf war includedmeasures such as armed guards , controlled access , intrusion detection and dedicated communicationsat key facilities , as well as aerial and ground surveillance of the pipeline corridor .

 ( 41 ) however , theevents of september 11 , 2001 focused attention on the vulnerability of pipelines to different terroristthreats .

in particular , the terrorist attacks raised the possibility of systematic attacks on pipelines bysophisticated terror groups in a manner that had not been widely anticipated before .

after the september 11 attacks , natural gas pipeline operators immediately increased security and began identifying additional ways to deal with terrorist threats .

gas pipeline operators , forexample , through the interstate natural gas association of america ( ingaa ) , formed a securitytask force to coordinate and oversee the industry's security efforts .

the ingaa states that it ensuredthat every member company designated a senior manager to be responsible for security .

workingwith dot , the department of energy ( doe ) , and non - member pipeline operators , the ingaa states that it assessed industry security programs and began developing common risk - based practices forincident deterrence , preparation , detection and recovery .

these assessments addressed issues suchas spare parts exchange , critical parts inventory systems , and security communications withemergency agencies , among other matters .

the ingaa also worked with federal agencies,including the ops and homeland security , to develop a common government threat notificationsystem .

 ( 42 ) the natural gas companies reported significant commitments to bolster security at their critical facilities .

according to the american gas association ( aga ) , companies strengthened emergency,contingency and business continuity plans ; increased liaison with law enforcement ; increasedmonitoring of visitors and vehicles on pipeline property ; monitored pipeline flows and pressure ona continuous basis ; increased employee awareness to security concerns ; and deployed additionalsecurity personnel .

 ( 43 ) the industry also begandeveloping encryption protocol standards to protectgas systems from cyber attack .

 ( 44 ) operators alsosought redundancy in the delivery system to providegreater flexibility to redirect or shut down product flows .

the oil pipeline industry responded to the september 11 attacks in a manner similar to that of the gas pipeline industry .

pipeline operators reviewed procedures , tightened security , reroutedtransportation patterns , closely monitored visitors and made capital improvements to harden keyfacilities .

 ( 45 ) operators also increased surveillanceof pipelines , conducted more thorough employeebackground checks , and further restricted internet mapping systems .

 ( 46 ) the association of oil pipelines ( aopl ) and the american petroleum institute ( api ) , working together , provided guidance tomember companies on how to develop a recommended pipeline security protocol analogous to anexisting protocol on managing pipeline integrity .

along with the gas pipeline industry , the oilpipeline industry reconciled its levels of security threat and associated measures with the nationalthreat advisory system of the office of homeland security .

according to the aopl , 95 percent ofoil pipeline operators had developed new security plans and had instituted the appropriate securityprocedures by february , 2003 .

the remaining 5 percent are primarily small operators in otherbusinesses but with oil pipelines between plant facilities .

 ( 47 ) in conjunction with the office of homeland security , pipeline operators joined with other gas and oil companies to establish an information sharing and analysis center ( isac ) in november2001 .

the isac is a cooperative , industry - directed database and software applications center forinformation related to security , including real - time threat alerts , cyber alerts and solutions .

theisac allows authorized individuals to submit reports about information and physical securitythreats , vulnerabilities , incidents , and mitigation .

the isac also provides access to information fromother members , u.s. government and law enforcement agencies , technology providers , and other security associations .

 ( 48 ) in 2003 , the isac had limited participationby operators since members were required to pay fees and similar information was available directlyfrom other sources .

the energy industry has taken steps , such as hiring a new administrationcontractor , to increase the usefulness of the isac and increase its membership .

 ( 49 ) .

government and industry have taken substantial actions during the last two years to improvepipeline security and oversight .

as one industry executive remarked , "before 9 / 11 , we nevercontemplated somebody flying a jet into some critical facility we have .

now we not only think aboutit , but we're also putting very different contingency plans in place. .

 ( 70 ) federal agencies acknowledgeindustry's progress .

the president's 2003 infrastructure protection strategy , for example , noted that"pipeline facilities already incorporate a variety of stringent safety precautions" and that "as a whole,the response and recovery capabilities of the pipeline industry are well proven..." ( 71 ) senior dhsofficials have also asserted that "pipelines are the best organized and have the best security practices"among maritime and land transportation sectors .

 ( 72 ) notwithstanding the progress to date in improving pipeline security , continued implementation of industry and government programs faces several challenges .

as discussed in detail in thefollowing sections , many in industry are concerned about the quality of information about actualterrorism threats that they receive from dhs .

industry is also generally concerned that criteria foridentifying critical facilities continue to evolve .

as a result , the pipeline industry is concerned thatit may be forced to spend too much on pipeline security , or spend in the wrong places - - divertinglimited resources from safety programs and other important uses .

tsa faces resource constraintsof its own , limiting the agency's ability to improve industry security standards and oversee pipelinesecurity in the field .

tsa and the ops currently cooperate on security inspections , but many inindustry are still concerned about the possibility of redundant , conflicting regulatory regimes .

both government and industry have taken numerous steps to try to improve pipeline security .

federal activities in this area are relatively new and agency responsibilities are still being sorted out,but discussions with a variety of industry representatives suggest that these efforts are generallythought to be moving in a logical direction .

furthermore , ongoing dialogue among the operators andfederal agencies appears to be addressing many elements of federal pipeline security policy that havebeen causing concern .

as oversight of the federal role in pipeline security continues , questions may be raised concerning the existing resources of tsa and its ability to execute its various pipeline securityresponsibilities , especially the implementation and enforcement of any potential future pipelinesecurity regulations .

congressional policymakers may pose questions: are tsa's pipeline securityactivities adequately funded ? .

is there a solid basis for how tsa prioritizes the most "critical"pipeline systems so that important network security vulnerabilities are not overlooked ? .

should tsainspect more pipeline systems to ensure universal compliance with security guidelines ? .

is there anappropriate division of responsibility for pipeline security among the federal agencies to minimizethe possibility of regulatory confusion and best balance agency missions with capabilities ? .

in addition to these specific issues , congress may wish to assess how the various elements of u.s. pipeline security activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect criticalinfrastructure .

for example , increasing the number of pipeline security inspections by tsa couldbe of limited value if asset "criticality" is not clearly defined and federal threat information remainsambiguous .

likewise , diverting pipeline resources away from safety to enhance security mightfurther reduce terror risk , but not overall pipeline risk , if safety programs become less effective asa result .

u.s. pipeline security necessarily involves many groups: federal agencies , oil and gaspipeline associations , large and small pipeline operators , and critical and non - critical asset owners .

reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals could be an oversightchallenge for congress .

the critical infrastructure assurance office ( ciao ) , created by pdd - 63 as an interagency office within the commerce department in 1998 , was charged with coordinating federal criticalinfrastructure assurance initiatives and raising industry awareness of infrastructure risks , especiallythose related to information systems .

 ( 95 ) amongother activities , ciao facilitated private sector ( including oil and gas ) input to the national strategy for critical infrastructure through the partnershipfor critical infrastructure security , and helped support formation of the energy information sharingand analysis center ( isac ) .

 ( 96 ) the national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) within the fbi was also created by pdd - 63 in 1998 .

the mission of the nipc was to detect , prevent , respond to and investigatemalicious acts against the nation's critical infrastructures .

nipc was a primary source of threatinformation to the energy isac , and also worked with industry on national critical infrastructurestrategy .

the nipc was viewed by industry as "a central focus for law enforcement and incidentanalysis , but not the central point for all forms of private sector cooperation. .

 ( 97 ) the office of energy assurance ( oea ) was established within the department of energy by secretary abraham in may , 2001 to help protect the country against major energy supply disruptions .

while the doe is not responsible for pipeline security , its activities under pdd - 63 as the leadagency for all other energy security has had implications for oil and gas pipelines .

for example,oea co - sponsored the development of guidelines for municipal governments to respond to naturalgas supply disruptions .

 ( 98 ) the oea's nationalinfrastructure simulation and analysis center ( nisac ) was chartered under section 1016 of the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) in october , 2001 .

the nisacs's stated mission has been to provide new computer modeling and simulationcapabilities for critical infrastructure analysis focusing on interdependencies , vulnerabilities , andcomplexities .

 ( 99 ) nisac has promoted , amongother capabilities , the ability to assess the propagationand escalation of minor initiating events between energy , communication and waterinfrastructures .

 ( 100 ) the homeland security act of 2002 transferred the activities of the critical infrastructure assurance office , the national infrastructure protection center , and the office of energy assurance ( sec .

201 ) into the new information analysis and infrastructure protection ( iaip ) directorate ofdhs .

the stated mission of iaip is to "analyze intelligence and information from other agencies ( including the cia , fbi , dia and nsa ) involving threats to homeland security and evaluatevulnerabilities in the nation's infrastructure. .

 ( 101 ) among other activities , iaip intends to evaluatecross - infrastructure ( eg , energy , transportation and telecom ) dependencies from the broadestperspective , building on criticality and vulnerability analysis done by the separate infrastructuresector lead agencies - - such as tsa for pipelines .

iaip also intends to offer guidance on "protectionaction strategies" with the overall goal of "enabling protection with better information. .

iaip alsointends to dedicate "technical experts" to facilitate analysis done by the infrastructure sector leadersand their industry partners , but will not seek direct regulatory relationships with industry unlesssector lead agencies fail to do so .

 ( 102 ) .

in addition to greater oversight of pipelines by regulatory agencies , the department ofjustice ( doj ) has increased its enforcement activities related to pipelines .

for example , on january 22,2003 , the justice department , with the environmental protection agency and the state ofwashington , announced a settlement with olympic pipeline co. and shell pipeline co. , resolvingclaims from the bellingham pipeline accident .

that settlement imposed some $92 million in civilfines and enhanced spill prevention spending , on top of $21 million in penalties imposed in relatedcriminal proceedings .

 ( 103 ) on march 11 , 2003 , emphasizing the environmental aspects of homeland security , attorney general ashcroft announced a crack down on companies failing to protect against possible terroristattacks on storage tanks , transportation networks , industrial plants - - and pipelines .

he pledged toincrease prosecution of civil and criminal cases , where appropriate , to make companies comply withenvironmental and safety laws .

 ( 104 ) along withother requirements , he asserted the department'sintention to enforce laws that "call for facilities to develop emergency response plans" and that "assure that pipelines do not leak or explode. .

 ( 105 ) the justice department has not initiated any new pipeline cases since march .

however , on april 1 , 2003 , doj and epa did announce a $34 million civil penalty - - the largest in epa history - - to colonial pipeline for seven recent oil spills .

along with other safety provisions , the penaltysettlement requires colonial to treat its entire 5,500 mile network as "high consequence" under opsrules .

 ( 106 ) while there are currently fewsecurity - specific regulations in the federal code , high profilepipeline safety settlements do have security connections as noted earlier in this report .

moreover,they indicate doj's future willingness to enforce new security regulations that may arise from recentlegislation .

one area related to pipeline safety not under the ops's primary jurisdiction is the siting approval of new gas pipelines , which is the responsibility of the federal energy regulatorycommission ( ferc ) .

ferc's primary role is regulating prices for the transmission and sale ofwholesale oil and natural gas in interstate commerce .

but companies building interstate gas pipelinesmust first obtain from ferc certificates of public convenience and necessity .

 ( ferc does notoversee oil pipeline construction. ) .

ferc must also approve the abandonment of gas facility use andservices .

these approvals may include safety and security provisions with respect to pipelinerouting , safety standards and other factors .

 ( 107 ) as a practical matter , however , ferc has traditionallyleft these considerations to the ops .

 ( 108 ) on september 14 , 2001 , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) notified fercregulated companies that it would "approve applications proposing the recovery of prudentlyincurred costs necessary to further safeguard the nation's energy systems and infrastructure" inresponse to the terror attacks of 9 / 11 .

ferc also committed to "expedite the processing on apriority basis of any application that would specifically recover such costs from wholesalecustomers. .

companies could propose a surcharge over currently existing rates or some other costrecovery method .

 ( 109 ) according to ferc , 3pipeline operators have filed formal requests for securitycost recovery to date .

of these applications 2 were approved , 1 was withdrawn .

 ( 110 ) on february 2003 , ferc handed down a new rule ( rm02-4-000 ) to protect critical energyinfrastructure information ( ceii ) .

the rule defines ceii as information that "must relate to criticalinfrastructure , be potentially useful to terrorists , and be exempt from disclosure under the freedomof information act. .

according to the rule , critical infrastructure is "existing and proposed systemsand assets , whether physical or virtual , the incapacity or destruction of which would negatively affectsecurity , economic security , public health or safety , or any combination of those matters. .

ceiiexcludes "information that identifies the location of infrastructure. .

the rule also establishesprocedures for the public to request and obtain such critical information , and applies both toproposed and existing infrastructure .

 ( 111 ) on may 14 , 2003 , ferc handed down new rules ( rm03-4 ) facilitating the restoration of pipelines after a terrorist attack .

the rules allow owners of a damaged pipeline to use blanketcertificate authority to immediately start rebuilding , regardless of project cost , even outside existingrights - of - way .

pipeline owners would still need to notify landowners and comply withenvironmental laws .

prior rules limited blanket authority to $17.5 million projects and 45-dayadvance notice .

 ( 112 ) .

major pipeline incidents , like other transportation incidents , are investigated independently by the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) .

ntsb investigations would examine what causedan incident and whether it was accidental or deliberate .

in this respect , ntsb could play a role interror incident investigations .

since 1969 , ntsb has investigated over 100 natural gas and oilpipeline incidents .

based on the probable cause of an incident , ntsb may make recommendationsto prevent recurrences .

ntsb may also conduct special studies of pipeline safety issues of nationalsignificance , and may evaluate the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved intransportation .

for example , ntsb reviewed federal oversight of oil pipeline safety in 1996 .

 ( 113 ) more recently , ntsb investigated both the bellingham and carlsbad pipeline accidents .

