the term "services" refers to a broad and widening range of economic activities such as accounting and legal services , banking , transportation , tourism , and telecommunications .

services are a significant sector of the u.s. economy , accounting for almost 70% of u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) and for over 80% of u.s. civilian employment .

services are becoming an important element of u.s. foreign trade and of global trade in general , although their intangibility and other characteristics along with other barriers have limited foreign trade in services .

because services are fundamentally different from goods , trade in services generates a unique set of trade policy issues .

in addition , advances in technology continue to broaden the range of available services and the means to deliver services , making the policy challenges very dynamic .

the increasing importance of services in u.s. and global trade has placed them on the u.s. agenda for bilateral and regional trade agreements , and services trade occupies a prominent place on the agenda of the united states and the other 152 members of the world trade organization ( wto ) in the doha development agenda round of multilateral negotiations .

u.s. suppliers of services are among the most competitive in the world .

the united states has taken the lead in encouraging foreign trade partners to reduce barriers to trade in services through bilateral , regional , and multilateral negotiations .

congress has a significant role to play in these efforts .

in fulfilling its responsibilities for oversight of u.s. trade policymaking and implementation , the congress monitors trade negotiations and the implementation of any agreements reached as a result of the negotiations .

more directly , the congress must pass any agreements requiring changes in u.s. law before they can go into effect .

free trade agreements that include provisions on services are pending congressional consideration , while negotiations in the wto continue .

this report provides background information and analysis on u.s. foreign trade in services .

it includes an examination of definitions and examples of services to indicate their nature and scope ; a review of the importance of services to the u.s. economy including u.s. foreign trade ; and an analysis of the policy challenges that confront the united states , especially the challenge of negotiating a set of international rules on trade in services and the challenge of resolving disputes over trade in services with trading partners .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

"services" encompass a very broad and widening range of economic activities .

according to one definition , services are "... a diverse group of economic activities not directly associated with the manufacture of goods , mining or agriculture .

they typically involve the provision of human value - added in the form of labor , advice , managerial skill , entertainment , training intermediation , and the like. .

services differ from manufactured goods primarily in that they are intangible , so they cannot be stored and must be consumed at the point of production ( trips to the doctor , enjoying a meal at the restaurant ) .

however , rapid changes in technology are reducing even these restrictions on services ( computer software that can be stored online , on disks , tape , etc. ) .

illustrative examples of services include wholesale and retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance and insurance ; professional , scientific , and technical services ; education ; arts and entertainment ; health care and social assistance ; food and accommodation services ; construction ; communication ; and public administration .

services are an increasingly significant sector of the u.s. economy .

in 1977 , they accounted for 55% of u.s. gdp .

in 2007 they accounted for 69% of u.s. gdp .

in 2008 , workers in the services sector accounted for 85% of the total civilian workforce .

the significance of services to a national economy and to the global economy go beyond what can be measured by data .

many services not only have intrinsic value but are also critical to running other parts of large economies .

for example , financial services ( banking , investment , insurance ) are the means by which capital flows throughout an economy from those who have it ( savers , investors ) to those who need it ( borrowers ) .

financial services are often called the lifeblood of an economy .

there is a symbiotic relationship between many services providers and manufacturers — demand for one creates demand for the other .

many manufacturers are dependent on transportation , communication and distribution services networks to ensure that inputs are available for the production of goods and to deliver final goods to consumers .

for example , car manufacturers depend on transportation services ( trucking , rail , etc. ) .

to make sure that component parts are available for assembly and that completed cars are delivered to dealers .

at the same time , demand for services creates demand for manufactures .

for example , the production of communication services leads to demand for telephones , radios , computers and other communications apparatuses .

u.s. trade in services , as narrowly measured , plays an important role in overall u.s. trade , albeit a much smaller role than domestic services play in the overall u.s. economy .

and the relative importance of trade in services has remained quite constant .

between 1986 and 2001 , for example , the share of services in overall u.s. exports in goods and services remained at around 28% , although it increased to 30% by 2003 where it has remained .

from 1986 to 2008 , the share of u.s. imports of goods and services accounted for by services has been 16% - 18% .

these data are presented in table 1 .

these shares are substantially lower than one might expect from a sector that dominates the domestic economy .

table 1 also shows that the united states continually realizes surpluses in services trade which have partially offset large trade deficits in goods trade in the u.s. current account .

these figures only measure trade in services that take place across borders as presented in the u.s. official balance of payments data .

because most services require direct contact between supplier and consumer , many service providers prefer to establish or must establish a presence in the country of the consumer .

for example , hotel and restaurant services by their very nature require a presence in the country of the consumer .

providers of legal , accounting , and construction services prefer a direct presence because they need access to expert knowledge of the laws and regulations of the country in which they are doing business and they require proximity to clients .

thus , cross - border services trade data do not capture all of the trade in services .

data on sales of services by foreign affiliates of u.s. - owned companies and by u.s. affiliates of foreign - owned firms help to provide a more accurate , albeit still incomplete , measurement of trade in services .

in 2006 ( the latest year for which published data are available ) , u.s. firms sold $806billion in services to foreigners through their majority - owned foreign affiliates .

in 2006 , foreign firms sold to u.s. residents , $616 billion in services through their majority - owned foreign affiliates located in the united states .

the data for cross - border trade and for sales by majority - owned affiliates are not directly compatible ; therefore , it is difficult to derive an accurate overall measure of services trade .

even these two sets of figures do not capture the total value of trade in services .

two other modes of services delivery are through the temporary movement of consumers to the location of the provider and the temporary movement of the provider to the location of the consumer .

u.s. data on the sales of services via these two modes of delivery are not readily available .

 ( see text box. ) .

the united states conducts trade in services ( both via cross border trade and foreign direct investments ) with many different regions of the world .

however , the graphs contained above in figure 1 and figure 2 show that much of the u.s. cross - border trade in services in 2008 occurred with eu - member countries .

figure 1 indicates that more than one - third of u.s. services exports were to the european union and figure 2 indicates that more than one third of u.s. imports of services were from the european union .

in contrast , canada accounted for 9% and 6% of u.s. services exports and imports , respectively .

the eu's dominance in u.s. services trade is even more apparent when taking into account services that are provided through multinational corporations ( mncs ) .

figure 3 shows shares by region of sales of services in 2006 ( the latest data available ) by u.s. majority - owned companies to foreign persons , a measurement comparable to u.s. exports .

figure 4 shows shares by region of sales in 2006 to u.s. persons by foreign majority - owned mncs , a measurement comparable to u.s. imports .

the figures indicate that europe accounted for 57% of sales to foreign persons and 62% of sales to u.s. persons services through mncs .

canada accounted for 11% and 9% of the total sales .

figure 5 and figure 6 show the shares of u.s. services exports and imports accounted for by types of services in 2007 ( latest available data ) .

travel and related services dominate u.s. cross - border services trade , accounting for 20% and 22% of u.s. services exports and imports , respectively , in 2007 .

passenger fares accounted for another 5% and 8% and other transportation services accounted for an additional 11% and 20% of u.s. services exports and imports .

the dominance of these services is not altogether surprising , given the relative ease with which they can be traded across borders .

as u.s. service providers strive to increase foreign trade , u.s. policymakers are faced with a number of challenges in constructing an international environment that is conducive to increased trade in services .

one challenge is identifying the foreign government laws , regulations , and policies that impede trade flows and prevent the international system of trade in services from operating efficiently .

while some of these barriers are similar to those that exist in goods trade , many are different and more complex and , therefore , sometimes difficult to identify .

a second challenge derives from the first — working with trading partners to build and administer "rules of the road" to facilitate trade in services .

the current rules , the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) , are a recent phenomenon and are at an early stage of development .

a third challenge is managing disputes that arise when trading partners do not agree on how trade in services should be conducted .

the background information and analysis presented here indicate that services are a significant component of the u.s. economy , accounting for a major portion of u.s. employment .

it is also a component in which u.s. firms have proved to be globally competitive .

the services sector is also very broad and encompasses an ever expanding range of economic activities of varying types .

the broad scope of the services sector presents policy challenges to u.s. policymakers , including the congress , as the united states works with trading partners to build regimes under which they will conduct trade in services .

the number and variety of negotiations planned or already underway suggests that congress will have a number of trade agreements to consider and that services will be an important part of the deliberations .

an overview of barriers , of the disputes in services trade and of the rapidly changing characteristics of the services sector , all suggest that the negotiations and the agreements they produce will become increasingly complex .

the united states presses its trading partners to liberalize their services sector as much as possible , because u.s. services providers are very competitive in world markets .

however , to accomplish its objectives , the united states is pressed by its partners to make concessions that adversely affect "import - sensitive" industries in the united states .

u.s. negotiators and , ultimately , congress will have to judge whether the agreements strike an appropriate balance for u.s. interests .

