second chance homes ( schs , also referred to as maternity group homes ) for unwed teenage mothers are not a new concept in the nation .

they are a revival of an old institution , called the "maternity home," in a new form to provide a safe , stable environment for teen mothers and their children who cannot live at home .

such teens are assisted in becoming self - sufficient , developing job skills , learning how to become good mothers , obtaining help in gaining access to child care , and in planning for the future .

renewed interest in such homes occurred in 1995 during the welfare reform debate .

with the passage of the welfare reform bill in 1996 , the state block grant for temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) was created .

tanf allowed the use of schs as a form of adult - supervised setting for unwed teenage mothers in which they could live apart from their parents and still be eligible for cash assistance .

in the 109 th congress , legislation has been introduced that would amend the runaway and homeless youth act ( rhya ) to explicitly authorize funding for maternity group homes through its transitional living program , and to evaluate such homes .

when the 108 th congress reauthorized the rhya , maternity group homes were added as an allowable use of funds under tlp .

this report describes second chance homes , discusses legislation that was introduced in the 109 th congress related to such homes , and describes federal funding provided through tanf and other programs to assist needy teen mothers who live in second chance homes .

evaluations of the effectiveness of a sch also are discussed .

there is no one definition for second chance homes because , according to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , second chance homes "can refer to a group home , a cluster of apartments , or a network of homes that integrate housing and services for teen mothers and their children who cannot live at home because of abuse , neglect or other extenuating circumstances. .

tanf law defines a second chance home as "an entity that provides individuals ... with a supportive and supervised living arrangement in which such individuals are required to learn parenting skills , including child development , family budgeting , health and nutrition , and other skills to promote their long - term economic independence and the well - being of their children. .

the law lists a "maternity home" as a distinct entity from a second chance home and requires state welfare agencies to assist unwed teen mothers in locating such a home .

it does not , however , define a maternity home or indicate how one differs from a second chance home .

the social policy action network ( span ) , which was a private nonprofit national resource center for these homes , defined second chance homes as "places of refuge for the most vulnerable teen mothers and their children .

they are community - based institutions that build social capital. .

depending on a community's need , such homes can be located in both urban and rural areas of a state .

the purpose of a second chance home is to assist and support young teen mothers in becoming self - sufficient by completing high school and developing job skills , to learn how to become good mothers by properly caring for their child , to help them gain access to child care , and to provide advice in planning for the future .

according to span , the main criteria for second chance homes is that they serve parenting teens ( some will accept pregnant teens and allow them to remain in the residence with their infants for at least six months or longer after birth ) , and that they are residential .

span indicated that second chance homes not only provided a stable , nurturing atmosphere for teen mothers , but safe , nurturing environments for their offspring .

second chance homes were said to be unique because most offered access on site "to child care , education , job training , counseling , and advice on parenting and life skills. .

staff also assist the residents in obtaining outside social services , child care and in making future plans .

second chance homes can be individually operated or can be operated and funded by agencies with broader missions and services .

churches and nonprofit organizations across the nation have operated group homes for teen mothers for a number of years .

after the passage of the 1996 welfare reform law , several states joined the effort to create and operate second chance homes by supporting programs that were community - based or conducted by faith - based groups using tanf or state funds .

legislation was enacted to reauthorize the runaway and homeless youth act for fy2004 through fy2008 , and to authorize funding for maternity group homes through tlp , as previously mentioned .

on may 1 , 2003 , h.r .

1925 , the runaway , homeless , and missing children protection act , was introduced by representative phil gingrey to reauthorize programs under the runaway and homeless youth act and the missing children's assistance act .

on october 10 , 2003 , the measure was signed into law ( p.l .

108-96 ) .

title i of the law amends the runaway and homeless youth act's section regarding eligibility for assistance to establish a transitional living program ( tlp ) , by specifying that plans to establish group homes include maternity group homes , and that services provided include , as appropriate , parenting skills .

a definition for maternity group homes was included as a new subsection .

for fy2004 , $105 million was authorized for rhya , and such sums as necessary for fy2005 through fy2008 .

no specific funding , however , was recommended for maternity group homes .

rhya is up for reauthorization in the 110 th congress .

between fy2002 and fy2006 , congressional funding for the runaway and homeless youth program has fluctuated between $88 million to a high of nearly $90 million in fy2003 .

for an appropriations history of the runaway and homeless youth program , see crs report rl31933 , the runaway and homeless: administration , funding , and legislative action , by [author name scrubbed] .

for fy2007 , the president requested the same amount enacted for the program in fy2006 , that is , $87,837,000 .

the president , however , did not request separate funding for maternity group homes .

the administration proposes awarding 193 tlp grants for fy2007 that would include maternity group homes to provide transitional living opportunities for pregnant and parenting homeless teens .

furthermore , the administration for children and families ( acf ) announced that it will begin using vouchers to provide maternity group home services in order to reach more vulnerable youth .

acf estimates that $4 million will be used to support about 100 vouchers to pregnant and parenting homeless teens .

it states further that a competitive grant would be awarded to a national organization for issuing the vouchers .

also , that national group would be responsible for recruiting and accrediting various maternity group home programs throughout the nation and for working with existing grantees to identify youths seeking those types of specialized services .

the runaway and homeless youth program is currently funded at fy2006 levels under a continuing resolution , ( cr , p.l .

109-383 ) through february 15 , 2007 .

on january 24 , 2005 , s. 6 , the marriage , opportunity , relief , and empowerment act of 2005 ( more act ) , was introduced by senator rick santorum and referred to the senate finance committee .

title iii , subtitle h of the bill would have amended rhya to require an evaluation of maternity group homes and require the evaluator to submit a report to congress regarding the status , activities , and accomplishments of such homes ( supported by grant funds ) no later than two years after the date in which the secretary of hhs entered into a contract for the evaluation , and biennially thereafter .

the bill would have authorized $33 million for fy2006 for maternity group homes eligible under rhya , and such sums as necessary for fy2007 .

identical provisions were included in s. 1780 , introduced by senator santorum on september 28 , 2005 , and referred to the senate finance committee .

no further action occurred .

on september 27 , 2005 , representative roy blunt introduced h.r .

3908 , the charitable giving act of 2005 , which not only would have amended the internal revenue code to provide incentives for individuals and businesses to increase contributions to charities , but also would have amend rhya to include maternity group homes for homeless youth within tlp .

referred to the house committees on ways and means and education and the workforce , no further action occurred .

this provision , however , was similar to language already enacted in p.l .

108-96 .

there is no single primary federal funding source for second chance homes .

there are a variety of federal , state , and local programs , however , through which funding can be obtained for second chance homes .

span indicated that second chance homes were expensive to operate .

it reported that such costs ranged from $8,000 to $65,000 per year per teen family , depending on the location of the home , the ability of the providers to coordinate services in a community , and the level of care needed by teen families .

not all sch providers receive federal funding to operate second chance homes .

for example , in massachusetts , funding for some schs is received only from the state department of social services , the united way and / or state grants and contracts , while other homes receive funding from various sources , including individual donors , non - profits and foundations , faith - based groups , county or city governments , as well as federal grants .

major federal sources for second chance homes are available via programs administered by hhs and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

how much funding is being used for second chance homes through these avenues , however , cannot be determined .

such decisions are made according to the discretion of the agency administering the program .

as mentioned above , some second chance homes have been closed in various states because of a lack of funding .

selected hhs and hud programs that can be used as funding sources for second chance homes are discussed below .

for fy2007 , all federal programs are operating under a cr until february 15 , 2007 .

to date there have been very few rigorous evaluations on the effectiveness of second chance homes .

hhs reports , however , that there have been several analyses regarding service delivery approaches of different programs that documented how the programs worked and provided descriptions of the teen mothers and their children .

as a result , insights have been gained regarding the needs of the mothers and their children , as well as in some cases , program outcomes , such as subsequent employment , education or subsequent pregnancies .

successful outcomes have been reported , according to hhs , by several states or programs related to reductions in repeat pregnancies , compared with the state average , higher rates of mothers completing school , lower rates of child abuse and neglect , improvements in the health of mothers and children , higher rates of mothers becoming employed , and a reduction in their dependency upon welfare .

new mexico , which began its state - sponsored second chance homes project in 1990 and has the oldest operation of such homes in the nation , operates 10 second chance homes with the capacity to serve 80 teen families .

all needy teen mothers and their children are served ( as long as the mothers stay in school ) .

new mexico has had less than 1% of its residents experience repeat pregnancies while living in the homes .

the mothers are allowed to stay until they are 22 years of age .

services provided include supervision , case management , family planning , educational assistance , job training , health care , counseling , life skills training , and child care .

massachusetts , which was one of the first states to create a network of second chance homes ( beginning in december 1995 ) , operates 15 such homes statewide through state centralized services and assists pregnant and parenting teens ages 13 to 19 .

data collected through its department of transitional living programs indicate that there were fewer repeat pregnancies ( about 2% ) among teen mothers living in second chance homes than the statewide average .

furthermore , span reported that over half of the teen mothers in massachusetts who left second chance homes in 1998 made notable progress in school , in learning to manage their personal budgets , maintaining the health requirements of their children , such as immunizations , and in mastering good parenting methods .

the homes provide services such as counseling , case management , and some on - site ged training , and child care .

massachusetts once had 21 second chance homes across the state and had the capacity to help 120 teen families on tanf and 16 teen families in the child welfare system .

span reported , however , that because of a lack of funding , massachusetts closed some of its second chance homes .

consequently , the housing capacity to assist such teens might have diminished .

it remained , however , the state with the largest network of such homes and , according to span , was a good model of how state - run homes should work .

texas , which began operating second chance homes in 1999 and has four sites , serves teen mothers on tanf under age 18 and their children as well as pregnant teens eligible for medicaid .

services provided include case management , counseling , mentoring , parenting classes , child care , school - to - work services , and transportation .

its home located in san antonio reports that 90% of babies born to residents weigh more than the average birth weight for teen births , which are expected to be high risk for low birth - weight .

hhs cautions that there are limitations in using these results to make informed policy decisions about designing programs to assist such mothers because: ( 1 ) results were based upon the participants' self - reports that were not independently validated for accuracy , ( 2 ) information was based on the reports of a very small number of mothers ; and ( 3 ) results reflected the outcomes of mothers who remained with the programs or were tracked after leaving the programs .

hhs found that in nearly all cases , there was no other group used to compare outcomes in order to determine whether participating in second chance homes specifically made a difference compared with what could have otherwise occurred .

the need for evaluation , hhs concluded , is being recognized as a fundamental part of a new program's design .

such information , hhs believed , not only could inform program operators and sponsors about the general success of a second chance home in accomplishing intended outcomes , but could be useful in informing others interested in starting or redesigning a second chance home .

hhs suggests four key issues and challenges that might be considered as more program administrators try to conduct accurate program evaluations .

they are: "program size and capacity" — most second chance homes accommodate a very small number of teen mothers and their children at one time , usually six or eight .

because of the small numbers , rigorous impact evaluations are more difficult .

"measurements" — determining certain outcomes for mother and child , such as acquiring a high school diploma or ged , might be easily quantified .

other outcomes , such as good parenting skills or increased self - esteem , might not be easily or quickly determined and might not surface for extended periods of time .

"comparison" — for rigorous impact evaluation , there is a need to use two comparable groups .

second chance homes participants , however , would be difficult to separate into two distinct groups .

"neither program operators nor researchers," hhs states , "would support the denial of services to teens and their children for purely research purposes. .

often , however , there are places where there is more demand for service than the ability to serve .

in such instances , applicants who are not selected , hhs suggests , could be included in a study to compare outcomes .

"follow - up and tracking" — certain key outcomes needed to determine the effectiveness of second chance homes can be measured only after an extended period of time .

these outcomes include long - term employment , subsequent higher earning and self - sufficiency , and child development outcomes .

many of the evaluations of second chance homes have data collected about participants while in the program .

tracking such teens after they have left a program , however , has proven to be very difficult .

