article i , section 8 , of the constitution vests in congress the power "to declare war. .

pursuant to that power , congress has enacted 11 declarations of war during the course of american history relating to five different wars , the most recent being those that were adopted during world war ii .

in addition , congress has adopted a number of authorizations for the use of military force , the most recent being the joint resolution enacted on october 16 , 2002 , authorizing the use of military force against iraq .

to buttress the nation's ability to prosecute a war or armed conflict , congress has also enacted numerous statutes which confer standby authority on the president or the executive branch and are activated by the enactment of a declaration of war , the existence of a state of war , or the promulgation of a declaration of national emergency .

this report examines a number of topics related to declarations of war and authorizations for the use of military force by the united states .

it ( 1 ) provides historical background on each of the declarations of war and on several major authorizations for the use of force that have been enacted ; ( 2 ) analyzes the implications of declarations of war and authorizations for the use of force under both international law and domestic law ; ( 3 ) lists and summarizes the more than 250 standby statutory authorities that can come into effect pursuant to a declaration of war , the existence of a state of war , and / or a declaration of national emergency ; ( 4 ) describes the procedures in congress governing the consideration of declarations of war and authorizations for the use of force , including the procedures under the war powers resolution ; and ( 5 ) sets forth in two appendices the texts of all of the declarations of war and the major authorizations for the use of force that have been enacted .

the report does not address the issue of the constitutionality of presidential uses of military force absent a declaration of war or authorization for the use of force .

the report will be updated as circumstances warrant .

from the washington administration to the present , there have been 11 separate formal declarations of war against foreign nations enacted by congress and the president , encompassing five different wars — the war of 1812 with great britain , the war with mexico in 1846 , the war with spain in 1898 , the first world war , and the second world war .

in each case the enactment of a formal declaration of war has been preceded by a presidential request to congress for such an action , either in writing or in person before a joint session of congress .

in each such message requesting a war declaration , the president has cited what he deemed compelling reasons for doing so .

these reasons have included armed attacks on united states territory or its citizens , and attacks on or direct threats to united states rights or interests as a sovereign nation .

in the 19 th century all declarations of war were passed by the congress in the form of a bill .

in the 20 th century all declarations of war were passed by the congress in the form of a joint resolution .

in every instance the measures were adopted by majority vote in both the house and the senate and were signed into law by the president .

the last formal declaration of war was enacted on june 5 , 1942 , against rumania during world war ii .

the circumstances of president mckinley's request for a declaration of war against spain in 1898 stand in singular contrast to all the others .

mckinley's request for a declaration of war on april 25 , 1898 , was approved by a voice vote of both houses of congress on that date .

his request was made after spain had rejected a u.s. ultimatum that spain relinquish its sovereignty over cuba and permit cuba to become an independent state .

this ultimatum was supported by a joint resolution of congress , signed into law on april 20 , 1898 , that among other things , declared cuba to be independent , demanded that spain withdraw its military forces from the island , and directed and authorized the president to use the u.s. army , navy and militia of the various states to achieve these ends .

the war with spain in 1898 , in short , was not principally based on attacks on the united states but on a u.s. effort to end the cuban insurrection against spain , bring about cuban independence , and restore a stable government and order on the island — outcomes that were believed by the united states to advance its interests .

in the 20 th century , without exception , presidential requests for formal declarations of war by congress were based on findings by the president that u.s. territory or sovereign rights had been attacked or threatened by a foreign nation .

although president wilson had tried to maintain u.s. neutrality after the outbreak of the first world war , he regarded the german decision on february 1 , 1917 , to engage in unrestricted submarine warfare against all naval vessels in the war zone , including those of neutral states , to be an unacceptable assault on u.s. sovereign rights which the german government had previously pledged to respect .

wilson's request to congress for a declaration of war against germany on april 2 , 1917 , stated that war had been "thrust upon the united states" by germany's actions .

congress passed a joint resolution declaring war which the president signed on april 6 , 1917 .

wilson delayed requesting a war declaration against austria - hungary until december 4 , 1917 .

he did so then because that state , a german ally in the war , had become an active instrument of germany against the united states .

congress quickly passed a joint resolution declaring war which the president signed on december 7 , 1917 .

president franklin d. roosevelt requested a declaration of war against japan on december 8 , 1941 , because of direct military attacks by that nation against u.s. territory , military personnel and citizens in hawaii and other outposts in the pacific area .

the house and the senate passed the requested declaration and the president signed it into law that same day .

after germany and italy each declared war on the united states on december 11 , 1941 , president roosevelt asked congress to respond in kind by recognizing that a state of war existed between the united states and those two nations .

congress passed separate joint resolutions declaring war on both nations which the president signed on december 11 , 1941 .

on june 2 , 1942 , president roosevelt asked that congress declare war on bulgaria , hungary and rumania , nations that were under the domination of germany , were engaged in active military actions against the united states , and had themselves declared war on the united states .

congress passed separate joint resolutions declaring war on each of these nations .

the president signed these resolutions on june 5 , 1942 .

there is a striking similarity of language in the eight declarations of war passed by the congress in the 20 th century .

they all declare that a "state of war" exists between the united states and the other nation .

with the one exception of the declaration of war against austria - hungary on december 7 , 1917 , the other seven declarations characterize the state of war as having been "thrust upon the united states" by the other nation .

all eight of these 20 th century declarations of war state in identical language that the president is authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against [the 'government' of the particular nation] ; and to bring the conflict to a successful termination all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

the complete texts of the 11 declarations of war are set forth in appendix a .

from the administration of president john adams to the present , there have been various instances when legislation has been enacted authorizing the use of military force by the president instead of formally declaring war .

in most cases such legislation has been preceded by a specific request by the president for such authority .

during the presidencies of john adams and thomas jefferson , these chief executives noted in messages to congress that congressional authorizations for use of force would be appropriate to enable the united states to protect its interests from predatory actions by foreign powers , in particular attacks on u.s. commercial vessels and persons on the high seas by france and by tripoli .

congress responded with specific authorizations for the use of force under the president's direction in 1798 against france and in 1802 against tripoli .

in 1815 president james madison formally requested that congress declare war against the regency of algiers in response to its attacks on u.s. citizens and commerce in the mediterranean .

congress responded with an act authorizing the president to utilize u.s. armed vessels to be used against algerian naval attacks but did not declare war .

in the period following world war ii , presidential requests for authority to use military force , when made , have usually been for broad authority to use u.s. military force in a specific region of the world in order to defend u.s. interests or friendly states as the president deems appropriate .

more recently , due to an expansive interpretation of the president's constitutional authority as commander - in - chief of the armed forces and of his inherent powers to use force without congressional authorization , the president has welcomed support from the congress in the form of legislation authorizing him to utilize u.s. military forces in a foreign conflict or engagement in support of u.s. interests , but has not taken the view that he is required to obtain such authorization .

what follows is a brief overview of key legislative authorizations of the use of military force by the president from the administration of john adams to the present .

appendix b provides the complete text of these specific authorizations .

traditionally , peace and war have been deemed under international law to be distinctive forms of relations between states .

thus , peace has been defined as "a condition in which states maintain order and justice , solve their problems by cooperation , and eliminate violence .

it is a condition in which states respect each other's sovereignty and equality , refrain from intervention and the threat or use of force and cooperate with one another in accordance with the treaties which they have concluded. .

war , in contrast , has been described as "a condition of armed hostility between states," "a contention , through the use of armed force , between states , undertaken for the purpose of overpowering another. .

war has been said to terminate or suspend the laws and customs that prevail in peacetime and to substitute for them the laws of war .

under the traditional laws of war enemy combatants can be killed , prisoners of war taken , the enemy's property seized or destroyed , enemy aliens interned , and other measures necessary to subdue the enemy and impose the will of the warring state taken .

moreover , the existence of a state of war traditionally has been deemed to terminate diplomatic and commercial relations and most of the treaty obligations existing between the warring states .

a state of war also has brought into play the law of neutrality with respect to relations between the belligerent and non - belligerent states .

in this traditional understanding a declaration of war has been deemed , in and of itself , to have the effect of creating a state of war and changing the relationship between the states involved from one of peace to one of war .

that has been the case even if no hostilities actually occur .

some question exists as to whether international law traditionally deemed a declaration of war to be a necessary prerequisite to the existence of a state of war ; but it is clear that under international law a declaration of war has been viewed as "creating the legal status of war ... [and giving] evidence that peace has been transmuted into war , and that the law of war has replaced the law of peace. .

authorizations for the use of force , in contrast , have not been seen as automatically creating a state of war under international law .

the u.s. court of claims , in construing the statutes authorizing the limited use of force against france in 1798 , described how their effects differed from those that followed in the wake of a war: [our naval vessels] might seize armed vessels only , and only those armed vessels which had already committed depredations , or those which were on our coast for the purpose of committing depredations , and they might retake an american vessel captured by such an armed vessel .

this statute is a fair illustration of the class of laws enacted at this time ; they directed suspension of commercial relations until the end of the next session of congress , not indefinitely ... ; they gave power to the president to apprehend the subjects of hostile nations whenever he should make "public proclamation" of war ... , and no such proclamation was made ; they gave him authority to instruct our armed vessels to seize french "armed," not merchant , vessels ... , together with contingent authority to augment the army in case war should break out or in case of imminent danger of invasion... .

if war existed , why authorize our armed vessels to seize french armed vessels ? .

war itself gave that right , as well as the right to seize merchantmen which the statutes did not permit .

if war existed why empower the president to apprehend foreign enemies ? .

war itself placed that duty upon him as a necessary and inherent incident of military command .

why , if there was war , should a suspension of commercial intercourse be authorized , for what more complete suspension of that intercourse could there be than the very fact of war ? .

there was no declaration of war ; the tribunals of each country were open to the other — an impossibility were war in progress ; diplomatic and commercial intercourse were admittedly suspended ; but during many years there was no intercourse between england and mexico , which were not at war ; there was retaliation and reprisal , but such retaliations and reprisals have often occurred between nations at peace ; there was a near approach to war , but at no time was one of the nations turned into an enemy of the other in such manner that every citizen of the one became the enemy of every citizen of the other ; finally , there was not that kind of war which abrogated treaties and wiped out , at least temporarily , all pending rights and contracts , individual and national .

whether this traditional understanding of war and of the effect of a declaration of war continues to be viable is a matter of considerable dispute among scholars .

the right of a state to initiate war , many contend , has been outlawed by such international agreements as the kellogg - briand peace pact and the charter of the united nations .

in the kellogg - briand peace pact , for instance , the parties stated that they "condemn recourse to war for the solution of international controversies , and renounce it as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another. .

after world war ii the nuremberg tribunal gave teeth to this commitment by ruling that the pact rendered aggressive war illegal under international law and makes those who plan and wage such a war guilty of a crime .

the charter of the united nations , in turn , states one of its purposes to be "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war," and it requires its members "to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state , or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the united nations. .

moreover , it provides for a system of collective security through the security council as the primary means of maintaining or restoring international peace and security .

both instruments , it is contended , recognize that the concept of war as a legal right of states , except in self - defense , has been superseded .

 ( the united states , of course , is a party not only to the charter but also to the pact , and it still regards the latter as continuing to be in force. ) .

whether the traditional concept of war remains valid has been further complicated by the increasing participation in armed conflict of non - state actors such as insurgents , freedom fighters , and terrorists .

the clarity of the consequences of a state of war in traditional international law has also become muddied in the modern era .

most states since 1945 , even when engaged in armed conflict , have resisted describing the conflict as a war .

states so engaged have not always automatically terminated diplomatic and commercial relationships , and the discontinuance of treaty obligations has increasingly been deemed to require a treaty - by - treaty examination .

moreover , conventions that attempt to regulate the means used to wage war , such as the hague conventions and other more recent agreements , and those that attempt to ameliorate the consequences of war for certain categories of persons , such as the geneva conventions , are deemed to apply to armed conflicts regardless of what label the parties attach to them .

a state of war still gives rise to "a mutual right to kill in battle," triggers application of the various conventions regulating the means of waging war as well as of the general principles of necessity and proportionality , and brings into play the geneva conventions .

but its other legal consequences seemingly have become less determinate .

perhaps as a consequence of these developments , declarations of war have fallen into disuse and are virtually never issued in modern conflicts .

one commentator asserts that since 1945 "[t]here are no cases of a formal declaration of war having been delivered by one state to another through diplomatic channels...." as noted above , the united states last declared war in 1942 against rumania and has since adopted only authorizations for the use of force .

thus , declarations of war may have become anachronistic in contemporary international law .

the legal right of states to engage in war has seemingly become constrained ( for other than defensive purposes ) , and the most salient international laws regarding the means of waging war and the protection of certain categories of persons apply to the circumstance of armed conflict regardless of whether war has been declared .

that circumstance can arise in the wake of an authorization to use force as well .

states likely still retain a right to issue declarations of war , at least in exercising the right of self - defense ; and such a declaration seemingly would still automatically create a state of war .

but it is not clear that the legal consequences under international law that would flow from a declaration differ dramatically from those that occur if an armed conflict comes into being pursuant to an authorization for the use of force .

early american jurisprudence drew a distinction between general , or perfect , war and limited , or imperfect , war , and understood a declaration of war under article i , section 8 , of the constitution to commit the nation to a general war .

justice washington , in bas v. tinghy , described the distinction as follows: it may , i believe , be safely laid down , that every contention by force between two nations , in external matters , under the authority of their respective governments , is not only war , but public war .

if it be declared in form , it is called solemn , and is of the perfect kind ; because one whole nation is at war with another whole nation ; and all the members of the nation declaring war are authorised to commit hostilities against all the members of the other , in every place , and under every circumstance .

in such a war all the members act under a general authority , and all the rights and consequences of war attach to their condition .

... [h]ostilities may subsist between two nations more confined in its nature and extent ; being limited as to places , persons , and things ; and this is more properly termed imperfect war ; because not solemn , and because those who are authorised to commit hostilities , act under special authority , and can go no farther than to the extent of their commission .

still , however , it is public war , because it is an external contention , by force , between some of the members of the two nations , authorised by the legitimate powers .

justice chase , more simply , stated: "congress is empowered to declare a general war , or congress may wage a limited war ; limited in place , in objects , and in time. .

thus , at least in the 18 th and 19 th centuries , authorizations for the use of force were understood to be included within congress's power to declare war and to have narrower legal consequences than declarations of war .

declarations were reserved for general war against particular countries and empowered the president "to use the whole land and naval force of the united states" ( united kingdom in 1812 ) , "to employ the militia , naval , and military forces of the united states" ( mexico in 1846 ) , or "to use the entire land and naval forces of the united states" ( spain in 1898 ) to prosecute the war .

authorizations , in contrast , allowed the president to use the american navy against the vessels of france , the bey of tripoli , and the dey of algiers , or against piracy generally .

in the modern era authorizations have sometimes been quite broad ; and some have , arguably , been equivalent in scope to a declaration of war .

but the domestic legal consequences that flow from such authorizations still are substantially more limited than those that would flow from a declaration of war .

both declarations of war and authorizations for the use of force have the effect of eliminating the time limits otherwise imposed on the president's use of the armed forces under the war powers resolution ; and both may legitimate the killing of foreign officials that might otherwise be prohibited by the executive order on assassinations .

the capture of enemy combatants on the battlefield and their detention until hostilities have subsided is implied in an authorization to use ground forces , just as it would be included in a formal declaration of war .

but a declaration of war automatically brings into effect a number of statutes that confer special powers on the president and the executive branch , especially concerning measures that have domestic effect .

a declaration , for instance , activates statutes that empower the president to interdict all trade with the enemy , order manufacturing plants to produce armaments and seize them if they refuse , control transportation systems in order to give the military priority use , and command communications systems to give priority to the military .

a declaration triggers the alien enemy act , which gives the president substantial discretionary authority over nationals of an enemy state who are in the united states .

it activates special authorities to use electronic surveillance for purposes of gathering foreign intelligence information without a court order under the foreign intelligence surveillance act .

it automatically extends enlistments in the armed forces until the end of the war , can make the coast guard part of the navy , gives the president substantial discretion over the appointment and reappointment of commanders , and allows the military priority use of the natural resources on the public lands and the continental shelf .

an authorization for the use of force does not automatically trigger any of these standby statutory authorities .

some of them can come into effect if a state of war in fact comes into being after an authorization for the use of force is enacted ; and the great majority of them , including many of the most sweeping ones , can be activated if the president chooses to issue a proclamation of a national emergency .

but an authorization for the use of force , in itself and in contrast to a declaration of war , does not trigger any of these standby authorities .

on the other hand , the authorization to use force in response to the terrorist attacks of 2001 has been asserted as legal authority for executive actions in the domestic context , the validity of which remains unresolved .

the executive branch asserted that the authorization permits detention without trial of persons arrested in the united states on suspicion of al qaeda related terrorism , which it regarded as bolstered by the supreme court's hamdi decision finding the detention of enemy combatants captured in afghanistan to be authorized as "a fundamental incident of waging war. .

while there is limited authority to support military trials of enemy soldiers captured within the united states , in previous wars the alien enemy act would likely have been the chief means of interning suspected enemies domestically .

under the executive branch view , the authorization to use force could be construed as broader than a declaration of war in that it is seen to authorize detention powers without any of the few rules or restrictions specified in the alien enemy act , and to authorize the detention of u.s. citizens as an exception to the non - detention act .

similarly , the executive branch argued that the authorization to use force must also be read to permit the conduct of certain types of electronic surveillance outside of the strictures of the foreign intelligence surveillance act , even though that act provides for only a two - week exception triggered by a declaration of war .

accordingly , it is possible that any similarly broad authorization to use force may be read to authorize any power that may properly be regarded as "a fundamental incident of waging war" under the circumstances , at least as implied exceptions to statutes that admit of statutory exception .

the following subsections give an overview of some of the more salient domestic legal consequences of a declaration of war or authorization for the use of force .

they are followed by a section setting forth a detailed list of the standby statutory authorities that can be triggered by a declaration of war , a state or war , and / or a proclamation of national emergency .

under ordinary circumstances the president exercises the powers conferred on him by the constitution and by statutes enacted by congress .

as noted in the preceding section , in extraordinary circumstances a number of additional statutory powers may become available ; and his constitutional powers are likely to be given a generous interpretation by the courts .

the standby statutory authorities potentially available to the president and the executive branch number in the hundreds .

some are triggered by a declaration of war , some by the existence of a state of war ( and , thus , also by a declaration of war ) , and some pursuant to a declaration or the existence of national emergency .

most can be triggered by one or more of the foregoing circumstances .

none of these special authorities appears to be triggered by an authorization for the use of force ( unless and until it leads to a state of war ) .

with respect to those statutes that are triggered by the existence of a national emergency or of a state or time of war , the determination of whether such a condition exists would be made in the first instance by the executive branch , unless the statute provides otherwise .

those authorities that require a declaration of national emergency as a predicate for coming into effect are not automatically activated by such a declaration .

national emergency powers can be exercised only pursuant to the strictures of the national emergencies act .

in addition to requiring that the president publicly declare a national emergency , that act requires that he specify the emergency statutory authorities that he intends to use prior to their use and that he publish that information in the federal register and report it to congress .

 ( on september 14 , 2001 , president bush , for example , took this step by issuing a "declaration of national emergency by reason of certain terrorist attacks" and specifying 10 statutory authorities that he intended to use. ) .

moreover , the act provides that congress can terminate a declared emergency at any time by joint resolution and that , in any event , the emergency declaration and any statutory powers activated pursuant to it expire after one year unless the president specifically renews the declaration .

the following subsections identify the standby authorities that become available to the president and the executive branch upon ( 1 ) a declaration of war , ( 2 ) the existence of a state of war , and ( 3 ) pursuant to a declaration of national emergency .

it is important to emphasize that a declaration of war activates not only the statutes listed in the first subsection but also — because a declaration of war automatically creates a state of war — those listed in the second section .

the latter statutes are listed separately because they can come into effect even if a declaration of war is never adopted .

within each subsection , the statutes are listed generally in the order in which they appear in the u.s. code .

the lists exclude the statutes detailed above concerning criminal law and taxes as well as the disaster relief authorities contained in the "robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act. .

many of following provisions can be triggered by circumstances other than a declaration of war .

but all would come into effect upon enactment of a declaration of war .

in addition to the statutes that are explicitly triggered by a declaration of war , a number come into the effect if a state of war , or period of war , or simply "war" exists .

because a declaration of war automatically creates a state of war , these authorities also are triggered by the enactment of a declaration of war .

but they can come into effect even if no declaration of war is adopted .

as is the case with respect to many of the statutes in the foregoing subsection , many of these statutes can also be triggered pursuant to a declaration of national emergency , and at least one comes into play if congress has enacted a specific authorization for the use of the armed forces .

the statutes are set forth in the order in which they appear in the u.s. code .

as noted , many of the statutes in the previous two subsections can also be triggered not only by a declaration of war or the existence of a state of war but also by a declaration of national emergency .

there are , in addition , a number of statutes that can be triggered only upon a declaration of national emergency or the existence of such an emergency .

these standby authorities do not automatically come into effect upon the issuance of a declaration of national emergency but only in conformity with the procedures set forth in the national emergencies act .

the statutes , listed generally in the order in which they appear in the u.s. code annotated , include the following .

the following section discusses how congress would act on a joint resolution or bill to declare war or authorize the use of force if the house and senate were to consider that measure under the regular procedures of each house .

it also describes how a measure declaring war or authorizing the use of force would be considered under the procedures contained in the war powers resolution of 1973 .

the senate's published precedents do not suggest that a measure proposing to declare war or authorize the use of force , if considered outside the framework of the war powers resolution , would be immune from the potentially laborious process to which other bills and joint resolutions are subject ( except those that benefit from special expedited procedures under rule - making statutes ) .

for example , a joint resolution declaring war or authorizing the use of force presumably would not be eligible for immediate floor consideration at the time it is introduced , and it presumably would be subject to possible delays resulting from the senators' exercise of their right to debate at length .

similarly , the precedents of the house apparently do not grant privilege to a joint resolution declaring war or authorizing the use of force either under the "leave to report" authority that house rules and precedents give to certain house committees or as a question of the privileges of the house .

concerning the latter , former house parliamentarian wm .

holmes brown has observed that "rule ix [on questions of privilege] is concerned not with the privileges of the congress as a legislative branch , but only with the privileges of the house itself. .

thus , neither the enumeration of legislative powers in article i , sec .

8 of the constitution nor the prohibition of that article against any withdrawal from the treasury except by enactment of an appropriation renders a measure purporting to exercise or limit those powers a question of the privileges of the house .

because a joint resolution declaring war or authorizing the use of force proposes to exercise a constitutional power of "the congress as a legislative branch," not of the house alone , it would seem , therefore , not to qualify as a question of privilege .

if so , the house would consider the joint resolution according to its established procedures for dealing with other legislative measures , unless the proposed declaration or authorization were to be considered under the terms of the war powers resolution .

congress has adopted eight declarations of war during the 20 th century — two at the outset of u.s. involvement in world war i and six in the course of world war ii .

house and senate consideration of the initial declarations in each of these wars is illustrative of the process that congress followed .

on both occasions , the house and senate acted to declare war in response to urgent presidential requests made personally before joint sessions of congress .

in light of the importance that most members attached to these requests , it is not surprising that , in both cases , the two houses acted on the joint resolutions quickly and without following all their regular legislative procedures .

by way of illustration , the following is a brief summary of how the house and senate considered the initial joint resolutions to declare war in 1917 and 1941 .

congress convened on april 2 , 1917 , and on that evening , president wilson addressed both houses to request that congress declare war against germany .

immediately after the president's address , senator martin introduced s.j.res .

1 , to declare war , which was referred to the committee on foreign relations .

also on april 2 , representative flood introduced a companion resolution , h.j.res 24 , which was referred to the committee on foreign affairs .

the senate committee reported s.j.res .

1 with an amendment on the following day .

senator lafollette objected to a unanimous consent request that the senate consider the measure immediately .

consequently , the joint resolution had to lie over for a day , pursuant to paragraph 4 ( a ) of senate rule xvii .

on april 4 , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to consider the joint resolution , agreed to the committee amendment , and , after considerable debate , passed the joint resolution by a roll call vote of 82-6 .

the house committee reported h.j.res .

24 on april 4 , and the house then agreed , by unanimous consent , to consider the measure on the following day "under the general rules of the house. .

because the joint resolution , once reported , was placed on the union calendar , "the general rules of the house" required that it be considered in committee of the whole .

consequently , when the house convened on april 5 , representative flood moved that the house resolve into committee of the whole to consider h.j.res .

24 .

before the house agreed to his motion , however , it also agreed to representative flood's unanimous consent request that the house instead consider s.j.res .

1 , which the senate already had passed .

after much debate , and after rejecting two amendments in committee of the whole and a motion to recommit with instructions in the house , the house passed s.j .

res .

1 by a roll call vote of 373-50 .

on december 8 , 1941 , president franklin d. roosevelt addressed a joint session of congress and asked for a declaration of war against japan .

immediately after the joint session ended , the senate reconvened and , following a live quorum call , senator connolly introduced a joint resolution declaring war .

at senator connolly's request , and by unanimous consent , the senate agreed to consider the joint resolution immediately , without committee consideration .

within minutes , and after brief statements by senators connolly and vandenberg , the senate passed the joint resolution by a roll call vote of 82-0 .

also immediately after the president's address , the house acted by considering and agreeing to representative mccormack's motion to suspend the rules and pass h.j.res .

254 , which representative mccormack introduced at that time .

december 8 being a monday , suspension motions were in order on that day .

immediately after the house passed h.j.res .

254 by a roll call vote of 388-1 , the house received a message from the senate that it already had passed its joint resolution , now numbered s.j .

res .

116 .

the house then agreed to representative mccormack's unanimous consent request that the house take the senate joint resolution from the speaker's table and agree to it .

this action was necessary in order for both houses to pass the same measure , making it eligible to be presented to the president for his signature .

enactment of the war powers resolution in november 1973 created special expedited procedures by which the house and senate can act on joint resolutions or bills to declare war or authorize the use of force , if those measures are considered in accordance with the other , related provisions of that law .

these expedited procedures were enacted into law as part of the war powers resolution as an exercise of the constitutional rule - making powers of the house and senate .

article i of the constitution empowers each house to set its own rules .

when congress enacts into law provisions that affect only the internal operations of the house or senate , or both , those provisions are known as rule - making provisions of law that are enacted pursuant to this grant of power under article i .

such rule - making provisions have exactly the same force and effect as provisions contained in the standing rules of the house and senate .

consequently , the house to which certain rule - making provisions apply may enforce , ignore , waive , suspend , supplement , or amend them by its own unilateral action , as it sees fit .

for example , the house could adopt a special rule , or the senate could agree to a unanimous consent request , that would supersede some or all of the procedures described here .

section 4 ( a ) of the war powers resolution directs the president to submit a report to congress within 48 hours after u.s. armed forces are introduced "into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances. .

section 5 ( a ) provides for the receipt and for the referral to committee of any such presidential report .

under section 5 ( b ) , the president is required to terminate use of the armed forces within 60 calendar days ( 90 days in some circumstances ) after submitting his report unless congress takes any one of several actions .

one of these actions is to declare war ; another is to "enact a specific authorization for such use of united states armed forces" as an alternative to declaring war .

under another section of the war powers resolution , congress can also adopt a bill or joint resolution at any time requiring the president to remove the armed forces unless a declaration of war or statutory authorization has been enacted .

section 6 of the war powers resolution contains the expedited , or "fast - track," procedures that were included in the law to enable the house and senate to act within the 60 calendar - day period on a bill or joint resolution contemplated by section 5 ( b ) .

if , under section 6 ( a ) , such a measure is introduced at least 30 calendar days before the end of the 60-day period , the measure is referred to the house foreign affairs committee or the senate foreign relations committee , as the case may be .

that committee is required to report one such measure , with its recommendations , not later than 24 calendar days before the end of the 60-day period .

this provision suggests that the committee can report the measure with the committee's proposed amendments , if any .

the subsection also provides that its provisions are to govern "unless such house shall otherwise determine by the yeas and nays. .

in other words , the house or senate can , by a rollcall vote decided by a simple majority , release its committee from the obligation to report a measure proposing to declare war or to take some other action enumerated in section 5 ( b ) .

if the house or senate committee does report , it is not required to report the measure favorably .

instead , it may report it unfavorably or without recommendation .

but what if either the senate or house committee fails to report a covered bill or joint resolution within the time permitted ? .

the senate parliamentarian has stated that the senate foreign relations committee would be automatically discharged if it failed to report as required by this subsection .

the house parliamentarian has stated that , should the house foreign affairs committee fail to report in a timely manner , a privileged motion to discharge that committee would be in order on the house floor .

section 6 ( b ) governs initial house and senate floor consideration of a joint resolution reported from committee pursuant to section 6 ( a ) .

under section 6 ( b ) , the bill or joint resolution , once reported ( or once the committee is discharged ) , "shall become the pending business" of the house or senate , as the case may be .

by making a covered measure the pending business on the house or senate floor , the war powers resolution evidently makes the measure privileged for floor consideration in the house ( without the need for the rules committee to report a special rule for that purpose ) , or obviates the need for a motion ( that usually is debatable ) to proceed to the measure's consideration in the senate .

because section 6 ( b ) contains no provisions to the contrary , the measure presumably would be amendable on the floor of either house to the same extent as any other bill or joint resolution that house considers , or could be tabled .

section 6 ( b ) goes on to require that the house or senate vote on final passage of the measure within three calendar days after having become the pending business , "unless such house shall otherwise determine by yeas and nays. .

the effect of this subsection probably is more significant for the senate than the house , because it is designed to preclude a filibuster on the senate floor .

in addition , the last provision of the subsection evidently gives either house options to adjust the timing and length of floor consideration by adopting any of several conceivable motions by rollcall vote .

for example , either house might agree by motion to postpone consideration of the measure to a date certain .

alternatively , either house might dispose of the measure by a rollcall vote in favor of a motion to table or recommit it or to postpone its consideration indefinitely .

under the same authority , the house or senate also might be able to shorten the debate to less than three calendar days or to extend the time for debate .

sections 6 ( c ) and 6 ( d ) address the process for the house and senate to reach agreement when each has passed a measure covered by section 5 ( b ) .

in summary , section 6 ( c ) provides for expedited committee and floor action in one house on a covered measure that the other house already has passed .

finally , section 6 ( d ) states that if a conference is necessary to reach a compromise between house and senate versions of a covered measure , the conferees are to be appointed "promptly," the conferees are to report in either agreement or disagreement within specified time periods , and the two houses are to act on the conference report before the end of the 60-day period .

these last two subsections raise the problem that no rules or rule - making statute can compel the house and senate to reach agreement .

all that expedited procedures can do is to require that the conferees report , and that the house and senate act on their report , by a time certain .

the war powers resolution cannot ensure that both houses will agree on the same position by the end of the 60-day period .

if the two houses were unable to agree by the end of the 60 days , that situation presumably would be reflected in ( 1 ) votes by one or both houses to reject a conference report in agreement , or ( 2 ) votes by both houses to agree to a conference report in disagreement ( in other words , votes in each house to accept the report of the conferees that they were unable to reach agreement within the time allotted them ) .

in either case , there is nothing in the statute that would preclude the two houses from appointing a new conference committee that might present a new conference report in agreement at some later date .

however , a conference report filed in the senate after the expiration of the 60-day period might well be subject to extended debate because , presumably , consideration of the report no longer would be governed by section 6 .

instead , the report would be considered under the senate's regular procedures .

appendix a. texts of formal declarations of war by the united states war with great britain 1812 ( act of june 18 , 1812 , ch .

102 , 2 stat 755 ) chap .

cii. — an act declaring war between the united kingdom of great britain and ireland and the dependencies thereof , and the united states of america and their territories .

be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that war be and the same is hereby declared to exist between the united kingdom of great britain and ireland and the dependencies thereof , and the united states of america and their territories ; and that the president of the united states is hereby authorized to use the whole land and naval force of the united states to carry the same into effect , and to issue to private armed vessels of the united states commissions or letters of marque and general reprisal , in such form as he shall think proper , and under the seal of the united states , against the vessels , goods , and effects of the government of the said united kingdom of great britain and ireland , and the subjects thereof .

approved , june 18 , 1812 .

[terminated by treaty of ghent , entered into force feb. 17 , 1815 .

8 stat .

218 , treaty series 109. .

war with mexico 1846 ( act of may 13 , 1846 , ch .

16 , 9 stat .

9 ) chap .

xvi. — an act providing for the prosecution of the existing war between the united states and the republic of mexico .

whereas , by the act of the republic of mexico , a state of war exists between that government and the united states: be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that , for the purpose of enabling the government of the united states to prosecute said war to a speedy and successful termination , the president be , and he is hereby , authorized to employ the militia , naval , and military forces of the united states , and to call for and accept the services of any number of volunteers , not exceeding fifty thousand , who may offer their services , either as cavalry , artillery , infantry , or riflemen , to serve twelve months after they shall have arrived at the place of rendezvous , or to the end of the war , unless sooner discharged , according to the time for which they shall have been mustered into service ; and that the sum of ten millions of dollars , out of any moneys in the treasury , or to come into the treasury , not otherwise appropriated , be , and the same is hereby , appropriated for the purpose of carrying the provisions of this act into effect .

sec .

2 .

and be it further enacted , that the militia , when called into the service of the united states by virtue of this act , or any other act , may , if in the opinion of the president of the united states the public interest requires it , be compelled to serve for a term not exceeding six months after their arrival at the place of rendezvous , in any one year , unless sooner discharged .

sec .

3 .

and be it further enacted , that the said volunteers shall furnish their own clothes , and if cavalry , their own horses and horse equipments ; and when mustered into service shall be armed at the expense of the united states .

sec .

4 .

and be it further enacted , that said volunteers shall , when called into actual service , and while remaining therein , be subject to the rules and articles of war , and shall be , in all respects except as to clothing and pay , placed on the same footing with similar corps of the united states army ; and in lieu of clothing every non - commissioned officer and private in any company , who may thus offer himself , shall be entitled , when called into actual service , to receive in money a sum equal to the cost of clothing of a non - commissioned officer or private ( as the case may be ) in the regular troops of the united states .

sec 5 .

and be it further enacted , that the said volunteers so offering their services shall be accepted by the president in companies , battalions , squadrons , and regiments , whose officers shall be appointed in the manner prescribed by law in the several states and territories to which such companies , battalions , squadrons , and regiments , shall respectively belong .

sec .

6 .

and be it further enacted , that the president of the united states be , and he is hereby , authorized to organize companies so tendering their service into battalions or squadrons , battalions and squadrons into regiments , regiments into brigades , and brigades into divisions , as soon as the number of volunteers shall render such organization , in his judgment , expedient ; and the president shall , if necessary , apportion the staff , field , and general officers among the respective states and territories from which the volunteers shall tender their services as he may deem proper .

sec 7 .

and be it further enacted , that the volunteers who may be received into the service of the united states by virtue of the provisions of this act , and who shall be wounded or otherwise disabled in the service , shall be entitled to all the benefit which may be conferred on persons wounded in the service of the united states .

sec 8 .

and be it further enacted , that the president of the united states be , and he is hereby , authorized forthwith to complete all the public armed vessels now authorized by law , and to purchase or charter , arm , equip , and man , such merchant vessels and steam boats as , upon examination , may be found fit , or easily converted into armed vessels fit for the public service , and in such number as he may deem necessary for the protection of the seaboard , lake coast , and the general defense of the country .

sec .

9 .

and be it further enacted , that whenever the militia or volunteers are called and received into the service of the united states , under the provisions of this act , they shall have the organization of the army of the united states , and shall have the same pay and allowances ; and all mounted privates , non - commissioned officers , musicians , and artificers , shall be allowed 40 cents per day for the use and risk of their horses , except of horses actually killed in action ; and if any mounted volunteer , private , non - commissioned officer , musician , or artificer , shall not keep himself provided with a serviceable horse , the said volunteer shall serve on foot .

approved , may 13 , 1846 .

[terminated by treaty of guadalupe hidalgo , entered into force may 30 , 1848 .

9 stat .

922 , treaty series 207. .

war with spain 1898 ( act of april 25 , 1898 , ch .

189 , 30 stat .

364 ) chap .

189. — an act declaring that war exists between the united states of america and the kingdom of spain .

be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , first .

that war be , and the same is hereby , declared to exist , and that war has existed since the twenty - first day of april , anno domini eighteen hundred and ninety - eight , including said day , between the united states of america and the kingdom of spain .

second .

that the president of the united states be , and he hereby is , directed and empowered to use the entire land and naval forces of the united states , and to call into the actual service of the united states the militia of the several states , to such extent as may be necessary to carry this act into effect .

approved , april 25 , 1898 .

[terminated by treaty of paris , entered into force april 11 , 1899 .

30 stat .

1754 , treaty series 343. .

war with germany 1917 ( act of april 6 , 1917 , ch .

1 , 40 stat .

1 ) chap .

1. — joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the imperial german government and the government and the people of the united states and making provision to prosecute the same .

whereas the imperial german government has committed repeated acts of war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the imperial german government which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and that the president be , and he is hereby , authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the imperial german government ; and to bring the conflict to a successful termination all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , april 6 , 1917 .

[terminated by act of july 2 , 1921 , [s.j.res .

16] ch .

40 , 42 stat .

105 which declared the state of war between the u.s. and germany to be at an end .

recognized by treaty on establishment of friendly relations , entered into force november 11 , 1921 .

42 stat .

1939 , treaty series 658. .

war with austria - hungary 1917 ( act of december 7 , 1917 , ch .

1 , 40 stat .

429 ) chap .

1 — joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the imperial and royal austro - hungarian government and the government and the people of the united states , and making provision to prosecute the same .

whereas the imperial and royal austro - hungarian government has committed repeated acts of war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that a state of war is hereby declared to exist between the united states of america and the imperial and royal austro - hungarian government ; and that the president be , and he is hereby , authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the imperial and royal austro - hungarian government ; and to bring the conflict to a successful termination all the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , december 7 , 1917 .

[terminated by act of july 2 , 1921 , [s.j .

res .

16] ch .

40 , 42 stat .

105 which declared the state of war between the u.s. and austria , a successor state and government to the austro - hungarian monarchy , to be at an end .

42 stat .

105 .

this was recognized by a treaty on establishment of friendly relations , entered into force november 8 , 1921 .

42 stat .

1939 , treaty series 658 .

the act of july 2 , 1921 , also declared the state of war between the u.s. and hungary , a successor state and government to the austro - hungarian monarchy , to be at an end .

this was recognized by a treaty on establishing friendly relations , entered into force december 17 , 1921 .

42 stat .

1951 , treaty series 660. .

war with japan 1941 ( act of december 8 , 1941 , ch .

561 , 55 stat .

795 ) [chapter 561] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the imperial government of japan and the government and the people of the united states and making provisions to prosecute the same .

whereas the imperial government of japan has committed unprovoked acts of war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the imperial government of japan which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the imperial government of japan ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination , all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , december 8 , 1941 , 4:10 p.m. , e.s.t .

[terminated by treaty of peace with japan , entered into force april 28 , 1952 .

3 ust 3169 , tias 2490. .

war with germany 1941 ( act of december 11 , 1941 , ch .

564 , 55 stat .

796 ) [chapter 564] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the government of germany and the government and the people of the united states and making provision to prosecute the same .

whereas the government of germany has formally declared war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the government of germany which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the government of germany ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination , all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , december 11 , 1941 , 3:05 p.m. , e.s.t .

[terminated by [h.j.res .

289] act of october 19 , 1951 , ch .

519 , 65 stat .

451] war with italy 1941 ( act of december 11 , 1941 , ch .

565 , 55 stat .

797 ) [chapter 565] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the government of italy and the government and the people of the united states and making provision to prosecute the same .

whereas the government of italy has formally declared war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the government of italy which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the government of italy ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination , all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , december 11 , 1941 , 3:06 p.m. , e.s.t .

[terminated by treaty of peace with italy , entered into force september 15 , 1947 .

4 ust 311 , 61 stat .

1245. .

war with bulgaria 1942 ( act of june 5 , 1942 , ch .

323 , 56 stat .

307 ) [chapter 323] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the government of bulgaria and the government and the people of the united states and making provisions to prosecute the same .

whereas the government of bulgaria has formally declared war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the government of bulgaria which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the government of bulgaria ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination , all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , june 5 , 1942 .

[terminated by treaty of peace with bulgaria , entered into force september 15 , 1947 .

4 ust 429 , 61 stat .

1915. .

war with hungary 1942 ( act of june 5 , 1942 , ch .

324 , 56 stat .

307 ) [chapter 324] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the government of hungary and the government and the people of the united states and making provisions to prosecute the same .

whereas the government of hungary has formally declared war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the government of hungary which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the government of hungary ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , june 5 , 1942 .

[terminated by treaty of peace with hungary , entered into force september 15 , 1947 .

4 ust 453 , 61 stat .

2065. .

war with rumania 1942 ( act of june 5 , 1942 , ch .

325 , 56 stat .

307 ) [chapter 325] joint resolution declaring that a state of war exists between the government of rumania and the government and the people of the united states and making provisions to prosecute the same .

whereas the government of rumania has formally declared war against the government and the people of the united states of america: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the state of war between the united states and the government of rumania which has thus been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared ; and the president is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval and military forces of the united states and the resources of the government to carry on war against the government of rumania ; and , to bring the conflict to a successful termination , all of the resources of the country are hereby pledged by the congress of the united states .

approved , june 5 , 1942 .

[terminated by treaty of peace with rumania , entered into force september 15 , 1947 .

4 ust 403 , 61 stat .

1757. .

appendix b. texts of key authorizations of use of force protection of the commerce and coasts of the united states ( act of may 28 , 1798 , ch .

48 , 1 stat .

561 ) chap .

xlviii. — an act more effectually to protect the commerce and coasts of the united states .

whereas armed vessels sailing under authority or pretence [ sic ] of authority from the republic of france , have committed depredations on the commerce of the united states , and have recently captured the vessels and property of citizens thereof , on and near the coasts , in violation of the law of nations , and treaties between the united states and the french nation .

therefore: be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that it shall be lawful for the president of the united states , and he is hereby authorized to instruct and direct the commanders of the armed vessels belonging to the united states to seize , take and bring into any port of the united states , to be proceeded against according to the laws of nations , any such armed vessel which shall have committed or which shall be found hovering on the coasts of the united states , for the purpose of committing depredations on the vessels belonging to citizens thereof ; — and also to retake any ship or vessel , of any citizen or citizens of the united states which may have been captured by any such armed vessel .

approved , may 28 , 1798 .

protection of the commerce of the united states ( act of july 9 , 1798 , ch .

68 , 1 stat .

578 ) chap .

lxviii. — an act further to protect the commerce of the united states .

section 1 .

be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the president of the united states shall be , and he is hereby authorized to instruct the commanders of the public armed vessels which are , or which shall be employed in the service of the united states , to subdue , seize and take any armed french vessel , which shall be found within the jurisdictional limits of the united states , or elsewhere , on the high seas , and such captured vessel , with her apparel , guns and appurtenances , and the goods or effects which shall be found on board the same , being french property , shall be brought within some port of the united states , and shall be duly proceeded against and condemned as forfeited ; and shall accrue and be distributed , as by law is or shall be provided respecting the captures which shall be made by the public armed vessels of the united states .

sec .

2 .

and be it further enacted , that the president of the united states shall be , and he is hereby authorized to grant to the owners of private armed ships and vessels of the united states , who shall make application thereof , special commissions in the form which he shall direct , and under the seal of the united states ; and such private armed vessels , when duly commissioned , as aforesaid , shall have the same license and authority for the subduing , seizing and capturing any armed french vessel , and for the recapture of the vessels , goods and effects of the people of the united states , as the public armed vessels of the united states may by law have ; and shall be , in like manner , subject to such instructions as shall be ordered by the president of the united states , for the regulation of their conduct .

and the commissions which shall be granted , as aforesaid , shall be revocable at the pleasure of the president of the united states .

sec .

3 .

provided , and be it further enacted , that every person intending to set forth and employ an armed vessel , and applying for a commission , as aforesaid , shall produce in writing the name , and a suitable description of the tonnage and force of the vessel , and the name and place of residence of each owner concerned therein , the number of the crew and the name of the commander , and the two officers next in rank appointed for such vessel ; which writing shall be signed by the person or persons making such application , and filed with the secretary of state , or shall be delivered to any other officer or person who shall be employed to deliver out such commissions , to be by him transmitted to the secretary of state .

sec .

4 .

and provided , and be it further enacted , that before any commission , as aforesaid , shall be issued , the owner or owners of the ship or vessel for which the same shall be requested , and the commander thereof , for the time being , shall give bond to the united states , with at least two responsible sureties , not interested in such vessel , in the penal sum of seven thousand dollars ; or if such vessel be provided with more than one hundred and fifty men , then in the penal sum of fourteen thousand dollars ; with condition that the owners , and officers , and crews who shall be employed on board of such commissioned vessel , shall and will observe the treaties and laws of the united states and the instructions which shall be given them for the regulation of their conduct: and will satisfy all damages and injuries which shall be done or committed contrary to the tenor thereof , by such vessel , during her commission , and to deliver up the same when revoked by the president of the united states .

sec .

5 .

and be it further enacted , that all armed french vessels , together with their apparel , guns and appurtenances , and any goods or effects which shall be found on board the same , being french property , and which shall be captured by any private armed vessel or vessels of the united states , duly commissioned , as aforesaid , shall be forfeited , and shall accrue to the owners thereof , and the officers and crews by whom such captures shall be made ; and on due condemnation had , shall be distributed according to any agreement which shall be between them ; or in failure of such agreement , then by the discretion of the court before whom such condemnation shall be .

sec .

6 .

and be it further enacted , that all vessels , goods and effects , the property of any citizen of the united states , or person resident therein , which shall be recaptured , as aforesaid , shall be restored to the lawful owners , upon payment by them , respectively , of a just and reasonable salvage , to be determined by the mutual agreement of the parties concerned , or by the decree of any court of the united states having maritime jurisdiction according to the nature of each case: provided , that such allowance shall not be less than one eighth , or exceeding one half of the full value of such recapture , without any deduction .

and such salvage shall be distributed to and among the owners , officers and crews of the private armed vessel or vessels entitled thereto , according to any agreement which shall be between them ; or in case of no agreement , then by the decree of the court who shall determine upon such salvage .

sec .

7 .

and be it further enacted , that before breaking bulk of any vessel which shall be captured , as aforesaid , or other disposal or conversion thereof , or of any articles which shall be found on board the same , such capture shall be brought into some port of the united states , and shall be libelled and proceeded against before the district court of the same district ; and if after a due course of proceedings , such capture shall be decreed as forfeited in the district court , or in the circuit court of the same district , in the case of any appeal duly allowed , the same shall be delivered to the owners and captors concerned therein , or shall be publicly sold by the marshal of the same court , as shall be finally decreed and ordered by the court .

and the same court , who shall have final jurisdiction of any libel or complaint of any capture , as aforesaid , shall and may decree restitution , in whole or in part , when the capture and restraint shall have been made without just cause , as aforesaid ; and if made without probable cause , or otherwise unreasonably , may order and decree damages and costs to the party injured , and for which the owners , officers and crews of the private armed vessel or vessels by which such unjust capture shall have been made , and also such vessel or vessels shall be answerable and liable .

sec .

8 .

and be it further enacted , that all french persons and others , who shall be found acting on board any french armed vessel , which shall be captured , or on board of any vessel of the united states , which shall be captured , or on board of any vessel of the united states , which shall be recaptured , as aforesaid , shall be reported to the collector of the port in which they shall first arrive , and shall be delivered to the custody of the marshal , or of some civil or military officer of the united states , or of any state in or near such port ; who shall take charge for their safe keeping and support , at the expense of the united states .

approved , july 9 , 1798 .

protection of the commerce and seamen of the united states against the tripolitan cruisers ( act of february 6 , 1802 , ch .

4 , 2 stat.129 ) chap .

iv. — an act for the protection of the commerce and seamen of the united states , against the tripolitan cruisers .

whereas the regency of tripoli , on the coast of barbary , has commenced a predatory warfare against the united states: be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that it shall be lawful fully to equip , officer , man , and employ such of the armed vessels of the united states as may be judged requisite by the president of the united states , for protecting effectually the commerce and seamen thereof on the atlantic ocean , the mediterranean and adjoining seas .

sec .

2 .

and be it further enacted , that it shall be lawful for the president of the united states to instruct the commanders of the respective public vessels aforesaid , to subdue , seize and make prize of all vessels , goods , and effects , belonging to the bey of tripoli , or to his subjects , and to bring or send the same into port , to be proceeded against , and distributed according to the law ; and also to cause to be done all such other acts of precaution or hostility as the state of war will justify , and may , in his opinion , require .

sec .

3 .

and be it further enacted , that on the application of , the owners of private armed vessels of the united states , the president of the united states may grant to them special commissions , in the form which he shall direct , under the seal of the united states ; and such private armed vessels , when so commissioned , shall have the like authority for subduing , seizing , taking , and bringing into port , any tripolitan vessel , goods or effects , as the before - mentioned public armed vessels may by law have ; and shall therein be subject to the instruction which may be given by the president of the united states for the regulation of their conduct ; and their commissions shall be revocable at his pleasure .

provided , that before any commission shall be granted , as aforesaid , the owner or owners of the vessel for which the same may be requested , and the commander thereof , for the time being , shall give bond to the united states , with at least two responsible sureties , not interested in such vessel , in the penal sum of seven thousand dollars ; or , if such vessel be provided with more than one hundred and fifty men , in the penal sum of fourteen thousand dollars , with condition for observing the treaties and laws of the united states , and the instructions which may be given , as aforesaid ; and also , for satisfying all damages and injuries which shall be done , contrary to the tenor thereof , by such commissioned vessel ; and for delivering up the commission , when revoked by the president of the united states .

sec .

4 .

and be if further enacted , that any tripolitan vessel , goods or effects , which shall be so captured and brought into port , by any private armed vessel of the united states , duly commissioned , as aforesaid , may be adjudged good prize , and thereupon shall accrue to the owners and officers , and men of the capturing vessel , and shall be distributed according to the agreement which shall have been made between them , or , in failure of such agreement , according to the discretion of the court having cognizance of the capture .

sec .

5 .

and be it further enacted , that the seamen may be engaged to serve in the navy of the united states for a period not exceeding two years ; but the president may discharge the same sooner , if in his judgment , their services may be dispensed with .

approved , february 6 , 1802 .

[repealed by p.l .

1028 , 84 th congress , 2d sess ( august 10 , 1956 ) ; 70a stat .

644 , sec .

53 ( b ) ] protection of the commerce and seamen of the united states against the algerine cruisers ( act of march 3 , 1815 , ch .

90 , 3 stat .

230 ) chap .

xc. — an act for the protection of the commerce of the united states against the algerine cruisers .

whereas the dey of algiers , on the coast of barbary , has commenced a predatory warfare against the united states — be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america , in congress assembled , that it shall be lawful fully to equip , officer , man and employ such of the armed vessels of the united states as may be judged requisite by the president of the united states for protecting effectually the commerce and seamen thereof on the atlantic ocean , the mediterranean and adjoining seas .

sec .

2 .

and be it further enacted , that it shall be lawful for the president of the united states to instruct the commanders of the respective public vessels aforesaid , to subdue , seize , and make prize of all vessels , goods and effects of or belonging to the dey of algiers , or to his subjects , and to bring or send the same into port , to be proceeded against and distributed according to law ; and , also , to cause to be done all such other acts of precaution or hostility , as the state of war will justify , and may in his opinion require .

sec .

3 .

and be it further enacted , that on the application of the owners of private armed vessels of the united states , the president of the united states may grant them special commissions in the form which he shall direct under the seal of the united states ; and such private armed vessels , when so commissioned , shall have the like authority for subduing , seizing , taking and bringing into port any algerine vessel , goods or effects , as the before - mentioned public armed vessels may by law have ; and shall therein be subject to the instructions which may be given by the president of the united states for the regulation of their conduct ; and their commissions shall be revokable at his pleasure .

provided , that before any commission shall be granted as aforesaid , the owner or owners of the vessels of which the same may be requested , and the commander thereof for the time being shall give bond to the united states , with at least two responsible sureties , not interested in such vessel , in the penal sum of seven thousand dollars , or if such vessel be provided with more than one hundred and fifty men , in the penal sum of fourteen thousand dollars , with condition for observing the treaties and laws of the united states , and the instructions which may be given as aforesaid , and also for satisfying all damages and injuries which shall be done contrary to the tenor thereof by such commissioned vessel , and for delivering up the commission when revoked by the president of the united states .

sec .

4 .

and be if further enacted , that any algerine vessel , goods , or effects which may be so captured and brought into port , by any private armed vessel , of the united states , duly commissioned as aforesaid , may be adjudged good prize , and thereupon shall accrue to the owners , and officers , and men of the capturing vessel , and shall be distributed according to the agreement which shall have been made between them , or , in failure of such agreement , according to the discretion [of] the court having cognisance of the capture .

approved , march 3 , 1815 .

[repealed by p.l .

1028 , 84 th congress , 2d sess ( august 10 , 1956 ) ; 70a stat .

644 , sec .

53 ( b ) ] suppression of piracy ( 33 u.s.c .

§§381-387 .

r.s.§§4293-4299 .

r.s.§4293 , 4294 , and 4295 are derived from the acts of march 3 , 1819 , ch .

77 , 3 stat .

510 and 512 ; january 30 , 1823 , 3 stat .

513 , ch .

7 , 3 stat .

721 .

r.s.§4296 is derived from the acts of march 3 , 1819 , ch .

77 , 3 stat .

513 ; january 30 , 1823 , ch .

7 , 3 stat .

721 ; august 5 , 1861 , ch .

48 , 12 stat .

314 .

r.s.§§4297 , 4298 , and 4299 are derived from the act of august 5 , 1861 , ch .

48 , 12 stat .

315. ) .

title 33 .

chapter 7 .

section 381 .

use of public vessels to suppress piracy the president is authorized to employ so many of the public armed vessels as in his judgement the service may require , with suitable instructions to the commanders thereof , in protecting the merchant vessels of the united states and their crews from piratical aggressions and depredations .

section 382 .

seizure of piratical vessels generally the president is authorized to instruct the commanders of the public armed vessels of the united states to subdue , seize , take , and send into any port of the united states , any armed vessel or boat , or any vessel or boat , the crew whereof shall be armed , and which shall have attempted or committed any piratical aggression , search , restraint , depredation , or seizure , upon any vessel of the united states , or of the citizens thereof , or upon any other vessel ; and also to retake any vessel of the united states , or its citizens , which may have been unlawfully captured upon the high seas .

section 383 .

resistance of pirates by merchant vessels the commander and crew of any merchant vessel of the united states , owned wholly , or in part , by a citizen thereof , may oppose and defend against any aggression , search , restraint , depredation , or seizure , which shall be attempted upon such vessel , or upon any other vessel so owned , by the commander or crew of any armed vessel whatsoever , not being a public armed vessel of some nation in amity with the united states , and may subdue and capture the same ; and may also retake any vessel so owned which may have been captured by the commander or crew of any such armed vessel , and send the same into any port of the united states .

section 384 .

condemnation of piratical vessels whenever any vessel , which shall have been built , purchased , fitted out in whole or in part , or held for the purpose of being employed in the commission of any piratical aggression , search , restraint , depredation , or seizure , or in the commission of any other act of piracy as defined by the law of nations , or from which any piratical aggression , search , restraint , depredation , or seizure shall have been first attempted or made , is captured and brought into or captured in any port of the united states , the same shall be adjudged and condemned to their use , and that of the captors after due process and trial in any court having admiralty jurisdiction , and which shall be holden for the district into which such captured vessel shall be brought ; and the same court shall thereupon order a sale and distribution thereof accordingly , and at its discretion .

section 385 .

seizure and condemnation of vessels fitted out for piracy any vessel built , purchased , fitted out in whole or in part , or held for the purpose of being employed in the commission of any piratical aggression , search , restraint , depredation , or seizure , or in the commission of any other act of piracy , as defined by the law of nations , shall be liable to be captured and brought into any port of the united states if found upon the high seas , or to be seized if found in any port or place within the united states , whether the same shall have actually sailed upon any piratical expedition or not , and whether any act of piracy shall have been committed or attempted upon or from such vessel or not ; and any such vessel may be adjudged and condemned , if captured by a vessel authorized as hereinafter mentioned [33 uscs §386] to the use of the united states , and to that of the captors , and if seized by a collector [the secretary of the treasury] , surveyor or marshal , then to the use of the united states .

section 386 .

commissioning private vessels for seizure of piratical vessels the president is authorized to instruct the commanders of the public armed vessels of the united states , and to authorize the commanders of any other armed vessels sailing under the authority of any letters of marque and reprisal granted by congress , or the commanders of any other suitable vessels , to subdue , seize , take , and , if on the high seas , to send into any port of the united states , any vessel or boat built , purchased , fitted out , or held as mentioned in the preceding section [33 uscs §385] .

section 387 .

duties of officers of customs and marshals as to seizure the collectors of the several ports of entry [the secretary of the treasury] the surveyors of the several ports of delivery [the secretary of the treasury] and the marshals of the several judicial districts within the united states , shall seize any vessel or boat built , purchased , fitted out , or held as mentioned in section forty - two hundred and ninety - seven [33 uscs §385] , which may be found within their respective ports or districts , and to cause the same to be proceeded against and disposed of as provided by that section .

authorization for the president to employ the armed forces of the united states for protecting the security of formosa , the pescadores , and related positions and territories of that area ( act of january 29 , 1955 , ch.4 , 69 stat .

7 .

[h.j.res .

159 , p.l .

84-4] ) p.l .

4 , chapter 4 — joint resolution authorizing the president to employ the armed forces of the united states for protecting the security of formosa , the pescadores and related positions and territories of that area .

whereas the primary purpose of the united states , in its relations with all other nations , is to develop and sustain a just and enduring peace for all ; and whereas certain territories in the west pacific under the jurisdiction of the republic of china are now under armed attack , and threats and declarations have been and are being made by the chinese communists that such armed attack is in aid of and in preparation for armed attack on formosa and the pescadores , whereas such armed attack if continued would gravely endanger the peace and security of the west pacific area and particularly of formosa and the pescadores ; and whereas the secure possession by friendly governments of the western pacific island chain , of which formosa is a part , is essential to the vital interests of the united states and all friendly nations in or bordering upon the pacific ocean ; and whereas the president of the united states on january 6 , 1955 , submitted to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification a mutual defense treaty between the united states of america and the republic of china , which recognizes that an armed attack in the west pacific area directed against territories , therein described , in the region of formosa and the pescadores , would be dangerous to the peace and safety of the parties to the treaty: therefore be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the president of the united states be and he hereby is authorized to employ the armed forces of the united states as he deems necessary for the specific purpose of securing and protecting formosa , and the pescadores against armed attack , this authority to include the securing and protection of such related positions and territories of that area now in friendly hands and the taking of such other measures as he judges to be required or appropriate in assuring the defense of formosa and the pescadores .

this resolution shall expire when the president shall determine that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the united states or otherwise , and shall so report to the congress .

approved , january 29 , 1955 , 8:42 a.m. [repealed by p.l .

93-475 [ s. 3473 ] october 26 , 1975 .

88 stat .

1439] promotion of peace and stability in the middle east ( p.l .

85-7 , 71 stat .

5 , march 9 , 1957 [h.j.res .

117] ) p.l .

85-7 — joint resolution , to promote peace and stability in the middle east .

resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the president be and hereby is authorized to cooperate with and assist any nation or group of nations in the general area of the middle east desiring such assistance in the development of economic strength dedicated to the maintenance of national independence .

sec .

2 .

the president is authorized to undertake , in the general area of the middle east , military assistance programs with any nation or group of nations of that area desiring such assistance .

furthermore , the united states regards as vital to the national interest and world peace the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nations of the middle east .

to this end , if the president determines the necessity thereof , the united states is prepared to use armed forces to assist any such nation or group of such nations requesting assistance against armed aggression from any country controlled by international communism: provided , that such employment shall be consonant with the treaty obligations of the united states and with the constitution of the united states .

sec .

3 .

the president is hereby authorized to use during the balance of fiscal year 1957 for economic and military assistance under this joint resolution not to exceed $200,000,000 from any appropriation now available for carrying out the provisions for the mutual security act of 1954 , as amended , in accord with the provisions of such act: provided , that , whenever the president determines it to be important to the security of the united states , such use may be under the authority of section 401 ( a ) of the mutual security act of 1954 , as amended ( except that the provisions of section 105 ( a ) thereof shall not be waived ) , and without regard to the provisions of section 105 of the mutual security appropriation act , 1957: provided further , that obligations incurred in carrying out the purposes of the first sentence of section 2 of this joint resolution shall be paid only out of appropriations for military assistance , and obligations incurred in carrying out the purposes of the first section of this joint resolution shall be paid only out of appropriations other than those for military assistance .

this authorization is in addition to other existing authorizations with respect to the use of such appropriations .

none of the additional authorization contained in this section shall be used until fifteen days after the committee on foreign relations of the senate , the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives , the committees on appropriations of the senate and the house of representatives and , when military assistance is involved , the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives have been furnished a report showing the object of the proposed use , the country for the benefit of which such use is intended , and the particular appropriation or appropriations for carrying out the provisions of the mutual security act of 1954 , as amended , from which the funds are proposed to be derived: provided , that funds available under this section during the balance of fiscal year 1957 shall , in the case of any such report submitted during the last fifteen days of the fiscal year , remain available for use under this section for the purposes stated in such report for a period of twenty days following the date of submission of such report .

nothing contained in this joint resolution shall be construed as itself authorizing the appropriation of additional funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the first section or of the first sentence of section 2 of this joint resolution .

sec .

4 .

the president should continue to furnish facilities and military assistance , within the provisions of applicable law and established policies , to the united nations emergency force in the middle east , with a view to maintaining the truce in that region .

sec .

5 .

the president shall within the months of january and july of each year report to the congress his action hereunder .

sec .

6 .

this joint resolution shall expire when the president shall determine that the peace and security of the nations in the general area of the middle east are reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the united nations or otherwise except that it may be terminated earlier by a concurrent resolution of the two houses of congress .

approved , march 9 , 1957 .

maintenance of international peace and security in southeast asia ( p.l .

88-408 , 78 stat .

384 , august 10 , 1964 [h.j.res .

11450] ) p.l .

88-408 , 78 stat. — joint resolution , to promote the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast asia .

whereas naval units of the communist regime in vietnam , in violation of the principles of the charter of the united nations and of international law , have deliberately and repeatedly attacked the united states naval vessels lawfully present in international waters , and have thereby created a serious threat to international peace ; and whereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic campaign of aggression that the communist regime in north vietnam has been waging against its neighbors and the nations joined with them in the collective defense of their freedom ; and whereas the united states is assisting the peoples of southeast asia to protect their freedom and has no territorial , military or political ambitions in that area , but desires only that these peoples should be left in peace to work out their own destinies in their own way: now , therefore , be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , that the congress approves and supports the determination of the president , as commander in chief , to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the united states and to prevent further aggression .

sec .

2 .

the united states regards as vital to its national interest and to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast asia .

consonant with the constitution of the united states and the charter of the united nations and in accordance with its obligations under the southeast asia collective defense treaty , the united states is , therefore , prepared , as the president determines , to take all necessary steps , including the use of armed force , to assist any member or protocol state of the southeast asia collective defense treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom .

sec .

3 .

this resolution shall expire when the president shall determine that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the united nations or otherwise , except that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent resolution of the congress .

approved , august 10 , 1964 [repealed by p.l .

91-672 [h.r .

15628] january 12 , 1971 .

84 stat .

2053] multinational force in lebanon ( p.l .

98-119 , 97 stat .

805 , october 12 , 1983 [ s.j.res .

159 ] ) p.l .

98-119 , 97 stat .

805 — joint resolution providing statutory authorization under the war powers resolution for continued united states participation in the multinational peacekeeping force in lebanon in order to obtain withdrawal of all foreign forces from lebanon .

resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , short title section 1 .

this joint resolution may be cited as the "multinational force in lebanon resolution. .

findings and purpose sec .

2 .

 ( a ) the congress finds that — ( 1 ) the removal of all foreign forces from lebanon is an essential united states foreign policy objective in the middle east ; ( 2 ) in order to restore full control by the government of lebanon over its own territory , the united states is currently participating in the multinational peacekeeping force ( hereafter in this resolution referred to as the "multinational force in lebanon" ) which was established in accordance with the exchange of letters between the governments of the united states and lebanon dated september 25 , 1982 ; ( 3 ) the multinational force in lebanon better enables the government of lebanon to establish its unity , independence , and territorial integrity ; ( 4 ) progress toward national political reconciliation in lebanon is necessary ; and ( 5 ) united states armed forces participating in the multinational force in lebanon are now in hostilities requiring authorization of their continued presence under the war powers resolution .

 ( b ) the congress determines that the requirements of section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the war powers resolution became operative on august 29 , 1983 .

consistent with section 5 ( b ) of the war powers resolution , the purpose of this joint resolution is to authorize the continued participation of the united states armed forces in the multinational force in lebanon .

 ( c ) the congress intends this joint resolution to constitute the necessary specific statutory authorization under the war powers resolution for continued participation by united states armed forces in the multinational force in lebanon .

authorization for continued participation of united states armed forces in the multinational force in lebanon sec .

3 .

the president is authorized , for purposes of section 5 ( b ) of the war powers resolution , to continue participation by united states armed forces in the multinational force in lebanon , subject to the provisions of section 6 of this joint resolution .

such participation shall be limited to performance of the functions , and shall be subject to the limitations , specified in the agreement establishing the multinational force in lebanon as set forth in the exchange of letters between the governments of the united states and lebanon dated september 25 , 1982 , except that this shall not preclude such protective measures as may be necessary to ensure the safety of the multinational force in lebanon .

reports to the congress sec .

4 .

as required by section 4 ( c ) of the war powers resolution , the president shall report periodically to the congress with respect to the situation in lebanon , but in no event shall he report less often than once every three months .

in addition to providing the information required by that section on the status , scope , and duration of hostilities involving the unites states armed forces , such reports shall describe in detail — ( 1 ) the activities being performed by the multinational force in lebanon ; ( 2 ) the present composition of the multinational force in lebanon , including a description of the responsibilities and deployment of the armed forces of each participating country ; ( 3 ) the results of efforts to reduce and eventually eliminate the multinational force in lebanon ; ( 4 ) how continued united states participation in the multinational force in lebanon is advancing united states foreign policy interests in the middle east ; and ( 5 ) what progress has occurred toward national political reconciliation among all lebanese groups .

statements of policy sec .

5 .

 ( a ) the congress declares that the participation of the armed forces of other countries in the multinational force in lebanon is essential to maintain the international character of the peacekeeping function in lebanon .

 ( b ) the congress believes that it should continue to be the policy of the united states to promote continuing discussions with israel , syria , and lebanon with the objective of bringing about the withdrawal of all foreign troops from lebanon and establishing an environment which will permit the lebanese armed forces to carry out their responsibilities in the beirut area .

 ( c ) it is the sense of the congress that , not later than one year after the date of enactment of this joint resolution and at least once a year thereafter , the united states should discuss with the other members of the security council of the united nations the establishment of a united nations peacekeeping force to assume the responsibilities of the multinational force in lebanon .

an analysis of the implications of the response to such discussions for the continuation of the multinational force in lebanon shall be included in the reports required under paragraph ( 3 ) of section 4 of this resolution .

duration of authorization for united states participation in the multinational force in lebanon sec .

6 .

the participation of united states armed forces in the multinational force in lebanon shall be authorized for purposes of the war powers resolution until the end of the eighteen - month period beginning on the date of enactment of this resolution unless the congress extends such authorization , except that such authorization shall terminate sooner upon the occurrence of any one of the following: ( 1 ) the withdrawal of all foreign forces from lebanon , unless the president determines and certifies to the congress that continued united states armed forces participation in the multinational force in lebanon is required after such withdrawal in order to accomplish the purposes specified in the september 25 , 1982 , exchange of letters providing for the establishment of the multinational force in lebanon ; or ( 2 ) the assumption by the united nations or the government of lebanon of the responsibilities of the multinational force in lebanon ; or ( 3 ) the implementation of other effective security arrangements in the area ; or ( 4 ) the withdrawal of all other countries from participation in the multinational force in lebanon .

interpretation of this resolution sec .

7 .

 ( a ) nothing in this joint resolution shall preclude the president from withdrawing united states armed forces participation in the multinational force in lebanon if circumstances warrant , and nothing in this joint resolution shall preclude the congress by joint resolution from directing such a withdrawal .

 ( b ) nothing in this joint resolution modifies , limits or supersedes any provision of the war powers resolution or the requirement of section 4 ( a ) of the lebanon emergency assistance act of 1983 , relating to congressional authorization for any substantial expansion in the number or role of united states armed forces in lebanon .

congressional priority procedures for amendments sec .

8 .

 ( a ) any joint resolution or bill introduced to amend or repeal this act shall be referred to the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives or the committee on foreign relations of the senate , as the case may be .

such joint resolution or bill shall be considered by such committee within fifteen calendar days and may be reported out , together with its recommendations , unless such house shall otherwise determine pursuant to its rules .

 ( b ) any joint resolution or bill so reported shall become the pending business of the house in question ( in the case of the senate the time for debate shall be equally divided between the proponents and the opponents ) and shall be voted on within three calendar days thereafter , unless such house shall otherwise determine by the yeas and nays .

 ( c ) such a joint resolution or bill passed by one house shall be referred to the committee of the other house named in subsection ( a ) and shall be reported out by such committee together with its recommendations within fifteen calendar days and shall thereupon become the pending business of such house and shall be voted upon within three calendar days , unless such house shall otherwise determine by the yeas and nays .

 ( d ) in the case of any disagreement between the two houses of congress with respect to a joint resolution or bill passed by both houses , conferees shall be promptly appointed and the committee of conference shall make and file a report with respect to such joint resolution within six calendar days after the legislation is referred to the committee of conference .

notwithstanding any rule in either house concerning the printing of conference reports in the record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports , such report shall be acted on by both houses not later than six calendar days after the conference report is filed .

in the event the conferees are unable to agree within forty - eight hours , they shall report back to the respective houses in disagreement .

approved , october 12 , 1983 .

authorization of the use of u.s. armed forces pursuant to u.n. security council resolution 678 with respect to iraq ( p.l .

102-1 , 105 stat .

3 , january 14 , 1991 [h.j.res .

77] ) p.l .

102-1 , 105 stat .

3 — to authorize the use of united states armed forces pursuant to united nations security council resolution 678 .

whereas the government of iraq without provocation invaded and occupied the territory of kuwait on august 2 , 1990 ; whereas both the house of representatives ( in h.j.res .

658 of the 101 st congress ) and the senate ( in s.con.res .

147 of the 101 st congress ) have condemned iraq's invasion of kuwait and declared their support for international action to reverse iraq's aggression ; whereas , iraq's conventional , chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programs and its demonstrated willingness to use weapons of mass destruction pose a grave threat to world peace ; whereas the international community has demanded that iraq withdraw unconditionally and immediately from kuwait and that kuwait's independence and legitimate government be restored ; whereas the united nations security council repeatedly affirmed the inherent right of individual or collective self - defense in response to the armed attack by iraq against kuwait in accordance with article 51 of the united nations charter ; whereas , in the absence of full compliance by iraq with its resolutions , the united nations security council in resolution 678 has authorized member states of the united nations to use all necessary means after january 15 , 1991 , to uphold and implement all relevant security council resolutions and to restore international peace and security to the area ; and whereas iraq has persisted in its illegal occupation of , and brutal aggression against kuwait: now , therefore , be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , section 1 .

short title .

this joint resolution may be cited as the "authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution. .

sec .

2 .

authorization for use of united states armed forces .

 ( a ) authorization. — the president is authorized , subject to subsection ( b ) , to use united states armed forces pursuant to united nations security council resolution 678 ( 1990 ) in order to achieve implementation of security council resolutions 660 , 661 , 662 , 664 , 665 , 666 , 667 , 669 , 670 , 674 , and 677 .

 ( b ) requirement for determination that use of military force is necessary. — before exercising the authority granted in subsection ( a ) , the president shall make available to the speaker of the house of representatives and the president pro tempore of the senate his determination that — ( 1 ) the united states has used all appropriate diplomatic and other peaceful means to obtain compliance by iraq with the united nations security council resolution cited in subsection ( a ) ; and ( 2 ) that those efforts have not been and would not be successful in obtaining such compliance .

 ( c ) war powers resolution requirements. — ( 1 ) specific statutory authorization. — consistent with section 8 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the war powers resolution , the congress declares that this section is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of section 5 ( b ) of the war powers resolution .

 ( 2 ) applicability of other requirements. — nothing in this resolution supersedes any requirement of the war powers resolution .

sec .

3 .

reports to congress .

at least once every 60 days , the president shall submit to the congress a summary on the status of efforts to obtain compliance by iraq with the resolutions adopted by the united nations security council in response to iraq's aggression .

approved , january 14 , 1991 .

authorization of the use of u.s. armed forces against those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the united states ( p.l .

107-40 , 115 stat .

224 , september 18 , 2001 [s. j. res .

23] ) to authorize the use of united states armed forces against those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the united states .

whereas , on september 11 , 2001 , acts of treacherous violence were committed against the united states and its citizens , and whereas , such acts render it both necessary and appropriate that the united states exercise its rights to self - defense and to protect united states citizens both at home and abroad , and whereas , in light of the threat to the national security and foreign policy of the united states posed by these grave acts of violence , and whereas , such acts continue to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the united states , whereas the president has authority under the constitution to take action to deter and prevent acts of international terrorism against the united states .

resolved by the senate and the house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled .

section 1 .

short title this joint resolution may be cited as the "authorization for use of military force" section 2 .

authorization for use of united states armed forces ( a ) that the president is authorized to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations , organizations , or persons he determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored such organizations or persons , in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the united states by such nations , organizations or persons .

 ( b ) war powers resolution requirements ( 1 ) specific statutory authorization - consistent with section 8 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the war powers resolution , the congress declares that this section is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of section 5 ( b ) of the war powers resolution .

 ( 2 ) applicability of other requirements - nothing in this resolution supercedes any requirement of the war powers resolution .

approved , september 18 , 2001 .

authorization of the use of force against iraq resolution of 2002 ( p.l .

107-243 , 116 stat .

1498 , october 16 , 2002 [ h.j.res .

114 ] ) to authorize the use of united states armed forces against iraq .

whereas in 1990 in response to iraq's war of aggression against and illegal occupation of kuwait , the united states forged a coalition of nations to liberate kuwait and its people in order to defend the national security of the united states and enforce united nations security council resolutions relating to iraq ; whereas after the liberation of kuwait in 1991 , iraq entered into a united nations sponsored cease - fire agreement pursuant to which iraq unequivocally agreed , among other things , to eliminate its nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons programs and the means to deliver and develop them , and to end its support for international terrorism ; whereas the efforts of international weapons inspectors , united states intelligence agencies , and iraqi defectors led to the discovery that iraq had large stockpiles of chemical weapons and a large scale biological weapons program , and that iraq had an advanced nuclear weapons development program that was much closer to producing a nuclear weapon than intelligence reporting had previously indicated ; whereas iraq , in direct and flagrant violation of the cease - fire , attempted to thwart the efforts of weapons inspectors to identify and destroy iraq's weapons of mass destruction stockpiles and development capabilities , which finally resulted in the withdrawal of inspectors from iraq on october 31 , 1998 ; whereas in p.l .

105-235 ( august 14 , 1998 ) , congress concluded that iraq's continuing weapons of mass destruction programs threatened vital united states interests and international peace and security , declared iraq to be in "material and unacceptable breach of its international obligations" and urged the president "to take appropriate action , in accordance with the constitution and relevant laws of the united states , to bring iraq into compliance with its international obligations" ; whereas iraq both poses a continuing threat to the national security of the united states and international peace and security in the persian gulf region and remains in material and unacceptable breach of its international obligations by , among other things , continuing to possess and develop a significant chemical and biological weapons capability , actively seeking a nuclear weapons capability , and supporting and harboring terrorist organizations ; whereas iraq persists in violating resolution of the united nations security council by continuing to engage in brutal repression of its civilian population thereby threatening international peace and security in the region , by refusing to release , repatriate , or account for non - iraqi citizens wrongfully detained by iraq , including an american serviceman , and by failing to return property wrongfully seized by iraq from kuwait ; whereas the current iraqi regime has demonstrated its capability and willingness to use weapons of mass destruction against other nations and its own people ; whereas the current iraqi regime has demonstrated its continuing hostility toward , and willingness to attack , the united states , including by attempting in 1993 to assassinate former president bush and by firing on many thousands of occasions on united states and coalition armed forces engaged in enforcing the resolutions of the united nations security council ; whereas members of al qaida , an organization bearing responsibility for attacks on the united states , its citizens , and interests , including the attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , are known to be in iraq ; whereas iraq continues to aid and harbor other international terrorist organizations , including organizations that threaten the lives and safety of united states citizens ; whereas the attacks on the united states of september 11 , 2001 , underscored the gravity of the threat posed by the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by international terrorist organizations ; whereas iraq's demonstrated capability and willingness to use weapons of mass destruction , the risk that the current iraqi regime will either employ those weapons to launch a surprise attack against the united states or its armed forces or provide them to international terrorists who would do so , and the extreme magnitude of harm that would result to the united states and its citizens from such an attack , combine to justify action by the united states to defend itself ; whereas united nations security council resolution 678 ( 1990 ) authorizes the use of all necessary means to enforce united nations security council resolution 660 ( 1990 ) and subsequent relevant resolutions and to compel iraq to cease certain activities that threaten international peace and security , including the development of weapons of mass destruction and refusal or obstruction of united nations weapons inspections in violation of united nations security council resolution 687 ( 1991 ) , repression of its civilian population in violation of united nations security council resolution 688 ( 1991 ) , and threatening its neighbors or united nations operations in iraq in violation of united nations security council resolution 949 ( 1994 ) ; whereas in the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l .

102-1 ) , congress has authorized the president "to use united states armed forces pursuant to united nations security council resolution 678 ( 1990 ) in order to achieve implementation of security council resolution 660 , 661 , 662 , 664 , 665 , 666 , 667 , 669 , 670 , 674 , and 677" ; whereas in december 1991 , congress expressed its sense that it "supports the use of all necessary means to achieve the goals of united nations security council resolution 687 as being consistent with the authorization of use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l .

102-1 ) ," that iraq's repression of its civilian population violates united nations security council resolution 688 and "constitutes a continuing threat to the peace , security , and stability of the persian gulf region," and that congress , "supports the use of all necessary means to achieve the goals of united nations security council resolution 688" ; whereas the iraq liberation act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-338 ) expressed the sense of congress that it should be the policy of the united states to support efforts to remove from power the current iraqi regime and promote the emergence of a democratic government to replace that regime ; whereas on september 12 , 2002 , president bush committed the united states to "work with the united nations security council to meet our common challenge" posed by iraq and to "work for the necessary resolutions," while also making clear that "the security council resolutions will be enforced , and the just demands of peace and security will be met , or action will be unavoidable" ; whereas the united states is determined to prosecute the war on terrorism and iraq's ongoing support for international terrorist groups combined with its development of weapons of mass destruction in direct violation of its obligations under the 1991 cease - fire and other united nations security council resolutions make clear that it is in the national security interests of the united states and in furtherance of the war on terrorism that all relevant united nations security council resolutions be enforced , including through the use of force if necessary ; whereas congress has taken steps to pursue vigorously the war on terrorism through the provision of authorities and funding requested by the president to take the necessary actions against international terrorists and terrorist organizations , including those nations , organizations , or persons who planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored such persons or organizations ; whereas the president and congress are determined to continue to take all appropriate actions against international terrorists and terrorist organizations , including those nations , organizations , or persons who planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored such persons or organizations ; whereas the president has authority under the constitution to take action in order to deter and prevent acts of international terrorism against the united states , as congress recognized in the joint resolution on authorization for use of military force ( p.l .

107-40 ) ; and whereas it is in the national security interests of the united states to restore international peace and security to the persian gulf region: now , therefore , be it resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , section 1 .

short title .

this joint resolution may be cited as the "authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution of 2002. .

sec .

2 .

support for united states diplomatic efforts .

the congress of the united states supports the efforts by the president to — ( 1 ) strictly enforce through the united nations security council all relevant security council resolutions regarding iraq and encourages him in those efforts ; and ( 2 ) obtain prompt and decisive action by the security council to ensure that iraq abandons its strategy of delay , evasion and noncompliance and promptly and strictly complies with all relevant security council resolutions regarding iraq .

sec .

3 .

authorization for use of united states armed forces .

 ( a ) authorization. — the president is authorized to use the armed forces of the united states as he determines to be necessary and appropriate in order to — ( 1 ) defend the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq ; and ( 2 ) enforce all relevant united nations security council resolutions regarding iraq .

 ( b ) presidential determination. — in connection with the exercise of the authority granted in subsection ( a ) to use force the president shall , prior to such exercise or as soon thereafter as may be feasible , but no later than 48 hours after exercising such authority , make available to the speaker of the house of representatives and the president pro tempore of the senate his determination that — ( 1 ) reliance by the united states on further diplomatic or other peaceful means alone either ( a ) will not adequately protect the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq or ( b ) is not likely to lead to enforcement of all relevant united nations security council resolutions regarding iraq ; and ( 2 ) acting pursuant to this joint resolution is consistent with the united states and other countries continuing to take the necessary actions against international terrorist and terrorist organizations , including those nations , organizations , or persons who planned , authorized , committed or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 .

 ( c ) war powers resolution requirements. — ( 1 ) specific statutory authorization. — consistent with section 8 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the war powers resolution , the congress declares that this section is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of section 5 ( b ) of the war powers resolution .

 ( 2 ) applicability of other requirements. — nothing in this joint resolution supersedes any requirement of the war powers resolution .

sec .

4 .

reports to congress .

 ( a ) reports. — the president shall , at least once every 60 days , submit to the congress a report on matters relevant to this joint resolution , including actions taken pursuant to the exercise of authority granted in section 3 and the status of planning for efforts that are expected to be required after such actions are completed , including those actions described in section 7 of the iraq liberation act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-338 ) .

 ( b ) single consolidated report. — to the extent that the submission of any report described in subsection ( a ) coincides with the submission of any other report on matters relevant to this joint resolution otherwise required to be submitted to congress pursuant to the reporting requirements of the war powers resolution ( p.l .

93-148 ) , all such reports may be submitted as a single consolidated report to the congress .

 ( c ) rule of construction. — to the extent that the information required by section 3 of the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l .

102-1 ) is included in the report required by this section , such report shall be considered as meeting the requirements of section 3 of such resolution .

approved , october 16 , 2002 .

