according to the federal trade commission , identity theft is the most common complaint from consumers in all 50 states , and accounts for over 35% of the total number of complaints the identity theft data clearinghouse received for calendar years 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 .

in calendar year 2006 , of the 674,354 complaints received , 246,035 or 36% were identity theft complaints .

the identity theft victim's information was misused for credit card fraud in 25% of the identity theft complaints ; for phone or utilities fraud in 16% of the identity theft complaints ; for bank fraud in 16% of the identity theft complaints ; for employment - related fraud in 14% of the identity theft complaints ; for government documents or benefits fraud in 5% of the identity theft complaints ; for loan fraud in 5% of the identity theft complaints ; and other types of identity theft fraud made up 24% of the complaints .

as a result of identity theft , victims may incur damaged credit records , unauthorized charges on credit cards , and unauthorized withdrawals from bank accounts .

sometimes , victims must change their telephone numbers or even their social security numbers .

victims may also need to change addresses that were falsified by the impostor .

with media reports of data security breaches increasing , concerns about new cases of identity theft are widespread .

this report provides an overview of the federal laws that could assist victims of identity theft with purging inaccurate information from their credit records and removing unauthorized charges from credit accounts , as well as federal laws that impose criminal penalties on those who assume another person's identity through the use of fraudulent identification documents .

this report will be updated as warranted .

the president's identity theft task force reported its final recommendations april 2007 , and recommended a plan that is intended to harness government resources to crack down on the criminals who traffic in stolen identities , strengthen efforts to protect the personal information , help law enforcement officials investigate and prosecute identity thieves , help educate consumers and businesses about protecting themselves , and increase the safeguards on personal data entrusted to federal agencies and private entities .

the plan focuses on improvements in four key areas: keeping sensitive consumer data from identity thieves through better data security and education ; making it more difficult for identity thieves who obtain consumer data ; assisting the victims of identity theft in recovering from the crime ; and deterring identity theft by more aggressive prosecution and punishment .

several recommendations made by the task force are aimed at closing the gaps in federal criminal statutes used to prosecute identity theft - related offenses to ensure increased federal prosecution .

they are as follows: amend the identity theft and aggravated identity theft statutes to ensure that identity thieves who misappropriate information belonging to corporations and organizations can be prosecuted add new crimes to the list of predicate offenses for aggravated identity theft offenses amend the statute that criminalizes the theft of electronic data by eliminating the current requirement that the information must have been stolen through interstate communications penalize creators and distributors of malicious spyware and keyloggers amend the cyber - extortion statute to cover additional , alternate types of cyber - extortion ensure that an identity thief's sentence can be enhanced when the criminal conduct affects more than one victi .

in accordance with the real id act of 2005 , on january 11 , 2008 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) published the final rule for state - issued driver's licenses and identification cards that federal agencies would accept for official purposes on or after may 11 , 2008 , in accordance with the real id act of 2005 .

the real id rule establishes standards to meet the minimum requirements of the real id act .

these standards involve a number of aspects of the process used to issue identification documents , including information and security features that must be incorporated into each card ; proof of identity and u.s. citizenship or legal status of an applicant ; verification of the source documents provided by an applicant ; and security standards for the offices that issue licenses and identification cards .

all states submitting requests will receive extensions until december 31 , 2009 .

in addition , states that meet certain benchmarks for the security of their credentials and licensing and identification processes will be able to obtain a second extension until may 10 , 2011 .

the rule extends the enrollment time period to allow states determined by dhs to be in compliance with the act to replace all licenses intended for official purpose with real id - compliant cards by december 1 , 2014 , for people born after december 1 , 1964 , and by december 1 , 2017 , for those born on or before december 1 , 1964 .

the rule is effective march 31 , 2008 .

