u.s. policy since the mid - 1950s has been to maintain a stockpile of at least several thousandnuclear weapons ( active and inactive ) for the indefinite future .

the bush administration reaffirmedthis policy in its nuclear posture review , briefed to congress in early 2002 .

 ( 1 ) this report deals withan element the administration views as necessary for continued maintenance of the stockpile,resuming production of "pits," a key component of nuclear warheads .

 ( 2 ) u.s. nuclear warheads include a primary and a secondary stage .

the primary stage has a layer of chemical explosive surrounding a shell of fissile metal - - all warheads in the stockpile useplutonium - - and other components .

detonating the explosive compresses the fissile metal so muchthat it can sustain a fission chain reaction .

the resulting nuclear explosion triggers a secondarystage , which through fission and fusion produces most of the warhead's explosive yield .

in theprimary , the components inside the explosive make up what is called the pit .

of these components,the plutonium shell is by far the hardest to make .

when completed , the pit is sealed to protect itfrom air and moisture .

from 1952 to 1989 , rocky flats plant , under the supervision of the department of energy ( doe ) and its predecessor agencies , used industrial - scale processes to manufacture many thousandsof pits for deployed weapons .

all weapons now in the u.s. stockpile use pits made there .

 ( losalamos and lawrence livermore national laboratories fabricated hundreds of one - of - a - kind pitsfor nuclear tests. ) .

following a 1989 raid by agents of the federal bureau of investigation and othersto investigate suspected environmental , safety , and health violations , ( 3 ) doe suspended rocky flats'pit manufacturing operations in 1989 , and permanently closed these operations in 1992 .

thus , since1989 , the united states has had no capability to build pits of the quality and quantity that doedeems necessary for use in the stockpile .

doe stated in february 2004 , "today , the united statesis the only nuclear weapons power without sufficient capability to manufacture stockpile - certifiedplutonium pits required to sustain its nuclear arsenal. .

 ( 4 ) the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semiautonomous agency within doe that congress established in 1999 , manages the nuclear weapons complex - - the labs , plants , andtest site for nuclear warhead r&d , production , maintenance , etc .

it is thus responsible for restoringpit production .

nnsa holds that the inability to build pits could impair the nuclear stockpile , for reasons such as the following .

each year , nnsa monitors some warheads for defects .

most of these warheads can be put back into the stockpile , but a few undergo more extensive tests that precludetheir reuse .

these latter tests include destruction of pits .

therefore , when doe built pits forstockpile weapons , it built some spares to replace pits expected to be destroyed over a warhead'sdesign life .

now , warheads are expected to remain in the stockpile far beyond their design lives .

unless new pits are made by the time spares are used up , tests that consume pits would force theremoval of deployed warheads from the stockpile .

based on current data , nnsa anticipates that pits will last for decades , but will eventually deteriorate .

if that proves to be the case , nnsa would ultimately have to replace all pitsthat remain in the stockpile beyond that time .

without replacement pits , if a type of pit develops certain kinds of defects , nnsa might have to withdraw from service all warheads using that pit .

if nnsa designs new nuclear warheads in the future , it would probably need new pits for them .

nnsa now stores thousands of pits from retired warheads .

in theory , newwarhead designs might incorporate stored pits .

however , any aging problems would affect storedpits as well as deployed pits , so that nnsa cannot count on using existing pits in futurewarheads .

the nuclear posture review presents the administration's general policy guidance for nuclear weapons and related defense elements , including infrastructure .

while it isclassified , nnsa said that the review "stated that the ability to produce pits is important to ensurethe future viability of the nation's nuclear deterrent. .

 ( 5 ) .

the pit manufacturing and certification campaign is nnsa's effort to restore pit production .

campaigns are "focused scientific and engineering efforts" whose goal is "to develop and maintainspecial capabilities and tools needed for continued certification of the stockpile , now and into thefuture , in the absence of underground nuclear testing. .

 ( 6 ) this campaign seeks to manufacture andcertify one type of pit in the short term , restore the capability to build other pit types in theintermediate term , and build a higher - capacity manufacturing facility for the long term .

this sectiondiscusses the elements of this campaign ; "congressional actions," below , discusses congressionalhandling of this campaign .

table 1 presents estimated funding .

the fy2005 request document isthe first to include detailed out - year budget projections ( in this case through fy2009 ) generatedthrough the future - years nuclear security program , providing a window into future plans .

the basis for the pit manufacturing and certification campaign was a record of decision on stockpile stewardship , published december 26 , 1996 , in which doe "decided to ... reestablish pitfabrication capability , with a small capacity , at the los alamos national laboratory. .

 ( 7 ) doeestimated requirements at 20 pits per year to replace pits destroyed in surveillance testing , but alsoclaimed that with the capability to produce all types of pits in the stockpile , it could produce "about50 pits per year in single shift operations. .

it judged the latter rate would be sufficient for the next10 years or more , rejected larger capacity because of small current demand and the long periodbefore added capacity might be needed , and raised the prospect of greater capacity in the future .

 ( 8 ) .

congress has expressed interest in the pit program for many years .

both houses haverepeatedly raised concerns over such management issues as budgeting and planning , and over theslow pace of pit certification .

both houses have supported low - rate pit production at los alamos .

this section highlights issues connected with the pit program , raises arguments andcounterarguments for each issue , and presents under "prospects" the state of play for each issue orwhat currently appears to be the most likely outcome .

issues dealt with include pit certification ; theneed for new pits ( beyond limited quantities for w88 warheads ) ; if new pits are needed , what is therequired capacity ; how might that capacity be obtained , and how quickly could or should that bedone .

is nnsa's plan for certification reasonable ? .

yes: to certify pits without nuclear testing , nnsa believes it must use much more sophisticatedtechniques than were used to certify rocky flats pits in order to rule out each plausible source offailure .

no: in one view , only nuclear testing can assure that pits will work as intended on groundsthat pits are sensitive to minor variations in process and materials , many potential unknowns exist,and computer models may not capture what we do not know .

others see the certification plan asexcessive , claiming pits will work despite minor production variations .

for decades , los alamosand livermore technicians made many one - of - a - kind pits for testing .

these pits did not meet warreserve standards but , as evidenced by the nuclear test record , a great many of them worked .

 ( 64 ) prospects: absent nuclear testing , the united states seems sure to use nnsa's plan to certify pits .

does the united states need new pits ( beyond limited quantitiesfor w88 ) ? .

yes: in one view , greater pit manufacturing capability is needed tohedge against uncertainty in pit life in order to ensure that the u.s. nuclear deterrent remainseffective .

further , the international situation may require the united states to manufacturenew - design warheads , including pits ; pits in storage may prove unsuitable for these warheadsbecause of design or aging .

no: some believe pits will deteriorate so slowly that a decision on mpfcan be deferred for decades .

some see new types of warheads as undesirable because these warheadswould imply that the united states was preparing to test , build , deploy , and threaten the use ofnuclear weapons , so these critics reject the new - weapons argument as a rationale for new pits .

thosewho favor abolishing nuclear weapons would not produce these weapons or their components .

prospects: no one can be certain that nnsa will not need to manufacture pits at some future date,and at any rate nnsa will have a limited capacity to produce pits at pf - 4 .

accordingly , the needfor some new pits is less at issue than are capacity , schedule , and the need for mpf .

if so , what capacity is needed ? .

low: it is notclear that pits will fail for many decades , if ever , in the critics' view .

pf - 4 could replace the few pitswithout spares that are destroyed during surveillance .

if new - design warheads are needed , smallnumbers might suffice , or nnsa might use spare pits for those warheads , or it might convertexisting warheads for new missions without changing the nuclear explosive package .

multiple - shiftoperations at pf - 4 would increase output somewhat if needed .

further , critics argue , proceedingwith mpf would reduce funds for other stockpile stewardship programs .

higher: one study stated,"a paramount concern is the need to begin work now on an adequate plutonium pit productionmanufacturing capability , in order to hedge against the uncertainties in useful pit life and in the timerequired to establish a new production facility. .

 ( 65 ) mpf , in this view , would guard against the failureof one or more types of pits and would enable ongoing replacement of pits to forestall problems fromaging .

it would permit fabrication of large numbers of new - design warheads .

while a smallerstockpile might permit lower pit production capacity , there can be no assurance on future stockpilesize .

prospects: the fy2004 energy and water development appropriations conference reportrequired doe and dod to submit a report to congress with the fy2005 budget request providingdetails on a stockpile plan supporting the nuclear weapons stockpile memorandum and stated itwould be "premature" to pursue further decisions on mpf pending congressional review of thereport .

in a hearing before the house armed services committee on march 18 , 2004 , nnsaadministrator linton brooks could not provide an estimate of the delivery date of the report .

thereport should help clarify stockpile size , giving some indication of required capacity .

on the otherhand , while the report will focus on the stockpile through 2012 , the stockpile and required capacitycould change substantially by 2021 , when mpf is scheduled to begin full production operations .

thus capacity will be at issue for some time to come , and with it the fate of mpf .

can nnsa expand pf - 4 to build enough pits without mpf ? .

yes: critics of the current plan note that some areas of pf - 4 are not used forpit manufacturing .

instead , they are used for fabricating plutonium - 238 components for spaceprobes , monitoring weapons components , and storing obsolete equipment from past plutonium r&d .

floor constraints make the layout of pit production equipment less than ideal .

using all of pf - 4 forpit production , arranging equipment more efficiently , and using multiple shifts might raise pf - 4'scapacity beyond 50 pits a year .

by one estimate , if national security depended on boosting the rateand if los alamos had prepositioned the necessary production equipment , pf - 4's capacity mightreach 100 or more a year .

 ( 66 ) further , someplutonium work could be consolidated , moved out of pf - 4,or moved to livermore's superblock facility .

 ( 67 ) no: mpf's proponents note that pf - 4 is the nation'smain plutonium r&d facility .

they hold that using it for production would interfere with r&d .

nnsa holds that the maximum feasible capacity of pf - 4 is 80 pits per year , that achieving thiscapacity would require major changes to plutonium work and considerable expense , and that adding50 years to the life of pf - 4 , which would be 40 years old by the time that it could begin productionat the new rate , may not be feasible .

 ( 68 ) since mpfmust proceed now if it is to provide a hedgeagainst possible future needs , the question of expanding pf - 4 is moot .

prospects: mpf's prospectsappear unsettled .

without knowing pit life , future stockpile size , and required capacity , it cannot bedetermined conclusively if pf - 4 would suffice , and such determination might not be possible forsome years .

on the other hand , pf - 4 would not suffice if the dominant consideration is a desire tobegin to hedge against a possible future need for a larger capacity than pf - 4 could reasonably offer .

congressional approval of mpf is also uncertain .

while the fy2004 national defense authorizationact provided the funding requested for the entire pit program , including mpf , the energy and waterdevelopment appropriations act cut mpf funding from $22.8 million to $10.8 million and theconferees , as noted , stated it was premature to pursue further decisions on mpf pending a report onthe stockpile plan .

could nnsa accelerate mpf's schedule ? .

yes: the nnsa report on mpf acceleration cited above presents various steps that it states couldaccelerate mpf by 3 to 4 years .

yes , but: projects often take longer than anticipated , so netacceleration might be less than anticipated .

if mpf acceleration were to delay other nnsa projectsby drawing funds or managerial attention from them , it is not clear that the tradeoff would beworthwhile .

prospects: the nnsa report arguably moves the debate away from the feasibility ofaccelerating mpf toward the desirability of so doing .

ironically , if congressional actions delay mpf,and congress were to subsequently decide to return to the original scheduled operating date , anaccelerated schedule might be the only way to meet the original schedule .

should congress and the administration delay mpf's schedule ? .

yes: those who would delay mpf find little if any evidence that pitswill deteriorate in ways that will require rebuilding of all pits of a given type , hundreds to thousandsof units .

furthermore , international developments might lead to a smaller arsenal that pf - 4 couldsupport .

it would be unwise , in their view , to spend billions on a facility that might well proveunneeded and that would support any future decision to proceed with development of new types ofnuclear weapons .

no: mpf's supporters believe uncertainties about plutonium aging and theinternational situation mean that the united states would be taking a big risk to delay proceedingwith mpf .

if events turn out unfavorably , an inability to make pits on a large scale could provedisastrous to u.s. security .

hedge: instead of proceeding with or delaying mpf based onincomplete information , nnsa could proceed on the current track until 2012 .

by that time , thatagency expects to complete the large volume of preconstruction work - - eis , site selection,planning , permitting , design , process development , etc .

if at that time plutonium aging did notappear to be a problem , or if the stockpile were projected to shrink , or if fewer types of nuclearweapons were deployed , or the likelihood of using nuclear weapons had become more remote thanat present , then the united states would , for a fraction of the cost of mpf , have purchased a hedgein case mpf needed to be built on the current schedule .

should such events turn out unfavorably,mpf could proceed to construction and operation with little or no loss of time .

prospects: in theshort term , further delay of several months in submitting the dod - doe report on stockpile planscould lead congress to delay mpf in the fy2005 budget cycle .

in the longer term , for reasons notedearlier , prospects for acceleration or delay are both quite uncertain .

table 4 .

key dates in nnsa's proposal for the pit manufacturing and certification campaign note: many entries for fy2004 and beyond are from department of energy , fy 2005congressional budget request , vol .

1 , esp .

p. 147-154 .

some mpf entries before fy2004 are fromu.s .

department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

"modern pit facility ( mpf ) fact sheet," october 2002 , 2 p. see also "project schedule: modern pit facility project," mpf eis , p. s - 14 .

both documents are available via http: / / www.mpfeis.com .

nnsa pit project staffupdated some information , march 3 , 2004 .

