this report provides a general discussion of legislative provisions and proposals relating to the military benefits for former spouses .

it is not designed to answer detailed questions about specific issues arising in individual cases .

thus , it does not deal with case law nor does it apply legal or judicial interpretations of enacted statutes to specific situations .

questions that this report seeks to answer include the following: what benefits can former spouses of members or retirees of the uniformed services receive under law ? .

what role do the services play in facilitating delivery of those benefits ? .

what practical problems arise in the implementation of and service involvement in claims on those benefits ? .

how does the current system for a divorce - related division of military retired pay work ? .

these frequently asked questions reflect confusion and controversy over social policy and economic equity issues .

the administrative and legal implementation has proven complex , due to the large number of couples affected and the variety of circumstances surrounding their military service and divorce .

prior to 1981 , state courts disagreed as to whether they were authorized or constrained by federal legislation or federal legal precedent in dividing military retired pay in divorce - related property settlements .

inconsistencies among the states and perceptions of unfairness and arbitrariness were common grounds for criticism of the system .

the supreme court ruled ( 6-3 ) on june 26 , 1981 , in the case of mccarty v. mccarty , that the former spouse of a military member or retiree could not be awarded any share of that member's / retiree's retirement pay as a part of a divorce property settlement in a community property state , because then - current federal law did not authorize the treatment of military retired pay as divisible property in such a settlement .

in reaching this ruling , however , the court did not necessarily endorse its social impact .

justice blackmun ( writing for the majority ) , virtually invited congress to consider a change in the law to allow such a division to be made: we recognize that the plight of an ex - spouse of a retired member is often a serious one .

see hearing on h.r .

2187 , h.r .

3677 , and h.r .

6270 before the military compensation subcommittee of the house committee on armed services , 96 th cong. , 2d sess .

 ( 1980 ) .

that plight may be mitigated to some extent by the ex - spouse's right to claim social security benefits , cf .

hisquierdo , 439 u.s. at 590 , and to garnish retired pay for the purposes of support .

nonetheless , congress may well decide , as it has in the civil service and foreign service contexts , that more protection should be afforded a former spouse of a retired servicemember .

the decision , however , is for congress alone .

we very recently have reemphasized that in no area has the court accorded congress greater deference than in the conduct and control of military affairs .

congress responded by enacting the uniformed services former spouses' protection act in september 1982 .

implementation of the provisions of the usfspa has often been confusing and frustrating for those involved .

uneven implementation of the law , especially with respect to the direct pay provisions , and the changing definition of disposable pay as the basis for division of retired pay have been contributing factors .

in addition , changes to other laws affecting the treatment of military retired pay with respect to other forms of compensation have also complicated the implementation usfspa .

in 1984 , the u.s. general accounting office ( gao , now called the government accountability office ) published a report that examined the implementation of the usfspa .

the gao also noted that many of the early implementation problems were related to inconsistent language used in court - ordered settlements .

over the years , changes to the law and actions by the courts have overcome many of these problems .

since usfspa's inception , challenges to its implementation have been dealt with by the courts and through amendments to the law .

the effects of usfspa are borne by a large number of military retirees and their spouses across all congressional districts ; some continue to feel that inequities in the law remain and advocate for further review , revision , or repeal of usfspa provisions .

military retired and retainer pay is often compared to , and contrasted with , public or private civilian pension programs .

those aspects of military retired pay that are comparable to civilian pensions lead advocates of dividing retired pay in divorce cases to reason that military retired pay should be treated similarly , that is , as divisible property .

on the other hand , certain unique aspects of military retired pay and military service in general , have led opponents to argue that military retired pay is qualitatively different from pensions .

they maintain that to treat military retired pay as a pension would thwart much of the program's justification .

according to the department of defense , the purpose of providing military nondisability retired and retainer pay is as follows: to establish a nondisability retirement system and authorize the payment of retired pay for service in the armed forces of the united states in order to ensure that ( 1 ) the choice of career service in the armed forces is competitive with reasonably available alternatives , ( 2 ) promotion opportunities are kept open for young and able members , ( 3 ) some measure of economic security is made available to members after retirement from career military service , and ( 4 ) a pool of experienced personnel subject to recall to active duty during time of war or national emergency exists .

the first and third purposes are directly comparable to reasons given for providing civilian pensions .

the second purpose is different , in terms of the age at which military members retire .

most military members become eligible to retire between the ages of 39 and 45 , while civilian pensions usually require that the beneficiary be much older before benefits become available .

all of these provisions are designed to allow the military to keep the force "young and vigorous," by permitting the involuntarily retirement of its members at a relatively young age .

the fourth purpose provides the principal argument for differentiating military retirement benefits from civilian pensions .

in retirement , military retirees continue to be members of the uniformed services and , to an extent , their retired pay serves as compensation for reduced service .

military retirees are generally subject to involuntary recall to active duty as well as to employment and travel restrictions .

they also remain subject to the uniform code of military justice .

violating any of these restrictions may be sufficient cause to terminate retired pay .

under most civilian pension plans , retirement benefits are viewed as deferred compensation .

in other words , pension annuities are based on benefits earned during the period of employment , rather than during retirement .

since these pensions may also be earned during the period of marriage , pensions are viewed as property that is subject to division in divorce settlements .

currently , qualified military members receive a defined pension from the time of retirement until death .

servicemembers may also make contributions to individual retirement accounts through the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) or through other private retirement accounts .

recent changes to the military retirement system that will go into effect on january 1 , 2018 , authorize government matching contributions to the tsp up to a certain percentage of basic pay .

in addition , for those entering the service on or after january 1 , 2018 , their defined annuity will be calculated at a reduced multiplier .

the reduction in the multiplier for the defined annuity does not change the usfspa provision allowing the court to award up to 50% of retired pay to a former spouse .

servicemembers under this new blended retirement system ( brs ) will still receive a defined benefit once eligible for retired pay , and will be vested in government contributions to their tsp accounts after two complete years of service .

vesting for the defined benefit remains 20 years of eligible service for a regular retirement .

funds in a tsp retirement account may be divided in a divorce settlement and federal statute does not limit the percentage that can be awarded to a former spouse in the division of these assets .

tsp funds are typically divided based on the amount in the account at the time of separation or divorce .

the tsp will honor a court order that requires payment in the future only if the present value of the payee's entitlement can be calculated to be paid currently .

when the brs went into effect on january 1 , 2018 , active duty servicemembers with less than 12 years of service and national guardsmen and reservists with less than 4,320 points had an opportunity to opt into the new system .

this could affect servicemembers and spouses who have finalized divorce settlements prior to january 1 , 2018 .

for example , a servicemember who has 11 years of service and whose former spouse was awarded 50% of his retired pay could opt into the new system .

this would reduce the potential monetary value of his / her defined annuity and potentially reduce the amount received by a former spouse .

those servicemembers who opt into the new blended retirement system or enter service on or after january 1 , 2018 , will also be eligible to receive a minimum amount of continuation pay between 8 to 12 years of service .

this could be paid to the member in a lump sum or in four installments .

this payment could be considered to be divisible upon the dissolution of a marriage .

another consideration is a provision in the new law that would allow servicemembers to opt for a lump sum payment of retired pay at the time of retirement vice a monthly annuity .

it is yet unclear whether a court order in a divorce settlement could require the servicemember to select either the lump sum payment or the monthly annuity for the purposes of division with a former spouse .

as this new retirement system is implemented , congress might consider whether the contributory portion of military retirement ( tsp individual and matching contributions ) should be treated differently under usfspa than the noncontributory , defined annuity .

because regular military retired pay is currently not vested until 20 years of service , it is calculated based on an individual's pay grade and years of service at the time of retirement .

in some divorce cases prior to 2017 , divisible retired pay was calculated based on years of service at the servicemember's retirement , even if the divorce occurred many years prior to the retirement .

some were concerned that the division of the retired pay at the time of retirement and not at the time of divorce created an inequity for the servicemember and subsequent spouses .

this issue was raised by dod and others in the initial consideration of the usfspa .

as stated by dr. lawrence j. korb , then - assistant secretary of defense for manpower , reserve affairs , and logistics with regard to the proposed bill , i believe the provisions in the first section in this bill to divert up to 50 percent of a servicemember's disposable retired pay would be inequitable unless the 50 percent limit is computed as if the member could retire at the time of the final court order .

pay increases for promotions and longevity from the data of divorce to the date of retirement would substantially increase a serviceman's retired pay .

if subsequent raises could be included , they would constitute windfall benefit for the former spouse to which he or she had made no contribution .

the national defense authorization act for fy2017 , signed by president obama on december 23 , 2016 , included a provision ( section 641 ) that requires divisible retired pay to be calculated based on "the amount of basic pay payable to the member for the member's pay grade and years of service at the time of the court order" instead of at the time of retirement .

some have argued that this revision to usfspa will add unnecessary complexity to legal processes in many states that already have a rule or rules in place to allow for equitable discounting of a former spouse's military pension benefit .

others argue that the frozen accrued benefit method is the most equitable approach and should continue to be a federal statutory requirement .

some benefits to former spouses , such as commissary privileges and medical care , terminate after the remarriage of a former spouse .

however , pension payments to the former spouse continue after remarriage until the retired servicemember's death .

some military retiree advocacy groups argue that the absence of a remarriage clause is inconsistent with the treatment of other federal retiree and benefit programs .

in addition there is the possibility for multiple payments to a single individual .

for example , a former spouse could be awarded 50% of a servicemember's retired pay and then remarry and subsequently divorce a second military spouse with an additional award of 50% of the second servicemember's retired pay .

previous congresses have proposed changes to usfspa that would terminate payments upon remarriage of a former spouse .

these amendments have not been enacted .

in deliberations leading up to the enactment of the usfspa , the senate armed services committee stated the following: military spouses are still expected to fulfill an important role in the social life and welfare of the military community .

child care and management of the family household are many times solely the spouse's responsibility .

nevertheless , since 1982 the nature of military families and family life has changed .

female representation in the armed forces has increased from 11% to 16% , same - sex spouses are allowed to receive benefits , and the number of dual - service married couples has more than doubled since 1985 .

dual - service marriages currently account for 12.3% of all active duty marriages .

over half of married females in the marine corps ( 56.7% ) and air force ( 54.0% ) are married to other military members .

approximately 8.1% ( 50,835 ) of active duty members' spouses are male .

frequent moves , deployments , and other hardships continue to create challenges for civilian spouses of military members .

in general , female military spouses are employed at lower rates and earn less than their female counterparts married to civilians .

approximately 41% of active duty military spouses are employed outside of the home relative to approximately 48% of spouses married - couple families across all u.s. households .

nevertheless , some civilian spouses of military members may have equivalent or greater earning potential in their careers .

these civilian and dual military spouses may not be contributing to management of the family household in the same way as perceived in 1982 .

for example , consider a case of a dual military active duty couple who are married while in the service .

assume that one former spouse leaves the service at eight years and goes to school for a graduate degree while being financially supported by his or her military spouse .

after 10 years of marriage , the couple divorces .

one spouse goes on to have a civilian career while the other spouse continues a military career until 25 years of service when he or she retires and begins to receive his or her retired pay .

under current law , the spouse who left the military at eight years would not be vested in any military retired pay ; however , under usfspa , a court may award up to 50% of the former spouse's military retired pay .

the ( now - civilian ) former spouse may also keep his or her entire civilian pension , as it was not an available asset to be divided at the time of the divorce .

in such a situation , it would be hard to argue ( as it was for justification of the usfpa ) , that one or the other had the primary responsibility for child care and household management during those eight years when both were married and in the service .

the intent of the usfspa remains equitable treatment by the courts of benefits earned through military service or affiliation .

in the past , fundamental definitions and inconsistent application or interpretation of the law has mitigated against this intent .

in addition , new laws that affect military benefits but are not directly related to the usfspa may have unintended effects on equitable division of already settled or future divorce cases .

