in the 108th congress , the house and senate passed competing versions of the patient safetyand quality improvement act ( h.r .

663 , s. 720 ) .

despite broad bipartisansupport for the legislation , no further action took place before adjournment in december 2004 .

onmarch 9 , 2005 , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) unanimously approved a new patient safety bill ( s. 544 ) , which is identical to last year'ssenate - passed measure .

the patient safety legislation is intended to encourage the voluntaryreporting of information on medical errors by establishing federal evidentiary privilege andconfidentiality protections for such information .

health care providers are reluctant to reportmedical errors because they fear that the information will damage their reputations and be used inmedical malpractice lawsuits .

patient safety emerged as a major health policy issue in late 1999 with the release of theinstitute of medicine's ( iom ) report to err is human .

 ( 1 ) the iom report concluded that preventable medical errors causeas many as 98,000 deaths each year and called on all parties to make improving patient safety anational health policy priority .

it recommended establishing a national mandatory reporting systemto hold hospitals and other health care facilities accountable for errors that lead to serious injury ordeath .

emphasizing that medical errors are primarily the result of faulty systems , process , andconditions that lead people to make mistakes , the iom also recommended the development ofvoluntary , confidential systems for reporting medical errors that result in no harm ( i.e. , close calls ) or minimal harm .

analysis of such voluntarily reported information could then be used to identifysystem vulnerabilities and develop preventive strategies .

the patient safety and qualityimprovement act attempted to implement that recommendation .

the iom based its conclusions on epidemiologic studies published in the 1980s and early1990s .

while medical researchers were familiar with the published estimates of the prevalence ofmedical errors in hospitals and other inpatient settings , the information was new to the public andit caught the attention of federal and state legislators and health care policymakers .

indeed , a 1999survey showed that patient safety was the most closely followed health policy story of the year .

 ( 2 ) as a result of the iom report,numerous patient safety initiatives were initiated within the federal government and throughout theprivate sector , in health plans and health care trade organizations and accrediting andstandard - setting bodies .

states responded to the iom report by considering legislation to expand existing mandatoryreporting systems and , in some cases , enact new systems .

currently , 22 states have mandatoryreporting systems .

the goal is to hold hospitals and health care providers accountable to the publicfor the most serious mistakes in the delivery of health care .

in an effort to encourage providers toreport errors , most states have adopted measures to protect reporting system data from use bymalpractice attorneys .

policymakers have had to balance provider concerns about the legalconsequences of making information available to attorneys and patients with the desire for publicaccountability .

legislation to encourage medical errors reporting was first introduced in the 106th congress,following the release of the iom report .

 ( 3 ) much of it was reintroduced in the 107th congress and again in the108th .

patient safety lies at the heart of the current debate on medical malpractice reform .

many trialattorneys defend the current tort system , claiming that the threat of litigation makes providerspractice safer medicine .

they view tort law as an important driver of health care quality .

butexperts on health care quality reject this argument .

echoing the iom's recommendations , theycontend that the only way to realize significant improvements in patient safety is by improving healthcare systems .

and that , in turn , requires the analysis of medical errors report .

by discouragingphysicians from reporting such information , the tort system is in conflict with this approach to safetyimprovement .

this report provides an overview and some analysis of medical errors reporting and thehouse and senate patient safety bills .

it begins with background information on the nature andcauses of medical errors , followed by a brief comparison of the differences between mandatory andvoluntary reporting systems .

the report then discusses some of the legal and policy issues facingstate mandatory reporting systems and major national voluntary reporting systems , and identifiesdesign features of effective reporting programs .

it concludes with a discussion and side - by - sidecomparison of h.r .

663 and s. 544 .

the iom report defined error as the failure of a planned action to be completed as intended ( an error of execution ) or the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim ( an error of planning ) .

medicalerrors can happen at all stages of the process of care , from diagnosis , to treatment , to preventive care .

not all errors result in harm .

those that do are referred to as preventable adverse events .

an adverseevent is an injury related to a medical intervention and not due to the underlying medical conditionof the patient .

while adverse events are often attributable to error and , therefore , preventable , theyneed not always be the result of medical mismanagement ( see discussion of adverse drug reactionsbelow ) .

a limited number of published studies have examined adverse events among hospitalizedpatients .

extrapolating from the results of two large , retrospective reviews of hospital records , theiom estimated that more than 1 million medical errors occur each year in the united states , of whichbetween 44,000 and 98,000 are fatal .

 ( 4 ) it also concluded that errors may cost the nation as much as $29billion annually in direct medical costs and lost income and productivity .

some researchers havechallenged the accuracy of the iom's numbers , but there is general agreement that the problem isserious .

 ( 5 ) still others saythe iom may have underestimated the true incidence of medical errors because it only considerederrors that occur among hospital patients , which represent a small proportion of the total populationat risk .

many patients receive increasingly complex care in ambulatory settings such as outpatientsurgical centers , physicians' offices , and clinics .

echoing the views of most health care analysts , the iom emphasized that medical errors areprimarily a systemic problem and generally not attributable to individual negligence or misconduct .

errors are the result of faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead people to make mistakes .

according to the iom , health care lags behind other industries ( eg , aviation , nuclear power ) thatpay attention to factors that affect performance , such as work hours , work conditions , informationtechnology , team relationships , and the design of tasks to make errors more difficult to commit .

the iom recommended establishing a nationwide mandatory reporting system for statesto collect standardized information ( initially from hospitals , but eventually from other institutionaland ambulatory health care settings ) on adverse events that result in death or serious harm .

theprimary purpose of mandatory reporting systems is to hold providers accountable by ensuring thatserious mistakes are reported and investigated and that appropriate follow - up action is taken.organizations that continue unsafe practices risk citations , penalties , sanctions , suspension orrevocation of licenses , and possible public exposure and loss of business .

the iom proposed thatmandatory reporting system data be made available to the public once they have been validated .

to complement the mandatory reporting of serious and fatal errors , the iom alsorecommended the development of voluntary reporting systems for collecting information on errorsthat result in little or no harm .

the focus of voluntary reporting is the analysis and identification ofsystemic problems that could lead to more serious types of errors , and the development of preventionstrategies .

to encourage reporting , the iom further recommended that information collected undera voluntary reporting system be strictly confidential and protected from legal discovery .

table 1 summarizes the differences between mandatory and voluntary reporting systems .

state adverse event reporting systems date back to the 1970s .

the iom reviewed reportingsystems in 13 states to learn more about their scope and operations during the preparation of its 1999report .

since the report's release , more than half of the states have introduced legislation to addressthe problem of medical errors , and several have enacted laws to create new mandatory reportingsystems or modify existing ones .

twenty - two states now have laws or regulations that requiregeneral and acute care hospitals to report medical errors .

 ( 8 ) table 1 .

characteristics of mandatory and voluntary medicalerrors reporting systems as proposed by the iom sources : institute of medicine ; national academy for state health policy .

the reporting requirements vary widely from state to state , though all require disclosure ofevents that result in unanticipated death .

for example , washington requires the reporting ofmedication - related errors , whereas tennessee requires health care facilities to report any "unusualevents. .

in florida , hospitals are required to report errors that result in certain specified injuries ( eg , brain or spinal damage ) , whereas in pennsylvania they must report "any situation or occurrencethat could seriously compromise quality assurance or patient safety. .

arizona requires health carefacilities to review reports made by medical practitioners regarding violations of professionalstandards or the law .

in contrast , new jersey requires hospitals and other institutions to report"serious medical errors" to regulators and patients .

some states also include in their reportingmandates provisions to prevent the discovery of error information in civil or administrativeproceedings .

few states have the experts to analyze more than a fraction of the reports they receive .

most reports are not investigated and few hospitals receive any feedback .

 ( 9 ) states face a difficult challenge in designing their reporting systems as they attempt toreconcile two competing objectives .

they must motivate health care providers and facilities toreport errors promptly and accurately , while at the same time holding them accountable through asystem of public disclosure of information about errors .

the iom concluded that the public has aright to information concerning the safety of the health care system .

providers , however , arereluctant to report adverse events .

they fear that publicly released data will lead to an increase inmalpractice lawsuits .

the more comprehensive and organized the reporting system database , thegreater the legal threat it may pose to providers .

in a 2003 report on state error reporting systems , the national academy for state healthpolicy ( nashp ) concluded that the balance between protecting data from legal discovery anddisclosing information to the public appears to be tipped in favor of data protection .

 ( 10 ) .

as a complement to the mandatory reporting of serious errors , the iom recommendedestablishing voluntary reporting systems to collect information on less serious mistakes that resultin little or no harm .

information gathered by voluntary reporting systems may be used to identifyvulnerabilities and weaknesses in health care systems and to make improvements to prevent seriouserrors from occurring .

to encourage providers to report errors without fear of the data being used in a medicalmalpractice lawsuit , the iom recommended that information collected under a voluntary reportingsystem be protected from legal discovery and admission as evidence in civil cases .

the patientsafety and quality improvement act seeks to implement that recommendation by providing legalprotection for information about medical errors that is voluntarily submitted to patient safetyorganizations ( psos ) .

psos would collect and analyze the information submitted by providers anddevelop and disseminate recommendations for systems - based solutions to improve patient safety andhealth care quality .

this section of the report provides an overview of h.r .

663 , as passed by thehouse during the 108th congress .

that is followed by some analysis of key differences between h.r .

663 and the version that passed the senate during the 108th and that was recentlyreintroduced and approved by the help committee .

the house passed the patient safety and quality improvement act ( h.r .

663 , h.rept .

108-28 ) on march 12 , 2004 , by a vote of 418-6 .

h.r .

663 would have providedlegal protection to certain categories of documents and communications termed "patient safety workproduct," which are developed by health care providers for reporting to psos .

patient safety workproduct would be privileged and not subject to: a civil or administrative subpoena ; discovery inconnection with a civil or administrative proceeding ; or disclosure under the freedom of informationact .

moreover , it could not be used in any adverse employment action against an employee who ingood faith reports the information to a provider ( with the intention of having it reported to a patientsafety organization ) or reports the data directly to a patient safety organization .

patient safety workproduct would not encompass documents or communications that are part of traditional medicalrecord keeping .

such information includes patients' medical records , billing records , hospitalpolicies , and records of drug deliveries , that is , information that has been developed , maintained,or which exists separately from patient safety work product .

only information specifically createdfor psos would be protected .

under the house - passed bill , psos would be certified by ahrq to collect and analyzepatient safety work product submitted by providers , and to develop and disseminaterecommendations for systems - based solutions to improve patient safety and health care quality .

anypublic or private organization seeking pso certification would have to meet certain criteria .

forexample , they would have to contain appropriately qualified staff , including licensed or certifiedmedical professionals , and not be part of a health insurance company .

a pso would also have tobe managed and operated independently from any provider that reported to it .

the house bill didnot include any language to encourage the establishment of psos in every state or region of thecountry .

h.r .

663 would have required ahrq to establish a national database to receiveand analyze de - identified information submitted by psos .

information in the national databasewould be available to the public .

the bill also would have required ahrq to develop voluntarynational standards to promote the interoperability of health information technology systems .

 ( 34 ) in addition to the provisions aimed at supporting voluntary reporting of medical errors , h.r .

663 instructed the fda to issue standards for unique product identifiers ( eg , barcodes ) on the packaging of drugs and biological products .

it also would have authorized grantprograms for electronic prescribing and other information technology to prevent errors .

finally , h.r.663 would have created a medical information technology advisory board to makerecommendations to hhs and congress on fostering the development and use of informationtechnologies to reduce medical errors .

the senate took up h.r .

663 on july 22 , 2004 , substituted alternative language ( s. 720 , as amended ) , and passed the measure by voice vote .

while s. 720had the same basic structure as the house - passed legislation , there were several key differences .

lawmakers were unable to reconcile those differences before the 108th congress adjourned .

onmarch 8 , 2005 , senator jeffords reintroduced the patient safety and quality improvement act ( s. 544 ) .

s. 544 , which is identical to last year's senate - passed measure ( s. 720 ) , was unanimously approved by the senate help committee on march 9 , 2005 .

table 3 on page 22 compares the patient safety legislation with the iom report's recommendations .

table 4 , which begins on page 23 , provides a side - by - side comparison of h.r .

663 and s. 544 .

definition of protected information .

as passedby the house , h.r .

663 would have provided legal protection to "patient safety workproduct," which it defined as any document or communication that is: developed by a provider forthe purpose of reporting to a pso , and reported to a pso ; created by a pso ; or that would reveal theworkings of a "patient safety evaluation system. .

the bill defined a patient safety evaluation systemas a process for collecting , managing , or analyzing information submitted to or by a pso .

patientsafety work product would not include a document or communication that is developed , maintained,or exists separately from any patient safety evaluation system ( eg , a patient's medical record or anyother patient or hospital record ) .

the legal protections in s. 544 apply to all "patient safety data. .

when thesenate bill was first approved by the help committee during the 108th congress , some analystsraised concerns that the definition of patient safety data was too broad .

it included , for example,"any data ... that could result in improved patient safety or health care quality or health careoutcomes , that are ... collected from a provider ...." critics of this language argued that it wouldextend the bill's evidentiary privilege and confidentiality protections to a wide range of quality - andoutcomes - related information .

as a result , the bill would have the unintended effect of preemptingstate laws that require hospitals to report infection rates , medical outcomes , and serious adverseevents .

to address those concerns , the definition of patient safety data was modified to more closelyresemble the language in h.r .

663 , which was tied to the activities of psos .

s. 544 defines patient safety data as any data , reports , records , memoranda , analyses,or written or oral statements that are: collected or developed by a provider for reporting ( within 60days ) to a pso ; requested by a pso and reported within 60 days ; reported to a provider by a pso ; or collected by a pso from another pso , or developed by a pso .

the definition also states that"patient safety data shall not include information ( including a patient's medical record , billing anddischarge information or any other patient or provider record ) that is collected or developedseparately from and that exists separately from patient safety data. .

this separate data provision hasbeen criticized as circular , because it says in effect that information that is not patient safety data isnot patient safety data .

s. 544 also includes a provision that is intended to protect mandatory statereporting laws .

the provision states that nothing in the bill limits the reporting of information thatis not patient safety data to a "federal , state , or local governmental agency for public healthsurveillance , investigation , or other public health purposes or health oversight purposes .

h.r .

663 included comparable language .

it said that nothing in the bill preempts orotherwise affects "state law requiring a provider to report information ... that is not patient safetywork product. .

privilege .

h.r .

663 would haveprotected patient safety work product from discovery in connection with a civil and administrativeproceeding , and from admission as evidence or disclosure in any such proceeding .

patient safetywork product would not be protected from use in criminal proceedings .

by comparison , s. 544 would prohibit lawyers from obtaining or using patient safety data in civil,administrative , and criminal proceedings , unless a judge determined that the information containedevidence of "a wanton and criminal act to directly harm the patient. .

that language was includedis an effort to ensure that the legislation does not unduly compromise the rights of injured patientsto obtain compensation .

in its 1999 report , the iom focused on protecting voluntarily reported patient safetyinformation from discovery and admission as evidence in civil and administrative proceeding , notingthat "instances of criminal prosecution for medical errors are exceptionally rare. .

the intent was toencourage the voluntary reporting of information about near misses and other problems that wouldotherwise go unreported were it not for legal protection .

analysis of such information would thenbe used to identify vulnerabilities in health care systems .

voluntary reporting systems , as envisionedby the iom , would not interfere with the mandatory reporting of more serious errors , as requiredunder state law and other accountability systems .

confidentiality .

s. 544 designatespatient safety data as confidential and not subject to disclosure , except in certain specifiedcircumstances ( eg , disclosure by a provider to a pso ) .

negligent or intentional disclosure of patientsafety data in violation of the bill's confidentiality provisions is subject to civil fines of up to $10,000per violation .

h.r .

663 also specified the circumstances under which disclosure of patientsafety work product ( identifiable and nonidentifiable ) was permitted and provided for penalties ofup to $10,000 per violation for disclosures other than those permitted .

unlike s. 544 ,the house bill did not expressly state that work product is confidential , though this was implied inthe bill's language .

h.r .

663 said that disclosures in violation of the bill's provisionsare unlawful and subject to fines , provided such disclosures constitute "a negligent or knowingbreach of confidentiality. .

both h.r .

663 and s. 554 state that if the disclosure is in violationof the hipaa privacy rule , then the hipaa penalties apply instead .

for details of the civil andcriminal penalties under hipaa , see crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questionsand answers on the hipaa rule .

pso certification and listing .

under the patientsafety legislation , providers would voluntarily submit information on medical errors to public orprivate entities designated as psos .

the psos would analyze the data and develop and disseminateevidence - based information to providers to help them implement changes that would improve patientsafety .

h.r .

663 would have required ahrq to establish a process for certifying psos .

the bill listed several criteria for certification .

for example , a pso must not be "a component ofa health insurer or other entity that offers a group health plan or health insurance coverage," and mustbe "managed , controlled , and operated independently from any provider" that reports patient safetywork product to the pso .

that would appear to exclude the department of veterans affairs ( va ) ,among others , from pso certification .

as previously discussed , the va has developed an internal,confidential , non - punitive reporting and analysis system and is widely recognized as a leader inpatient safety .

h.r .

663 also would have required psos that are components of otherorganizations to protect the confidentiality of patient safety work product and ensure that theirmission did not create a conflict of interest with the rest of the organization .

by comparison , s. 544 relies on a process of pso self - certification.organizations would be required to submit a certification to ahrq that they intend to perform thevarious pso activities specified in the legislation .

the agency would review the submission and,if acceptable , place the name of the organization on a list of certified psos .

s. 544 doesnot include any criteria that place limits on the types of public or private entities that seek psocertification and listing , nor does it address the issue of conflict of interest .

civil penalties .

as noted above , both billsprovide for civil monetary penalties of up to $10,000 for each negligent or intentional disclosure ofpatient safety information in violation of the provisions in the legislation .

the bills also prohibit ahealth care provider from taking any adverse employment action against an employee who in goodfaith reports information to the provider with the intention of having it reported to a pso , or whoreports the information directly to a pso .

but whereas h.r .

663 included civil finesof up to $20,000 per violation for providers who took such action , s. 544 permits anemployee to sue their employer to enjoin a wrongful adverse employment action and to obtainequitable relief , including reinstatement , back pay , and restoration of benefits .

unlike the house bill , s. 544 specifies that providers include state - run facilities.because the federal government cannot give state employees a right to sue the state , s. 544 includes a provision requiring state hospitals to agree to be subject to such civil action in orderto assert the privileges established by the legislation .

drug and biological product identification .

h.r .

663 instructed fda to require unique product identifiers on the packaging of drugsand biological products .

that provision would appear to have been met by the agency's february26 , 2004 bar code rule .

there is no comparable provision in s. 544 .

health information technology ( it ) standards , grants andadvisory board .

both bills would require the secretary of health and humanservices to adopt voluntary , national interoperability standards for the electronic exchange of healthcare information .

h.r .

663 contained three additional health it provisions , none ofwhich are included in the senate version .

the house measure authorized grants to physicians forelectronic prescription programs , and to hospitals for purchasing health it systems .

it also wouldhave created a medical information technology advisory board ( mitab ) to makerecommendations to the secretary and congress on promoting electronic information exchange toimprove patient safety and the quality of health care .

congress and the administration have taken a number of important steps in the past twoyears to promote the adoption of it systems for the electronic collection and exchange of patientinformation in order to reduce medical errors , lower health care costs , and improve the quality ofcare .

the health it provisions in the patient safety legislation duplicate some of those actions .

forexample , the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( p.l .

108-173 ) required the secretary to adopt electronic prescribing standards and establish a commission onsystemic interoperability to develop a comprehensive strategy for the adoption and implementationof health it data standards .

p.l .

108-173 also authorized it grants for physicians and establisheddemonstration projects to determine how to improve the quality of care through the adoption of itsystems .

on july 21 , 2004 , national coordinator for health information technology david brailerreleased a 10-year framework for strategic action outlining steps to transform the delivery of healthcare by adopting electronic health records and developing a national health information infrastructure ( nhii ) to link such records nationwide .

 ( 35 ) the framework sets out a bottom - up approach in which the roleof hhs is to promote and encourage the private sector to build community - level electronic healthinformation networks .

adopting interoperability standards will over time permit these localnetworks to connect with one another to form a nhii .

table 3 .

comparison of patient safety legislation with the iomrecommendations table 4 .

side - by - side comparison of patient safety and quality improvement ac .

