climate change is viewed as a global issue , but proposed responses generally require action at the national level .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) which called on industrialized countries to take the lead in reducing greenhouse gases .

over the past 16 years , a variety of voluntary and regulatory actions have been proposed or undertaken in the united states , including monitoring of utility carbon dioxide emissions , improved appliance efficiency , and incentives for developing renewable energy sources .

in 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol to the unfccc , which called for legally binding commitments by developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .

he also rejected the concept of mandatory emissions reductions .

since then , the bush administration has focused u.s. climate change policy on voluntary initiatives to reduce the growth in greenhouse gas emissions .

this focus was particularly evident in the administration's 2006 climate action report ( car ) submitted under the provisions of the unfccc .

of the roughly 50 programs summarized in the 2006 car , only seven were described as "regulatory. .

these regulatory programs were generally implemented to achieve energy or environmental goals other than the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , but produced a concomitant emissions reduction .

in this sense , they could be considered the results of a "no regrets" policy in which climate change effects resulting from related air quality and energy policies are included in the decision - making process on new or modified rules .

however , indirect regulation and "no regrets" policies may be supplanted by direct regulation of greenhouse gas emissions .

in its 2007 decision in massachusetts v. epa , the supreme court found that the environmental protection agency has the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles under the clean air act .

further , the court directed epa to begin the process of determining whether greenhouse gases endanger public health and welfare .

if epa finds that they do , then epa would be required under the clean air act to regulate their emission .

however , it is also possible that epa would find that greenhouse gases do not endanger public health and welfare , or that there is insufficient evidence to make a finding either way .

further , in june 2008 , the senate considered legislation ( s. 3036 ) to enact an economy - wide cap - and - trade system to reduce u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

however , a cloture motion on this bill failed , and the bill was ultimately tabled .

a cap - and - trade system is the favored approach of the incoming administration , and similar legislation may have a better chance of passage in the 111 th congress .

this report provides background on the evolution of u.s. climate change policy from ratification of the unfccc to the george w. bush administration's rejection of the kyoto protocol programs , to the present .

current major regulatory programs that monitor or reduce greenhouse gas emissions are identified , along with their estimated effect on greenhouse gas emissions .

finally , energy legislation enacted in the 109 th and 110 th congresses that could directly or indirectly reduce greenhouse gases is discussed .

as described above , current federal actions that directly address greenhouse gases focus on research , information , and voluntary programs .

each of the climate action reports submitted by the united states to the unfccc has included a compilation of the several dozen programs that various administrations have felt are relevant to reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

regulatory measures that have reduced greenhouse gas emissions are a small subset of the total u.s. effort numerically , but are responsible for a proportionally larger share of greenhouse gas emission reductions .

in general , these regulatory programs were established and implemented primarily for reasons other than climate change concerns .

it should be noted that reductions from these programs combined represent about 3% of year 2000 greenhouse gas emissions , and total u.s. emissions have continued to grow: emissions increased approximately 3% between 2000 and 2005 ; emissions have grown approximately 17% since 1990 .

the list of federal regulatory programs discussed here is primarily drawn from activities listed by the george w. bush administration in its most recent ( 2006 ) submission to unfccc .

the submission to unfccc focused on mandatory programs , but numerous voluntary programs have also been implemented over the past 16 years .

this section discusses the seven regulatory programs listed in the climate action report , as well as two additional regulatory programs , carbon dioxide monitoring by electricity generators , and renewable electricity generation requirements ( eliminated by p.l .

109-58 ) not included in the list .

these programs' estimated effects on greenhouse gas emissions are summarized in table 1 .

on august 8 , 2005 , president bush signed the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) , with provisions directly and indirectly related to greenhouse gas emissions .

title xvi establishes a voluntary national program designed to encourage voluntary reductions in greenhouse gases .

the effort is led by an interagency committee , with doe playing a key supporting role .

title xvi attempts to support actions focused on reducing u.s. carbon intensity , but does not establish a requirement to reduce emissions .

the title also establishes a program to encourage exports of carbon intensity - reducing technologies to developing countries .

this program is led by the secretary of state .

in addition to title xvi , section 1253 repeals the mandatory purchase requirement under section 210 of purpa for new contracts if ferc finds that a competitive electricity market exists and if other conditions are met .

the debate over the bill included proposals to increase cafe standards and to establish a renewable portfolio standard , although these changes were not included in the final law .

also not included in p.l .

109-58 was section 1612 of the senate bill ( h.r .

6 , as amended by s.amdt .

866 ) , which expressed the sense of the senate that human activities are a substantial cause of greenhouse gas accumulation in the atmosphere , causing average temperatures to rise .

further , the resolution called for a mandatory , market - based program to limit greenhouse gas emissions .

also , a bill to establish a mandatory , market - based greenhouse gas reduction program ( s. 1151 ) was debated on the senate floor as s.amdt .

826 and defeated by a 38-60 vote .

on december 19 , 2007 , president bush signed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) .

eisa contains many energy provisions that could lead to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions .

in addition to these indirect reductions , eisa also directly addresses climate change issues in several ways .

first , eisa expands the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) established in p.l .

109-58 .

the rfs requires that a minimum amount of renewable fuels be blended into transportation fuels each year .

the eisa amendments to the rfs significantly expand the mandated level .

further , they require that an increasing share of the rfs be met with "advanced biofuels" defined as having 50% lower lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions than petroleum fuels .

this is the first time that congress has enacted national policy addressing the carbon content of motor fuels .

second , title vii of the new law focuses on research , development , and demonstration of technologies to capture and store carbon dioxide .

doe research and development is expanded and will include large - scale demonstration projects .

the department of the interior must develop a methodology to assess the national potential for geologic and ecosystem storage of carbon dioxide , and must recommended a regulatory framework for managing geologic carbon sequestration on public lands .

in addition to the above programs , eisa also requires the establishment of an office of climate change and environment in the department of transportation .

this office will plan , coordinate , and implement research at dot on reducing transportation - related energy use , mitigating the causes of climate change , and addressing the impacts of climate change on transportation .

energy provisions not directly addressing climate change , but that could lead to lower greenhouse gas emissions , include more stringent fuel economy ( cafe ) standards for passenger cars and light trucks ; higher - efficiency standards for appliances and lighting ; higher - efficiency requirements for government buildings ; and research and development on renewable energy .

energy policy was a key issue in the 110 th congress , as it was in earlier congresses .

high energy prices and international instability motivated passage of the 2005 energy policy act and the 2007 energy independence and security act .

given that energy consumption is the dominant source of carbon dioxide emissions in this country , and a substantial source of overall greenhouse gas emissions , any reduction in energy consumption will likely lead to lower emissions .

as indicated below ( table 2 ) , energy - related activities are responsible for about 86% of the country's greenhouse gas emissions , and 98% of its carbon dioxide emissions .

as noted in this report , climate change was an integral part of the debate on the 1992 energy policy act ( epact ) , occurring as it did during the signing and ratifying of the unfccc .

indeed , epact became the implementing legislation for the unfccc , and , as discussed in this report , those programs are responsible for much of the reduced growth in greenhouse gases achieved since 1992 .

most federal policies and regulations that have resulted in greenhouse gas reductions were , in fact , promulgated as energy policy initiatives .

however , these policies have not reversed growth in overall u.s. emissions .

climate change — as a specific issue needing a regulatory response — was debated during deliberations on the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ) and recognized in passage of senate amendment 866 expressing the sense of the senate that congress should enact a comprehensive and effective national program of mandatory , market - based limits and incentives on greenhouse gases that slow , stop , and reverse the growth of such emissions .

the energy independence and security act ( eisa ) of 2007 directly addresses some climate change issues , but still generally focuses on energy supply and consumption .

the overall effect of epact 2005 and eisa on future greenhouse gas emissions is unclear , and specific action on the issue will depend on efforts to enact the national program called for in senate amendment 866 .

an attempt to pass an economy - wide greenhouse gas cap - and - trade program in the senate was unsuccessful in the 110 th congress .

while some provisions in energy laws enacted over the past 16 years have led to lower greenhouse gas emissions or addressed climate change directly , other provisions in those same laws have almost certainly resulted in higher emissions .

to date , no energy law has had reducing greenhouse gas emissions as the main organizing principle .

comprehensive climate change policy directed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions should address energy supply and consumption and , thus , be integrated with energy policy .

this will be a pivotal challenge to the 111 th congress's and the incoming administration's anticipated efforts to enact legislation to limit greenhouse gas emissions .

