during the cold war , the united states maintained nuclear forces that were sized and structured to deter any attack by the soviet union and its warsaw pact allies , and if deterrence failed , to defeat the soviet union .

in the years since the 1989 collapse of the berlin wall and 1991 demise of the soviet union , officials in the u.s. government and analysts outside government have conducted numerous reviews and studies of u.s. nuclear weapons policy and force structure .

although these studies have varied in scope , intent , and outcome , most have sought to describe a new role for u.s. nuclear weapons and to identify the appropriate size and structure of the u.s. nuclear arsenal in the post - cold war era .

in offering their recommendations , these analyses addressed not only the end of the hostile u.s. - soviet global rivalry , but also the emergence of new threats and regional challenges to u.s. security .

the u.s. department of defense conducted several far - reaching reviews , including the 1993 bottom - up review , the 1994 nuclear posture review , and the 1997 quadrennial defense review , that contributed to the clinton administration's response to changes in the international security environment .

these formal reviews , when combined with less prominent internal studies , resulted in numerous changes to the structure of u.s. nuclear forces and policy guiding their potential use .

however , many critics of the clinton administration argued that , at the end of the 1990s , the u.s. nuclear posture looked much as it had at the beginning of the decade .

the number of deployed nuclear weapons had declined as the united states implemented the first strategic arms reduction treaty ( start i ) and completed the withdrawal of most of its non - strategic nuclear weapons .

but , even though the soviet union no longer existed and the threat of global nuclear war had sharply diminished , the united states continued to focus its nuclear planning and size and structure its nuclear forces to deter the potential threat of a russian attack .

in a speech at the national press club in may 2000 , then - governor george w. bush both echoed the criticism of the clinton administration's nuclear policy and outlined an alternative approach that he pledged to adopt if elected .

he stated that the "clinton - gore administration" remained "locked in a cold war mentality" and that the united states needed to "fend against the new threats of the 21 st century. .

he argued that "america should rethink the requirements for nuclear deterrence..." and stated that "the premises of cold war nuclear targeting should no longer dictate the size of our arsenal. .

he stated that , if elected , he would ask the secretary of defense "to conduct an assessment of our nuclear force posture. .

after dod completed that assessment , he would reduce u.s. nuclear forces to the "lowest possible number consistent with our national security. .

in several speeches and statements during his first year in office , president bush and his advisers stated that "russia is no longer our enemy" and they pledged to alter u.s. nuclear weapons policy to reflect this view .

in its debate over the fy2001 defense authorization bill , the senate passed a provision that called on the next president to conduct a new nuclear posture review during his first year in office .

during the last few years of the clinton administration , congress had prevented the president from reducing u.s. strategic nuclear forces below the levels specified in start i until the 1993 start ii treaty entered into force .

the clinton administration had sought relief from this language because the costs to the services of retaining weapons slated for elimination were growing .

but some members questioned whether the clinton administration might reduce u.s. forces too far if congress lifted the prohibition .

hence , the senate retained the prohibition in the fy2001 bill and stated that the next president could only reduce u.s. forces after conducting a new nuclear posture review .

although the house had not included similar language in its bill , the conference committee supported the call for a new nuclear posture review .

these two factors — the congressional mandate and the presidential commitment — established the framework for the bush administration's review of u.s. nuclear posture .

the administration completed its review and sent a classified report to congress at the end of december 2001 ; it provided the public with a summary of its results in early january 2002 .

the results of the administration's review generated a significant amount of debate in january , and then again in march , when a copy of the classified report leaked to the press .

most analysts focused on areas where the bush administration had proposed to change u.s. nuclear posture ; some focused on areas where u.s. nuclear policy would remain the same as it had been for years , or even decades .

this report provides a general overview of the past , present , and possible future of u.s. nuclear policy .

it begins with a review of the international security environment , highlighting the threats that the united states has sought to deter or respond to with its nuclear forces .

it then reviews the strategy and doctrine guiding the u.s. nuclear force posture , targeting and employment policy , the numbers and types of weapons in the nuclear force structure , and the infrastructure that has supported design , development , and testing of u.s. nuclear weapons .

in each of these areas , the report summarizes u.s. nuclear policy during the cold war , identifies changes implemented in the decade after the collapse of the soviet union , and details how the bush administration proposes to bring continuity and change to u.s. nuclear weapons , policy , and infrastructure .

the report concludes with a discussion of several issues and questions that analysts have raised after reviewing the bush administration's nuclear posture review .

these include the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security policy , how to make the u.s. nuclear deterrent "credible," the relationship between u.s. nuclear posture and the goal of discouraging nuclear proliferation , plans for strategic nuclear weapons , and the future of non - strategic nuclear weapons .

the united states has maintained its nuclear arsenal to deter attacks or threats of attack from its adversaries .

as was noted above , the soviet union and russia have been the primary , but not only , targets of this strategy .

the united states has sought to deter attack by maintaining a nuclear force structure and operational plans for those forces that would convince any attacking nation that the costs of its aggression would far outweigh the benefits .

the challenge for u.s. nuclear policy has been to make this threat credible .

many analysts have argued that the overwhelming destructive power of nuclear weapons could have undermined the threat to use them — because the soviet union and russia could have responded to a u.s. retaliatory attack with equally destructive attacks against the united states , the united states might not have launched its nuclear forces .

other nations might not be able to threaten the united states with massive destruction , but they also might not believe that the united states would cross the nuclear threshold unless its own survival were at risk .

hence , the united states has sought , on many occasions in the past 50 years , to modify and adjust its forces and targeting strategy so that potential adversaries would believe and heed the u.s. threat to retaliate with nuclear weapons , adding more limited attack options and seeking greater flexibility in the timing and size of potential nuclear attacks .

the u.s. department of energy's ( doe ) nuclear weapons complex provides warheads required by the department of defense for its strategic and non - strategic nuclear weapons .

the complex is an integrated network of facilities that conduct research and development ; produce nuclear and other materials ; produce , maintain and test nuclear weapons ; and dismantle retired warheads .

during the cold war , the facilities in the complex expanded their capacity and capability to meet the needs of a large nuclear arsenal of increasing technical sophistication .

in the last decade , as is described in more detail below , the number of facilities in the complex declined and the focus of its efforts shifted .

the bush administration plans to adjust the complex further , restoring some of the capabilities lost in the last decade and enhancing the u.s. capability to produce and maintain nuclear weapons .

as was noted above , the clinton administration retained much of the existing u.s. nuclear weapons policy and force posture in the decade after the demise of the soviet union .

nevertheless , in official documents , the administration stated that nuclear weapons were playing a smaller role in u.s. defense strategy than they had during the cold war , and it stated that these weapons existed primarily to serve as a deterrent for adversaries who were armed with their own nuclear weapons .

the clinton administration , and the bush administration before it , also eliminated many specific targets from the u.s. war plan , and began to reduce the size of the u.s. nuclear arsenal , in response to the demise of the warsaw pact and soviet union .

but the central tenets of the u.s. deterrence strategy and nuclear employment plans remained essentially unchanged .

furthermore , during the 1990s , the clinton administration began to develop targeting options for the use of nuclear weapons in response to chemical or biological attack from nations other than russia , and , in its declaratory policy , the administration would not rule out the possible first use of nuclear weapons in these circumstances .

at the same time , many participants in the public debate over nuclear weapons policy argued that the united states should alter sharply its nuclear weapons strategy and force posture .

they claimed that , in the absence of the global threat from the soviet union , the united states could maintain its deterrent posture with a far smaller number of nuclear weapons ; many proposed reductions to levels of around 1,000 warheads .

some also argued that , with its overwhelming superiority in conventional weapons , the united states could defeat almost any potential adversary without threatening to resort to nuclear weapons .

several studies concluded that a policy of "nuclear abolition" could be a practical , albeit long term , goal for the united states and other nations with nuclear weapons .

in the meantime , they argued that the united states should use its nuclear weapons only to deter the potential use of nuclear weapons by other nations .

in this framework , the united states could consider its nuclear weapons to be "weapons of last resort. .

the bush administration's description of the role of nuclear weapons differs sharply from the views advocated by many analysts over the last decade , but it is more consistent with official policies and posture adopted by the clinton administration .

the bush administration assumes that nuclear weapons will be a part of u.s. security strategy for at least the next 50 years .

given this time frame , the npr recommends that the united states begin now to develop weapons systems that will enter the force in the years between 2020 and 2040 .

therefore the administration clearly does not assume that the current systems in the u.s. nuclear arsenal will be the last .

the administration also has a role for nuclear weapons that goes well beyond a "weapon of last resort" designed to deter only nuclear attack .

the administration not only argues that nuclear weapons can deter chemical , biological , and conventional attack , it believes they can do more than just deter attack .

it has argued that they can also be used to assure allies of u.s. commitments , dissuade adversaries from acquiring weapons of mass destruction or threatening the united states , and defeat adversaries by destroying critical targets if deterrence fails .

this last objective has contributed to the administration's interest in developing new types of nuclear weapons that can threaten hardened and deeply buried targets .

the administration has argued , however , that this expanded role for nuclear weapons does not mean that the united states is increasing its reliance on nuclear weapons .

it has noted that the addition of missile defenses and precision - guided conventional weapons to u.s. deterrent forces will give the president a greater number of options in a crisis and actually reduce the likelihood of nuclear use .

critics , however , question this logic , arguing that the administration's approach will blur the distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons and increase the likelihood of nuclear use .

according to one analyst , the administration has outlined a role for nuclear weapons that emphasizes war - fighting over deterrence .

he has argued that "if military planners are now to consider the nuclear option any time they confront a surprising military development , the distinction between nuclear and nonnuclear options fades away. .

others have also concluded that the administration's plan will increase u.s. reliance on nuclear weapons .

former senator sam nunn , former secretary of defense william perry , and retired general eugene habiger wrote that the administration's policy is "expanding options for nuclear attacks , widening the number of targeted nations and developing new nuclear weapons variants. .

they note that "each of these ideas may have a plausible military rationale," but "their collective effect is to suggest that the nation with the world's most powerful conventional forces is actually increasing its reliance on nuclear forces. .

some critics of the administration's policy continue to argue for a far more limited role for nuclear weapons in u.s. defense and security policy .

they question whether threats to use nuclear weapons in response to anything other than a nuclear attack would be either necessary or credible .

therefore , according to one analyst , "the u.s. would be far better served by adopting a genuinely new nuclear posture , one that maintains nuclear weapons only to deter nuclear attack .

given the awesome power of u.s. conventional forces , we do not need nuclear weapons for any other purpose , even to deter a chemical or biological attack. .

furthermore , given the long - standing "taboo" against the use of nuclear weapons , some argue that the united states would enhance its standing in the international community if it sought to reduce , rather than expand , the role of nuclear weapons in international affairs .

in many ways , the debate over the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. defense policy follows from a more fundamental debate over how to make deterrence credible .

this debate surfaced frequently during the cold war , when the united states sought to develop a mixture of strategy , doctrine , and force posture that would deter not only a soviet nuclear attack on the united states but also a conventional attack by the soviet union or its allies against u.s. allies .

for example , some analysts questioned whether the soviet union would believe u.s. threats to launch a massive retaliatory strike in response to an attack in europe , when the soviet union could respond by devastating u.s. cities .

concerns about the credibility of the u.s. deterrent underlined many of the u.s. efforts to develop smaller , more accurate nuclear weapons and war plans that contained options allowing attacks against a range of targets .

analysts hypothesized that , if the soviet union knew that the united states could launch an attack more tailored to the provocation , and more directed against soviet nuclear forces , then u.s. threats might seem more credible to the soviet leadership .

in other words , the more prepared the united states appeared to fight and win a nuclear war , the more likely it would be for the soviet union to refrain from aggression and for deterrence to succeed .

others argued , however , that such large force structures and elaborate plans were simply overkill , that the threat of nuclear destruction with as few as 100 warheads , known as a minimum deterrent , could be enough to deter any rational leader from challenging the united states .

in the years after the end of the cold war , debates over the credibility of nuclear deterrence often focused on whether nations armed with chemical or biological weapons might believe u.s. threats to retaliate with nuclear weapons if attacked with chemicals or biological agents .

some argued that the potential loss of life from a biological attack would be so severe that nuclear deterrent threats would be both appropriate and credible .

others argued that nations simply would not believe that the united states would cross the nuclear threshold in response to anything less than a nuclear attack , so nuclear threats would not be a credible deterrent for chemical or biological weapons .

furthermore , some argued that if a nation did use chemical or biological weapons , and the united states did not retaliate with nuclear weapons , the united states would be caught in a bluff and the credibility of its nuclear deterrent would be further damaged .

these views contributed to the theory that the united states should threaten to use nuclear weapons only as a "last resort. .

the bush administration has outlined plans to develop a more focused nuclear war - fighting capability for the united states .

the emphasis on the development of penetrating nuclear weapons that can destroy hardened and deeply buried targets , along with the "capabilities" based approach that states the united states will seek the ability to destroy threatening capabilities possessed by any potential adversary , are a part of this new strategy .

as was noted above , critics have argued that these changes in the u.s. nuclear posture make it more likely that the united states will use nuclear weapons in a future crisis .

the bush administration has argued , however that u.s. plans and capabilities to use nuclear weapons against smaller countries would make nuclear use less likely because it would make the u.s. deterrent more credible and robust .

analysts who support the bush administration's approach have noted that "leaders of rogue states may not take seriously a u.s. threat to launch massive nuclear strikes on leadership and weapons sites... .

thus , having the capability to destroy such targets with smaller and less destructive weapons would strengthen , rather than erode deterrence. .

in addition to altering the u.s. force posture and war plans , the bush administration has been somewhat more explicit in threatening the use of nuclear weapons in retaliation for chemical or biological attacks .

as was noted above , u.s. policy , both during the cold war and in the decade since its end , has been one of "studied ambiguity" about the circumstances under which it would retaliate with nuclear weapons for a chemical , biological , or even conventional attack .

it never openly declared that it would use nuclear weapons ( and therefore , never would have been caught in a "bluff" if it did not retaliate with nuclear weapons ) , but it also would not foreswear the first use of nuclear weapons .

president bush has not altered this policy , but he has stated that "we want to make it very clear to nations that you will not threaten the united states or use weapons of mass destruction against us or our allies. .

he said that "i view our nuclear arsenal as a deterrent , as a way to say to people that would harm america that ... there is a consequence. .

in its report on the national security strategy of the united states , released in september 2002 , the bush administration stated that the united states would "deter and defend against the threat [of nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons] before it is unleashed. .

but the report also stated that the united states would seek to "strengthen nonproliferation efforts to prevent rogue states and terrorists from acquiring the materials , technologies , and expertise necessary for weapons of mass destruction. .

the report says that the united states will "enhance diplomacy , arms control , multilateral export controls , and threat reduction assistance that impede states and terrorists seeking wmd..." according to the administration , the development of new types of nuclear weapons that can defeat hardened and deeply buried targets , along with the potential use of nuclear weapons in retaliation for non - nuclear attacks , are a part of the u.s. effort to dissuade other nations from acquiring and threatening to use chemical , biological , or nuclear weapons .

but many critics of the administration' approach argue that this policy is likely to undermine u.s. diplomatic efforts to discourage nuclear proliferation .

according to one analyst , "by emphasizing the important role of nuclear weapons , the pentagon is encouraging other nations to think it is important to have them as well. .

senator john kerry expressed a similar view when he stated that the npr would undermine u.s. credibility when it sought to convince other nations to forego nuclear weapons , noting that "it reduces all our bona fides on the proliferation issue .

critics of the administration's policy point specifically to the implications its views on the u.s. negative security assurance might have for u.s. nonproliferation efforts .

many note that , through the negative security assurance , the united states sought to convince other nations that they would not need their own nuclear weapons to deter a nuclear threat from the united states .

but , there would be "no reason for other countries to refrain from acquiring nuclear weapons" if the united states abandoned that policy .

not only would these nations receive no security benefit from the absence of nuclear weapons in their arsenals , they might also conclude that they could only deter a u.s. attack if they were to acquire their own nuclear weapons .

others , however , have argued that the negative security assurance has done little to stem proliferation or enhance u.s. security because other nations do not consider the u.s. nuclear posture or declaratory policy when making their decisions about the acquisition of nuclear weapons .

even if the united states did not have any nuclear weapons , some nations would seek them for themselves to counter their neighbors or offset the u.s. advantage in conventional weapons .

furthermore , some analysts consider the negative security assurance , and its specific focus on nuclear weapons , as an "outdated policy that effectively gives non - nuclear countries a safe haven for developing chemical and biological weapons. .

nevertheless , many critics of the administration's policy have questioned the wisdom of an approach that might undermine u.s. nuclear nonproliferation objectives , even in the interest of providing new tools to address chemical and biological weapons .

they note that the united states currently possesses conventional forces that are far superior to those of any other country .

if , however , potential adversaries were to acquire nuclear weapons , they might present the united states with an "asymmetrical threat" that could offset u.s. conventional superiority .

therefore , these critics argue , the united states should seek to "marginalize as much as possible the role that nuclear weapons play in u.s. defense and foreign policy. .

nations can only negate the overwhelming u.s. conventional superiority with nuclear weapons , so "it is in u.s. interest to keep the firewall between nuclear and conventional high and strong. .

as was noted above , the bush administration's plans for the u.s. arsenal of strategic nuclear weapons contain a number of key components: reductions in the number of "operationally deployed" strategic nuclear warheads to between 2,200 and 1,700 warheads ; retention of most deployed delivery vehicles ( icbms , slbms , and bombers ) , with reductions in the number of warheads carried by and counted on these vehicles ; storage of many warheads removed from deployment ; the ability to restore stored warheads to deployed delivery vehicles in days , weeks , or months — a capability known as the "responsive force. .

the administration argues that this combination of features will allow the united states to reduce its deployed forces while retaining the flexibility it needs to respond to unexpected or potential contingencies that might come up in the future .

when combined with the plans to rebuild a robust infrastructure , these plans indicate that the united states will maintain the ability to enhance both the size and the capabilities of its strategic nuclear forces .

analysts have raised numerous questions about the administration's plans .

first , they question why , if russia and the united states are no longer enemies , does the united states need to maintain 2,200 warheads in its deployed forces .

they argue that russia is the only potential adversary that has enough nuclear , leadership , and military targets to justify such a large u.s. force , and , by insisting on retaining this many weapons , the united states must still be developing war plans that contemplate wide - spread attacks on russian targets .

the administration disputes this claim , noting that the united states has other potential adversaries , and , even if these nations do not possess thousands of nuclear warheads , some may expand their nuclear forces or chemical and biological capabilities in the future .

analysts have also noted that the administration's claims of deep reductions in offensive nuclear weapons are undermined by its plans to retain thousands of warheads in storage for a "responsive force. .

they note that , if these warheads were deployed on existing delivery vehicles , the united states could have a deployed force of nearly 4,000 warheads in a relatively short amount of time .

they also argue that , if russia adopts a similar posture , the threat of nuclear terrorism could increase because russia's stored warheads might be vulnerable to theft or sale to nations seeking their own nuclear weapons .

the administration has countered by noting that the united states has never destroyed warheads removed from delivery vehicles under past arms control agreements ; it has always retained an active stockpile of warheads for spares and testing purposes .

on the other hand , under arms control agreements , the united states did have to destroy delivery vehicles so that their warheads would no longer count in the total of deployed warheads .

the bush administration does not plan to destroy either the silos for the peacekeeper missiles or the trident submarines that will be removed from the strategic force .

it also plans to retain the same number of delivery vehicles that the united states would have retained , and counted as 3,500 warheads , under the start ii treaty .

hence , even if the united states deploys only 2,200 warheads on a day - to - day basis , it could expand its forces relatively rapidly .

many of the questions raised by the administration's critics reflect their views on the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security and their views on what is needed to maintain a credible deterrent .

generally , they believe that the united states should adopt a posture where nuclear weapons are weapons of "last resort," used only to deter or respond to nuclear attack on the united states .

they conclude that the united states could maintain a credible deterrent with a far smaller number of nuclear weapons , perhaps 1,000 or fewer , and without significant investments in new infrastructure or new nuclear weapons capabilities .

the administration , however , has outlined a posture that reflects the view that nuclear weapons should play a broader role in u.s. national security strategy than just the deterrence of nuclear attack , that a credible deterrent requires the capability to effectively threaten and destroy a range of critical targets , and that the united states may need different numbers of nuclear weapons and different types of nuclear weapons to address threats that emerge in the future .

under this formula , the flexibility to restore nuclear warheads quickly , expand the number of deployed warheads over time , and develop new weapons with new capabilities makes it possible for the united states to reduce its deployed weapons in the near term without creating potential risks to its security in the future .

as was noted above , the united states withdrew from deployment most its nonstrategic nuclear weapons during the early 1990s , leaving a few hundred air - delivered bombs deployed at bases in europe .

although some analysts question the need for these weapons , and their relevance to nato's strategy in the absence of the soviet union and warsaw pact , most concerns about nonstrategic nuclear weapons focus on the potential for the loss or theft of russia's weapons .

unclassified reports estimate that russia may still have up to 8,000 nonstrategic nuclear weapons at storage areas around the country , and that these storage areas might be poorly guarded and the weapons may be vulnerable to theft .

one former member of congress , curt weldon , referred to the issue of russia's tactical nuclear weapons as "severe" and "critical. .

many analysts believe that , to address concerns about russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons , the united states must propose unilateral or negotiated reductions in these forces .

others argue that negotiations are not an option because , with just a few hundred weapons deployed , the united states would have little leverage to convince russia to reduce its stocks of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

many contend that the united states should focus , instead , on measures to improve security at russia's nuclear weapons storage facilities and to enhance transparency and openness so that both sides can remain confident in the safety and security of russia's stockpile .

efforts in these areas are funded by dod's cooperative threat reduction program and doe's nonproliferation programs in russia .

the bush administration did not address questions about u.s. or russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the npr or in the testimony and briefings that accompanied its release .

however , in the months following the release of the npr , and particularly after the united states and russia signed the strategic offensive reductions treaty in may 2002 , the administration began to recognize that nonstrategic nuclear weapons should be on the agenda for discussions between the united states and russia .

press reports indicated that this issue would be on the agenda during the may summit when presidents bush and putin signed the treaty .

this did not occur , and secretary of defense rumsfeld noted , at the time , that the issue on nonstrategic nuclear weapons was one that "keeps getting set aside. .

however , during hearings on the treaty before the senate foreign relations committee in july 2002 , secretary of defense rumsfeld and secretary of state powell both acknowledged that the two sides did need to address the issue .

both indicated that nonstrategic nuclear weapons would be on the agenda for the new consultative group for strategic stability , which was announced in the joint declaration released after the may 2002 summit in moscow .

this group , which is chaired by the u.s .

secretaries of defense and state and russia's ministers of defense and foreign affairs , held its first meeting in september 2002 .

many analysts believe that this group should place its highest priority on addressing the risks posed by russia's arsenal of nonstrategic nuclear weapons , but this has not happened to date .

