on april 12 , the house and senate approved the conference version of the fy2003supplemental ( h.r .

1559 / h.rept .

108-76 ) providing $78.49 billion to cover the costsof military operations in iraq , relief and reconstruction of iraq , ongoing u.s. costs in afghanistan,additional aid to coalition partners and nations cooperating in the global war on terrorism , andhomeland security .

this total is $3.74 billion more than the request and roughly $500 million morethan the $77.93 billion passed by the house and the $77.95 billion passed by the senate .

theconference version includes a $3.1 billion airline industry relief package that was not requested bythe president .

 ( 1 ) president bush signed the legislationon april 18 ( p.l .

108-11 ) .

reflecting congressional priorities , the conference version of the bill includes additional funding for homeland security programs , such as customs and border protection and baggage andpassenger screening .

h.r .

1559 further includes $700 million for protecting high - threaturban areas , up substantially from $50 million requested by the administration .

the emergencysupplemental also provides $2.23 billion for first responders , about 10% higher than requested .

on international assistance issues , the conference version generally provides amounts proposed , but adds $369 million for food aid for iraq and elsewhere , and drops $150 million for apresidential crisis fund .

the $2.475 billion iraq relief and reconstruction fund will follow theauthorities of regular foreign aid programs that are usually managed by the department of state andthe u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

nevertheless , congress agreed to thepresident's request for broad discretion in the allocation of iraq reconstruction money that allowsdirect apportionment to several federal agencies , including dod .

for defense spending , h.r .

1559 , as enacted , funds the $62.6 billion requested by the administration but appropriates all but $15.7 billion in regular appropriations accounts ratherthan providing $59.9 billion , as requested , in the defense emergency response fund to be spent atdod's discretion .

instead , congress appropriated $15.7 billion in a new iraq freedom fund , wheredod will have spending flexibility as long as it stays within several ceilings and floors and provides5-day advance notifications of transfers .

congress also increased combat pay and separationallowances for u.s. forces , costing an estimated $650 million .

within days of the initiation of u.s. military operations in iraq , president bush sent congressa $74.75 billion supplemental package largely divided into three parts - - defense , iraqreconstruction and foreign aid , and homeland security , as shown in table 1 .

table 1 .

emergency iraq war supplemental summary ( $s billions ) sources: house and senate appropriations committees and congressional budget office .

a the aviation industry relief initiative , as structured in s. 762 , as passed the senate , provided a combination of direct appropriations for grants to the airlines and changes in feesand unemployment benefits for airline workers that do not require direct appropriations .

theenacted version of h.r .

1559 follows the senate framework of directappropriations and other items , although at different levels .

amounts shown in brackets for thesenate and enacted levels represent cbo estimates of the costs of fee changes andunemployment benefits .

b includes only direct appropriations and excludes the non - appropriated costs of the airlineindustrypackage shown in brackets .

congressional action on administration request .

as passed on april 3 in both bodies , the bills were at ( senate ) or just below ( house ) the request fordefense .

both bills increased appropriations for iraq reconstruction and other foreign aid - - thehouse slightly , to $7.98 billion , and the senate more significantly , to $8.45 billion , mainly due toa $600 million amendment for additional food aid for iraq .

for homeland security , the housemeasure was slightly below the president's request , mainly because of the denial of funding for thewhite house's proposed emergency fund , while the senate increased homeland security by about$770 million to $5.14 billion .

h.r .

1559 provided $3.2 billion for airline industry reliefwhile s. 762 included an estimated $3.5 billion .

 ( 2 ) as requested , the conference version of the bill provides $62.58 billion for defense but , as recommended by appropriators in both houses , the enacted legislation reduces the flexibility in usingthose funds that was requested by the administration .

as passed , h.r .

1559 appropriates most of the funds to regular appropriations accounts .

however , it also sets up a new$15.7 billion iraq freedom fund to give dod additional flexibility .

within the new fundestablished for iraqi relief and reconstruction , the conference bill appropriates funds to thepresident , giving him the flexibility to allocate those funds to various agencies , including thedepartment of defense .

in response to administration concerns , the conference version eliminatedrestrictions that would have prevented dod from administering any of these funds .

the enactedappropriation , however , provides that the funds are to be designated as bilateral economic assistanceand spent consistent with the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

 ( 3 ) for homeland security , the conference version provides $5.12 billion , $749 million more than requested .

for airline relief , the final bill provides for a $3.1 billion package , including directappropriations , authority to extend by 26 weeks unemployment compensation for displaced workers,and a temporary suspension of certain passenger and air carrier security fees from june 1 toseptember 30 , 2003 .

 ( 4 ) while details of each of these components are discussed below , one overriding theme that was apparent throughout the supplemental package was the president's desire for the maximum degreeof flexibility in managing and allocating these resources .

under the proposal , most of the fundswould be have been placed in emergency response funds which the president , the secretaries ofdefense , justice , and homeland security could draw upon .

purposes for which the resources wouldbe used were justified in general terms , but extensive discretion would have been allotted toexecutive officials .

among the proposed emergency funds were: defense emergency response fund - - $59.9 billion iraq relief and reconstruction fund - - $2.4 billion department of homeland security counterterrorism fund - - $1.5billion department of justice counterterrorism fund - - $500million executive office of the president emergency response fund - - $250million legislative branch emergency response fund - - $125million .

administration officials argued that such flexibility was needed due to constantly changing circumstances in and around iraq and uncertainty over the duration and magnitude of the militarycampaign , the demands posed for near - term humanitarian relief , and longer - term reconstruction ofthe country , and the ongoing "global war on terrorism. .

in the enacted legislation , reflecting both house and senate action , funds are generally directed for more specific purposes than proposed by the white house .

the iraqi relief and reconstructionfund is the exception where congress gives the president flexibility to allocate funds to five federalagencies , including the department of defense .

previous versions of the supplementalappropriation , as passed by the house and the senate , would have limited the president's ability toapportion the funds directly to dod , and required that fund be managed by the state departmentand the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

for defense , the conference version allocates much of the $59.9 billion requested by the department of defense in the defense emergency response fund to regular appropriationsaccounts , reserving $15.7 billion in a new iraq freedom response fund to be allocated by thepresident subject to various ceilings and floors set in the bill .

h.r .

1559 substitutes the president's request for two department of homeland security funds totaling $3.5 billion with specific allocations for port security , state and localgovernment law enforcement , and national guard reimbursements , checked baggage explosivedetection systems at airports , among others .

the conference report also allocates most of these fundsto specific accounts .

the enacted supplemental also distributes nearly all of the $500 million proposed justice department counterterrorism fund among several activities , allocating a portion for fema disasterrelief .

h.r .

1559 further requires advance notification of how the money will be spentand directs the administration to reimburse foreign aid accounts that have previously been drawnupon to fund pre - conflict needs in iraq .

amendments during floor debate .

during floor debate , lawmakers considered amendments affecting each of the three main areas of the president'ssupplemental request .

defense - related proposals that were adopted included: stevens amendment to increase combat pay ( $650 million estimated cost ) - - adopted by voice vote and included in the conference agreement .

allard amendment to create a panel to examine claims of sexual misconductat the air force academy - - adopted by voice vote and included , with modifications , in the enactedlegislation .

within stevens amendment ( sa 522 ) , a section that would prohibit contractsfor military airlift services to any carrier that is "not effectively controlled by citizens of the unitedstates. .

 ( 5 ) the amendment , with modifications,remained in the enactedlegislation .

the senate also rejected an amendment by senator landrieu that would have added $1.05 billion for national guard and reserves procurement ( tabled 52-47 ) .

house and senate amendments regarding iraq reconstruction and international assistance focused generally on efforts to add humanitarian resources for iraq , cut aid to turkey and colombia,and restrict eligibility of reconstruction contractors .

the senate approved an amendment by senatorkohl adding $600 million for pl480 title ii food assistance programs , including a requirement that$155 million be used to reimburse food accounts from which resources had been previously takenfor iraq .

h.r .

1559 provides $250 million for these same purposes .

the enacted billprovides $369 million for food assistance .

the house defeated three amendments cuttinginternational assistance: cunningham amendment to delete $1 billion in aid to turkey .

 ( defeated 110-315 ) .

defazio amendment to cut aid to turkey by $207 million , transferring thefunds to establish national guard weapons of mass destruction civil support teams ( defeated113-312 ) .

mcgovern amendment eliminating $61 million in counter narcotics funds forcolombia and increasing appropriations for the office of domestic preparedness ( defeated209-216 ) .

on aid contracting and related issues , the house approved ( voice vote ) a proposal by congressman kennedy ( mn ) that prohibits the use of funds for iraq reconstruction to purchase goods or servicesproduced by france , germany , russia , or syria , although u.s. subsidiaries of companies organizedin those countries would be eligible .

two senate amendments related to this issue were withdrawn: ensign amendment to prohibit reconstruction funds in a way that would benefit businesses and citizens of france and germany unless physically located in theu.s .

landrieu / mikulski amendment to require that american flag commercial shipsbe used to transport u.s. assistance .

h.r .

1559 , as enacted , however , deleted the house - passed kennedy amendment .

most amendments considered in both houses focused on increased spending for homeland security purposes .

the senate adopted a modified proposal by senator bayh adding $105 millionfor grants to states for smallpox and other bioterrorism inoculation programs .

originally , theamendment would have provided $340 million .

the conference version of h.r .

1559 includes $100 million for such inoculation programs .

the senate further agreed to an amendmentby senator specter ( 65-32 ) adding $200 million to the office for domestic preparedness ( odp ) andrearranging odp funds so that resources for high - threat urban areas would grow from $100 million,as reported in s. 762 , to $600 million .

h.r .

1559 , as approved , raises thistotal to $700 million .

the senate also adopted an omnibus amendment by senator stevens thatincluded provisions increasing homeland security by about $150 million , mainly for doe nuclearsecurity programs .

conferees generally supported these doe activities .

but the house and senaterejected several other efforts to add to the president's request for homeland security: senator hollings amendment to add about $1 billion for port security - - tabled 52-47 .

senator breaux amendment to add about $2.67 billion for various homelandsecurity programs - - tabled 52-46 .

senator schumer amendment to increase odp funding by $2.33 billion - - tabled 51-46 .

senator boxer amendment to earmark $30 million for r&d and deploymentof technology to protect commercial airliners from man - portable defense systems - - tabled50-47 .

congressman obey amendment to add $2.5 billion for homeland security - - ruled out of order .

congressman nadler amendment to increase port security funds by $15 billion - - ruled out of order .

the senate also rejected an amendment by senators byrd and hollings that would not have increased homeland security spending , but would have allocated resources to specific accounts rather thanleaving the secretary of homeland security with broad discretion .

the administration generally supported actions by the house and senate , but raised objections in a few areas , largely related to executive flexibility matters .

the white house suggested thatsenate language allocating defense funds to specific accounts might "slow timely and effectingfunding of urgent needs. .

the administration raised the same concern regarding house text thatallocated homeland security resources to specific activities rather than placing the money in a centralfund .

this , the white house claimed , would "hinder" the homeland department's secretary fromapplying the funds to the most critical threats .

the executive further expressed concerns about thehouse bill which directed that iraq relief and reconstruction fund resources be managed by thestate department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , removingpresidential flexibility over involving multiple agencies in reconstruction operations .

finally , thewhite house considered the airline industry relief packages in both bills "excessive. .

 ( 6 ) details concerning each of the supplemental's major components are discussed below .

the administration requested $62.6 billion for the department of defense ( dod ) for the costof the war in iraq , continued u.s. operations in afghanistan and the global war on terrorism , andenhanced security at military bases in the united states .

the dod fy2003 supplemental requestfunded the deployment and redeployment of u.s. forces and equipment to the persian gulf and theprosecution of a short , intense conflict .

in addition , the request included funding for an occupationforce in iraq for the remainder of fy2003 , repair and re - stocking of military equipment andmunitions , as well funds to conduct firefighting and restore and repair iraqi oil fields , and a smallamount of funding for humanitarian assistance .

 ( 7 ) although dod did not specify the amount , its request also included funds to cover the cost of u.s. forces in afghanistan ( operation enduring freedom ) as well as the cost of enhanced securityin the united states ( operation noble eagle ) for the remainder of the fiscal year .

 ( 8 ) dod received$6.1 billion to cover its expenses for these missions in the first part of the year in the fy2003consolidated appropriations resolution ( p.l .

108-7 / h.j.res .

2 ) .

 ( 9 ) dod has estimatedexpenses for the remainder of the fy2003 to be about $6 to $8 billion .

 ( 10 ) citing the "unpredictable nature of the u.s. conflict in iraq," the department of defense requested that $59.9 billion , 96% of its total , be appropriated to the defense emergency responsefund ( derf ) , a transfer account , where dod could exercise discretion in spending the money forpurposes that it considers appropriate and move funds into the relevant appropriation accounts .

 ( 11 ) although dod's proposed language required quarterly reports to congress about the allocation of actual expenditures , some members of congress expressed concerns about the extent of flexibilitythat dod would have in allocating almost $60 billion .

in response to these concerns , the enactedversion of the supplemental appropriated 75% of the funding in the supplemental to specificaccounts and added various reporting requirements .

to give dod flexibility to develop and exploit cooperative military relationships with other nations in the global war on terrorism , the defense department requested $1.4 billion for militaryand logistical support to pakistan , jordan , and other "key cooperating nations" in the war onterrorism , $150 million to support indigenous or irregular foreign military forces and $50 million tosupport the regular forces of foreign nations working with the united states in the global war onterrorism .

some of these proposals were controversial and congress rejected dod's request forindigenous forces and reduced and limited the request for regular forces but agreed to provide the$1.4 billion for military and logistical support with additional reporting requirements .

the request also proposed to raise current statutory limits on the amount of funds to be used at the discretion of the secretary of defense and combatant commanders for unanticipated militaryrequirements including support for foreign military forces .

dod again cited the war in iraq and theglobal war on terrorism as the rationale for these changes .

the request also proposed a majorincrease from $2 billion to about $9 billion in the total amount of funding that dod could transferbetween appropriations after notifying the appropriations committees .

 ( 12 ) the enacted version raisesthe statutory limits and gives dod additional transfer authority but at levels lower than requested .

in remarks at the pentagon , president bush characterized the fy2003 supplemental as urgent , and dod officials called for quick passage to ensure that dod does not face shortages in operatingexpenses .

dod characterized $30.3 billion of its $62.6 billion request as costs incurred for thebuildup phase of the iraqi war including expenses such as transportation of equipment and personnel,or as committed costs , such as those for the return of troops and equipment theater of operations .

 ( 13 ) in the enacted version of the supplemental , congress appropriated these costs in regularappropriations accounts rather than providing them in the defense emergency response fund asrequested by dod .

the president's supplemental proposal included $7.79 billion for near - term iraq reconstructionand relief , additional aid to coalition partners and other states cooperating in the global war onterrorism , and related state department and usaid administrative expenses .

most of the funds - - $7.6 billion - - fell under the jurisdiction of foreign operations appropriations programs .

bycomparison , the supplemental request totaled a little less than half of the $16.2 billion appropriatedpreviously by congress for fy2003 foreign operations activities .

the proposal , as detailed below in table 5 , was roughly divided into two components: iraq relief and reconstruction ( about $2.85 billion ) ( 56 ) and aid to coalition partners and other nationsengaged in the war on terrorism ( about $4.7 billion ) .

the smallest component of the supplemental proposal covered additionalresources for homeland security .

some critics of administration homeland securitypolicy , including some members of congress , believe that key domestic preparednessmeasures have been under - funded and argue for additional resources .

in some cases,as discussed elsewhere in this report , members offered amendments increasingamounts for homeland security .

details of congressional action on homeland securityfunding matters are included in table 8 .

table 8 .

homelandsecurity ( $s millions ) a included under dept .

of homeland security items below .

the bush administration's request for fy2003 supplemental appropriations included $2 billion for the odp .

these funds would be distributed to state and localgovernments "... to support federally - coordinated terrorism prevention and securityenhancements at this time of heightened threat , and terrorism preparedness for firstresponders. .

 ( 64 ) the department of homelandsecurity projected that $1.5 billionwould go to the odp formula grant program , $450 million to critical infrastructuresecurity grants , and $50 million to high threat urban areas .

 ( 65 ) the administration'srequest for $450 million for critical infrastructure security grants contained at leastone significant change to the current structure of federal first responder programs .

the request proposed allowing recipients to use these funds for personnel overtimeexpenses , an activity not currently authorized in existing terrorism preparednessprograms .

congressional action .

the house , in h.r .

1559 , provided a total of $2.2 billion to odp , $200million above the administration request , specifically providing the followingamounts .

 ( 66 ) $1.5 billion to odp's formula grant program , and $700 million "... to address security requirements in high threat,high density urban areas with critical infrastructure. .

 ( 67 ) in s. 762 , the senate appropriations committee recommended $2 billion for odp of which $1.42 billion would have gone to the formula grantprogram , $450 million to critical infrastructure security , $100 million to high threaturban areas , and $30 million to technical assistance .

 ( 68 ) the full senate passed anamendment , however , that added an additional $200 million and allocated morefunding to high threat urban areas .

 ( 69 ) the senatealso added additional funding tofema and the community - oriented policing services program ( justice department ) for interoperable communications .

s. 762 , as passed by the senate,provided a total of $2.2 billion for odp programs , matching the house amount .

thesenate - passed bill provided: $1.27 billion for the formula grant program , $300 million to critical infrastructure protection , $600 million to high threat urban areas , $30 million for technical assistance and other activities,and , $219 million for interoperable communications ( to fema andcops ) .

the enacted supplemental ( p.l .

108-11 ) provides $2.23 billion for odp , which is $230 more than the administration request .

in addition , the conference providedroughly $109.5 million for interoperable communications programs .

totalsupplemental funding for first responder preparedness comes to roughly $2.34billion , which , when added to the fy2003 regular appropriation of $2.045 billion,comes to a fy2003 grant total of $4.385 billion .

specifically , the conferenceagreement provides the following amounts: $1.3 billion for odp's formula grant programs ( 80% must go to localities ) , $200 million for critical infrastructure protection ( no less than50% going to localities ) , $700 million to high threat urban areas , $30 million for technical assistance , and , $109.5 million interoperable communications ( fema andcops ) ( 70 ) a number of observers have argued that the current level of federal assistance for first responders is insufficient and should be increased above current fundinglevels .

other observers , however , point to evidence of slow state and local utilizationof federal grants as an indication that additional funding at this time is notnecessary .

 ( 71 ) still others have suggested thatodp's distribution formula should beadjusted to increase assistance to areas perceived to be high - risk .

 ( 72 ) the conferenceagreement addressed a number of these concerns .

it instructed odp to distributeformula grant funds to states within 60 days of enactment , and further instructedstates to distribute 80% of funds to localities within 45 days of receipt .

similarrequirements for distribution were applied to the other odp assistance programs .

conferees also adopted several reporting requirements in the senate bill ( s. 762 ) .

these include reports on risk assessments of high - threat urbanareas , cost of securing such areas , appropriation federal share of security costs , andproposals for new distribution formulas .

 ( 73 ) conferees also required reports onovertime accountability and a listing of all federal terrorism preparedness grantprograms administered by dhs .

 ( 74 ) .

the administration's fy2003 supplemental request included $500 million to reimburse department of justice organizations for the following purposes: ( 1 ) toreestablish operational capabilities that were lost or weakened as a result of a terroristattack ; and ( 2 ) to pursue counterterrorism investigations , including the payment ofrewards .

the request for this account includes language that would authorize the useof such funding to reimburse any federal agency for costs related to detaining aterrorist suspect as well .

for the department of homeland security's counterterrorism fund , the administration's fy2003 supplemental request included $1.5 billion to reimburseany homeland security organization for counterterrorism investigations andoperations , including operations in support of the department of defense .

amongother things , such operations could include ( 1 ) increasing border and maritimesecurity ; ( 2 ) enhancing elements of the strategic national stockpile ; ( 3 ) providingincreased port security for military outloads ; and ( 4 ) deploying various biologicalattack detection technologies , related countermeasures , and response assets .

congressional action .

as reported by the senate appropriations committee , s. 762 provided $500million , as requested , for the department of justice's counterterrorism fund .

however , as part of an omnibus amendment proposed by senator stevens , the senatevoted to re - allocate these funds among several department of justice programs,including fbi salaries and construction , state and local law enforcement assistance,community oriented policing services , and interagency law enforcement support .

the stevens amendment also took $109.5 million of the president's request for thecounterterrorism fund and made it available for additional fema disaster reliefoperations .

the house measure appropriated $50 million for the fund , and anadditional $450 million for several other justice department programs , including$399 million for the fbi .

for homeland security counterterrorism fund , the senaterecommended $1.135 billion after shifting $580 million for the coast guard to aseparate account , but including $215 million for the president's emergency responsefund .

the president had proposed resources for the emergency fund under a separateline - item .

as enacted , h.r .

1559 combines approaches taken in the house and senate bills of allocating most of the proposed $500 million dojcounterterrorism fund to specific accounts .

the fbi receives $367 million , closeto the house recommendation , but senate proposals for over $160 million for stateand local law enforcement and interagency law enforcement support were deleted .

similar to the senate bill , the conference agreement provides additional funds forfema , although the $55 million appropriation is less than half the amountrecommended in s. 762 .

beyond the additional resources for the departments of justice and homeland security to bolster their counterterrorism capabilities , the white house asked for a$250 million fund that could be drawn upon to meet any emerging terrorist relatedthreat across the entire federal government .

among any authorized activity , thishighly flexible fund could be used to assist first responders and health care workerswho have suffered adverse reactions from voluntary smallpox vaccinations .

the administration also proposed a $125 million emergency fund for the legislative branch to meet emerging terrorist - prevention needs .

congressional action .

house and senate bills split on the issue of a white house emergency response fund .

s. 762 provided $215 million within department of homeland securityfunds , while the house did not include any resources for this purpose .

as enacted , h.r .

1559 does not provide funding for a white house emergencyresponse fund but includes $150 million for the department of homeland security'scounterterrorism fund .

these resources can be used to reimburse any homelandsecurity organization for terrorism - related expenses .

the conference appropriationfurther includes $125 million for additional legislative branch security requirements,with specific allocations spread over a number of accounts , as illustrated in table 8 .

the onset of the war in iraq has dramatically effected the airline industry .

air travel in the short term has dropped approximately 10% according to the airtransport association ( ata ) .

more worrisome for the airlines , advance bookingsfor the months ahead appear to be dropping approximately 30% .

all of this ishappening against the backdrop of the events of september 11th , which also had ahuge negative impact on the industry .

the airlines lost record amounts of money in2002 , following what had been the previous record loss in 2001 .

among major airlines , only southwest was profitable in 2002 , and southwest is the only major carrier believed to have a chance at profitability in 2003 .

theindustry's second largest airline , united , is operating in receivership and thepossibility exists that other carriers could find themselves in this position in the nearfuture .

there is , therefore , considerable concern that the airline industry is likely togo through a period of major structural change .

after september 11 , congress and the bush administration moved swiftly to provide the airline industry with $15 billion in federal financial support ( airtransportation safety and system stabilization act ( stabilization act ) , p.l .

107-42 ) .

the first $5 billion provided direct aid to pay for industry losses associated with theresults of the september 11th attacks .

the vast majority of these funds have alreadybeen distributed to the airlines ( a listing of airlines receiving funds is available fromthe department of transportation ( dot ) , http: / / ostpxweb.dot.gov / aviation / ) .

asecond source of funding , access to $10 billion in government backed loans , requiredapproval by the newly created air transportation stabilization board ( atsb ) .

thirteen airlines applied for the loan program .

the majority received some form ofassistance , but the largest single applicant , united , was denied a loan .

of the $10billion authorized by this program only about $1.5 billion has been committed .

in the fy2003 emergency supplemental , congress again proposed providing some short term relief to the airline industry .

the house - approved package totaled$3.2 billion in direct assistance while the senate proposed $3.5 billion , as estimatedby cbo .

both bills had the same intent , but there were significant differences in howaid would be provided .

both the house and the senate measures included significant funding for security costs .

in addition , s. 762 would providea tax holiday for collections of the existing $2.50 per flight segment security feecharged to airline passengers .

the senate measure would also extend to the end of2004 war risk insurance provisions in existing legislation that expire at the end of thisyear .

in addition , the senate bill provided additional unemployment insurance todisplaced airline industry employees .

both bills had provisions that would limitairline industry executive compensation .

the enacted emergency supplemental includes a relief package estimated by cbo as totaling $3.1 billion for fy2003 .

conferees adopted the senate approach ofdirect appropriations plus authority to temporarily suspend fees , and extendunemployment and war risk insurance .

as calculated by cbo , the airline industryrelief package breaks out as follows for fy2003: grants to u.s. flag carriers for aviation security costs: $2.296 billion compensation to air carriers for secure cockpit doors: $100million suspension of fees , june 1 to september 30 , 2003: $570million ( 77 ) extension of unemployment benefits: $125million 7 .

