federal interagency coordinative mechanisms are executive entities , possessing their own statutory or other establishing authority , that provide coordination in policy areas involving a number of separate , independent agencies .

the devices and arrangements , which have proliferated and gained prominence recently , range from the office of homeland security ( ohs ) to the national security council ( nsc ) , the "drug czar," and a multiplicity of joint operational task forces .

these entities , numbering in the hundreds , can be categorized among seven different types , which vary in significant ways .

they raise competing rationales and objections ; have been established and have evolved for different reasons and in different time periods ; and differ in terms of their jurisdiction , authority , responsibilities , membership , leadership , and governmental location .

this report and other related crs and congressional documents provide information on , examinations of , and preliminary comparisons among federal interagency coordinative devices .

a number of rationales for and objections to interagency coordinative mechanisms might be offered .

interagency coordinative entities lack standardization and uniformity ; consequently , no particular device is an identical match for another .

they differ from each other in a number of ways: location , leadership , and membership characteristics ; enabling authority and permanency ; and powers , responsibilities , and jurisdictions .

the combination of these characteristics — different attributes , establishments and evolution , and rationales , along with compromises to meet certain objections — has produced a variety of coordinative mechanisms and arrangements .

 ( specific examples are described in the next section ) .

seven broad types are distinguished here: 1 .

councils consisting of the president , who is the chairman , the vice president , and specified department and / or agency heads , with only three in existence: the national security council , created by public law in 1947 , and the homeland security council and the usa freedom corps council , each created by executive order , in 2001 and 2002 , respectively .

2 .

committees made up of department and agency heads , along with , in some cases , officials from the executive office of the president ( eop ) , including the interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking [in people] , the principals committees of the nsc and hsc , the president's critical infrastructure protection board , and its predecessor , the critical infrastructure protection group .

3 .

specially created positions or offices , with their own authority and resources , to cover a policy area that crosses a number of separate and independent agencies ( eg , council on environmental quality and the directors of the offices of national drug control policy , of homeland security , and of usa freedom corps ) .

4 .

agency heads or other officers with qualified authority over other entities , particularly the director of central intelligence , the director of the secret service , and inspectors general , who can enlist the assistance of or task other organizations in carrying out specific duties and assignments .

5 .

sub - cabinet boards , committees , and councils , such as the nsc and hsc deputies committees , two inspector general coordinating councils , and the chief financial officers coordinating council .

6 .

transfers of personnel , resources , or units among new or existing entities , by setting up interagency partnerships , joint operational task forces , and field working groups ; by transferring specific units for temporary duty ; and by detailing and redeploying staff .

these are illustrated by a host of arrangements and mechanisms: u.s. coast guard transfer to the navy in times of war or other emergencies , use of military personnel and resources in law enforcement efforts , fema's multiplicity of partnerships , the secret service's membership in nearly 50 working groups , nsc's ad hoc working groups , hsc's policy coordination committees , various anti - terrorism support teams and cybersecurity operational centers , and inspector general council committees , as well as numerous staff details for particular operations and redeployments to meet crisis situations .

7 .

transfers of authority between and among agencies , principally through the cross - designation of agents from one agency to another with shared jurisdiction and related responsibilities ( such as the customs service and immigration and naturalization service for border control ) and through special deputation by the u.s .

marshals service for personnel without their own law enforcement authority ( such as criminal investigators in some offices of inspector general ) .

examples of federal interagency coordinative mechanisms , interspersed among the seven categories , are manifold .

the following illustrate their number , range , and diversity .

federal interagency coordinative mechanisms have become prevalent and prominent recently , as means of fostering cooperation and support among government agencies .

they range from such well - established entities as the national security council to the office of homeland security , and from such highly visible devices as the "drug czar" to nearly anonymous joint task forces and field working groups .

now numbering in the hundreds , the devices can be categorized among seven distinct types .

these differ in terms of their location and membership , powers and responsibilities , enabling authority and permanency , and establishment and evolution .

their contemporary growth in quantity and importance has occurred for a variety of reasons .

among these are: the expansion of federal responsibilities , both foreign and domestic ; additions in the number and types of government organizations implementing policy ; increases in the complexity and interrelated nature of public policies ; and changes in policy priorities .

these developments have resulted in a higher incidence of shared responsibilities , overlapping jurisdictions , cross - cutting programs , and fragmentation of policy implementation among agencies .

interagency devices are viewed as a way of overcoming these obstacles to cooperation and coordination among entities and , thereby , improving the effectiveness and efficiency of policy implementation .

this can be accomplished , moreover , in a relatively quick and straightforward fashion , by comparison to broad - scale reorganizations , such as mergers and transfers of separate agencies .

different coordinative "models," moreover , can be adopted or adapted for different purposes and under different circumstances .

nonetheless , some coordinative devices have aroused concerns about their impact and implications .

certain devices have been viewed as setting up another bureaucratic layer and a potentially rival organization ; as being too weak to meet their mandates ; or , alternately , as being too strong , thus interfering with other responsibilities of agencies under the coordinator's jurisdiction .

finally , in cases where executive orders and presidential directives govern the devices , their creation and control can circumvent the legislative process and present problems for congressional oversight .

