digital television ( dtv ) is a new television service representing the most significant development in television technology since the advent of color television .

dtv can provide movie theater quality pictures and sound , a wider screen , better color rendition , multiple video programming or a single program of high definition television ( hdtv ) , and other new services currently being developed .

dtv can be hdtv , or the simultaneous transmission of multiple programs of standard definition television ( sdtv ) , which is a lesser quality picture than hdtv but significantly better than today's television .

the rationale often cited for the digital transition is that aside from offering superior broadcast quality to consumers , dtv will allow over - the - air broadcasters to offer the same kinds of digitally - based services ( such as pay - per - view ) currently offered by cable and satellite television providers .

additionally , it is argued that digital television uses the radiofrequency spectrum more efficiently than traditional analog television , thereby conserving a scarce resource ( bandwidth ) that can be used for other wireless applications .

there are three major components of dtv service that must be present in order for consumers to enjoy a fully realized "high definition" television viewing experience .

first , digital programming must be available .

digital programming is content produced with digital cameras and other digital production equipment .

such equipment is distinct from what is currently used to produce conventional analog programming .

second , digital programming must be delivered to the consumer via a digital signal .

digital signals can be broadcast over the airwaves ( requiring new transmission towers or dtv antennas on existing towers ) , transmitted by cable or satellite television technology , or delivered by a prerecorded source such as a digital video disc ( dvd ) .

and third , consumers must have a digital television product capable of receiving the digital signal and displaying digital programming on their television screens .

congress and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) have played major roles in the development of dtv .

starting in 1987 , the fcc launched a decade - long series of proceedings exploring the potential and feasibility of a transition from conventional analog televisions to advanced television systems .

while the original term used to describe the new television system was high definition television ( hdtv ) , the fcc used a broader term — advanced television ( atv ) — referring to any television technology that provides improved audio and video quality .

after it became clear that atv would be using digital signal transmission , the fcc began ( in 1995 ) to use the term dtv ( synonymous with atv ) to describe the new service more accurately .

in december 1996 , after lengthy debate between television manufacturers , broadcasters , and computer firms , the fcc adopted a standard for dtv signal transmission based on recommendations of the advanced television system committee ( atsc ) .

the atsc standard allows for 18 different video formats , of which four have subsequently been adopted for commercial use .

meanwhile , the telecommunications act of 1996 ( p.l .

104 - 104 ) provided that initial eligibility for any dtv licenses issued by the fcc should be limited to existing broadcasters .

broadcasters would be issued dtv licenses while at the same time retaining their existing analog licenses during the transition from analog to digital television .

the act provided that broadcasters must eventually return either their existing analog channel or the new digital channel .

also in the 104 th congress , a major debate took place over whether to direct the fcc to conduct auctions for the spectrum allocated for dtv .

the fcc estimated the commercial value of the dtv spectrum to be between $11 billion to $70 billion .

no legislation was enacted , however , and the fcc did not obtain the authority to auction the dtv licenses .

in 1997 , the fcc adopted rules to implement the telecommunications act , and granted dtv licenses to some 1600 full power incumbent television broadcasters .

the dtv licenses consist of 6 megahertz ( mhz ) of unused spectrum within the vhf and uhf frequency bands .

because dtv signals cannot be received through the existing analog television broadcasting system ( known as ntsc ) the fcc decided to phase in dtv over a period of years , so that consumers would not have to immediately purchase new digital television sets or converters .

thus , broadcasters were given 6 mhz of new spectrum for digital signals , while retaining their existing 6 mhz for analog transmission so that they can simultaneously transmit ntsc and dtv signals to their broadcasting market areas .

the simultaneous broadcasting ( "simulcasting" ) of the same programs in both digital and analog modes was intended to allow viewers who have not yet purchased dtv sets or converters to continue to receive television programming during the transition to dtv .

the ruling required television stations receiving the dtv licenses to build their dtv facilities according to a schedule determined by the size of their markets .

the fcc has granted extensions to licensees unable to meet the schedule due to unforeseeable or uncontrollable circumstances , such as an inability to secure tower locations for new antennas .

the fcc set a target date of 2006 for broadcasters to cease broadcasting the analog signal and return their existing analog television spectrum licenses to be auctioned for other commercial purposes .

during the 105 th congress , the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105 - 33 ) made the 2006 reversion date statutory , providing that a "broadcast license that authorizes analog television service may not be renewed to authorize such service for a period that extends beyond december 31 , 2006. .

however , the act required the fcc to grant extensions for reclaiming the analog television licenses in the year 2006 from stations in television markets where any one of the following three conditions exist: if one or more of the television stations affiliated with the four national networks are not broadcasting a digital television signal ; if digital - to - analog converter technology is not generally available in the market of the licensee ; or if at least 15% of the television households in the market served by the station do not subscribe to a digital "multi - channel video programming distributor" ( including cable or satellite services ) and do not have digital tv sets or converters .

in the 109 th congress , the 2006 deadline for the digital transition was extended .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109 - 171 ) , signed by the president on february 8 , 2006 , sets a "hard" digital transition deadline of february 17 , 2009 .

meanwhile , since the beginning of the digital transition , the fcc has continued to monitor the status of the dtv conversion of both commercial and noncommercial broadcast stations .

on august 6 , 2007 , the fcc released the final assignment of digital television channels — to be used post dtv transition — for over 1,800 stations .

on december 31 , 2007 , the fcc released the third periodic review of the commission's rules and policies affecting the conversion to digital television .

in this report and order , the fcc adopted procedures and rule changes necessary to ensure that broadcasters meet the statutory transition deadline and complete construction of their final , post - transition facilities while maintaining the best possible television service to their viewers. .

full - power television stations are required to file status reports with the fcc detailing their transition status , additional steps necessary , and a time line for making those steps in order to meet the february 17 , 2009 deadline .

the nationwide buildout of digital television is a complex and multifaceted enterprise .

a successful buildout requires: the development by content providers of compelling digital programming ; the delivery of digital signals to consumers by broadcast television stations , as well as cable and satellite television systems ; and the widespread purchase and adoption by consumers of digital television equipment .

the goal of the fcc and congress is to complete the transition to dtv as quickly as possible , so that ntsc ( analog ) spectrum can be reclaimed and reallocated for other purposes .

some of the ntsc spectrum will be auctioned for commercial wireless services , and some of it will be used for new public safety services ( the fcc has already designated some of the analog tv spectrum for public safety use ) .

the key issue for congress and the fcc has been: what steps , if any , should be taken by government to further facilitate a timely , efficient , and equitable transition to digital television ? .

to address this question , congress and the fcc have confronted a highly complex policy landscape , involving different industries , technologies , and interests , including content providers , commercial and noncommercial television broadcasters , cable and satellite television providers , consumer electronics manufacturers and retailers , and consumers .

the following sections in this report — on activities and issues in the 108 th , 109 th , and 110 th congresses — discuss issues that have been primary considerations in the congressional debate on the digital television transition .

additionally , appendix a provides background information on a complex array of policy issues related to the digital television transition .

these include digital "must carry," mandating digital tuners , copyright protection technology , cable / dtv interoperability , digital conversion of public broadcasting stations , digital conversion of low power television stations , public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters , and others .

a number of bills were introduced into the 108 th congress , relating in some way to digital television .

some urged congress to require broadcasters to return the analog spectrum on "a date certain. .

under this approach , spectrum would be freed up for other uses .

among legislation in the 108 th congress , the hero act ( h.r .

1425 and within 9 / 11 commission omnibus bills h.r .

5024 , h.r .

5040 , and s. 2774 ) would have prohibited any delay in reassigning the 24 mhz for public safety purposes , and required those frequencies to be operational by january 1 , 2007 .

during march and april 2004 , another digital transition proposal was informally circulated by the media bureau of the fcc .

under this proposal , the transition deadline would be moved from 2006 to 2009 .

cable and satellite providers would be required to carry a broadcaster's digital signal only , but could — if the broadcaster so chooses — down - convert the digital signal to an analog signal that cable or satellite customers could watch on their analog televisions .

under this scenario , according to the media bureau proposal , cable and satellite tv households watching down - converted digital signals on their analog sets would be counted toward the 85% statutory threshold required in order for broadcasters to return to the government their valuable analog spectrum , which can then be auctioned and / or assigned for other purposes .

the commercial broadcasting industry expressed strong opposition to the media bureau's proposal .

according to the commercial broadcasters , the proposal would discourage the development of digital television services ( such as hdtv and multicasting ) and remove the incentive for consumers to purchase dtvs .

additionally , they argue , if analog spectrum is reclaimed under the media bureau proposal , tv households that are exclusively "over - the - air" — many of whom are economically disadvantaged — would lose their television service altogether unless they purchased dtvs , converter boxes , or cable or satellite television subscriptions .

in response to these criticisms , kenneth ferree , former head of the media bureau , argues that the development of digital services will not be adversely impacted because market forces will ensure that popular stations will likely be carried by cable and satellite tv providers in both digital and analog form by 2009 .

additionally , suggests ferree , economically disadvantaged over - the - air households could receive federal subsidies ( derived from reclaimed spectrum auction proceeds , for example ) for purchasing converter boxes , thereby ensuring that these households will continue to receive television service .

during the summer of 2004 , congress held three hearings on the digital television transition .

on june 2 , 2004 , the house energy and commerce committee , subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet , held a hearing on the ferree proposal — "advancing the dtv transition: an examination of the fcc media bureau proposal. .

a june 9 , 2004 hearing held by the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation — entitled , "completing the digital television transition," — also examined the ferree proposal and other digital transition issues including the possibility of consumer subsidies for converter boxes .

finally , the house subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet held another hearing on july 21 , 2004 , looking specifically at lessons learned from berlin , germany , which successfully underwent a transition to digital television in 2003 .

the hearing , entitled , "the digital television transition: what we can learn from berlin," featured the release of a general accountability office ( gao ) report entitled , german dtv transition differs from u.s .

transition in many respects , but certain key challenges are similar .

the gao identified three elements responsible for berlin's successful digital transition: implementing extensive consumer education , providing subsidies to low - income households for converter boxes , and setting a near - term , widely recognized shut - off date for analog tv service .

on july 22 , 2004 , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) released its final report .

the commission recommended that congress support legislation "which provides for the expedited and increased assignment of radio spectrum for public safety purposes. .

in response to this recommendation , on september 21 , 2004 , senator john mccain introduced s. 2820 , the save lives act .

s. 2820 would change the digital transition deadline from december 31 , 2006 to december 31 , 2008 .

spectrum for public safety would be freed for use by first responders , and other spectrum would be available for commercial uses .

proceeds from the auctioning of commercial spectrum would be credited to a digital transition consumer assistance fund .

the fund would be used to establish a $1 billion digital transition program , administered by the secretary of commerce , which would subsidize consumers who continue to rely exclusively on over - the - air broadcasts with analog televisions .

the program would give priority to low - income households , and would provide assistance for purchasing digital - to - analog converter boxes or other technologies which would allow consumers to continue receiving television signals .

s. 2820 also required labeling of analog televisions ( with the label stating it is unable to receive digital signals without a converter box ) , directs the department of commerce ( in consultation with the fcc ) to submit a report to congress recommending a consumer education program on the digital transition , and requires the fcc to issue final decisions on its proceedings regarding dtv must - carry and public interest obligations .

during the september 22 , 2004 markup of s. 2820 in the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation , an amendment was offered by senator conrad burns which sets a digital transition deadline ( december 31 , 2007 ) only for spectrum that has been designated for public safety , and provides that the fcc may waive the deadline in a given market "to the extent necessary to avoid consumer disruption while ensuring the ability of relevant public safety entities to use such frequencies. .

the burns amendment was subsequently adopted by the committee .

on september 29 , 2004 , senator mccain offered a modified version of s. 2820 as an amendment to the national intelligence reform act of 2004 ( s. 2845 ) .

as in committee , senator burns offered a modifying amendment to the mccain amendment .

at the request of senator mccain , the senate approved by unanimous consent the mccain amendment as modified by the burns amendment .

the final version adopted into s. 2845 sets the digital transition deadline of december 31 , 2007 only for spectrum that has been designated for public safety .

language regarding the fcc's authority to waive the deadline to avoid consumer disruption was modified to read: "only if all relevant public safety entities are able to use such frequencies free of interference by december 31 , 2007 , or are otherwise able to resolve interference issues with relevant broadcast licensee by mutual agreement. .

the senate passed s. 2845 on october 6 , 2004 .

other provisions of s. 2820 relevant to digital television are retained within the senate - passed version of s. 2845 .

however , the sections regarding the digital transition consumer assistance fund and the $1 billion in consumer digital transition subsidies are moot , because the legislation limits the digital transition deadline only to public safety spectrum and does not authorize auctions of commercial spectrum currently used for analog television broadcasts .

also , labeling requirements would only go into effect if the fcc acts to set a hard deadline for the return of analog spectrum .

the house - passed version of s. 2845 ( passed on october 16 , 2004 ) contained a nonbinding provision ( section 5011 ) expressing the "sense of the congress" that the 85% penetration test should be eliminated and that broadcasters should be required to cease analog transmissions by december 31 , 2006 in order that analog spectrum can be returned for public safety and commercial uses .

the conference report version of s. 2845 contained a digital television provision similar to the house language .

section 7501 states that it is the sense of congress that "congress must act to pass legislation in the first session of the 109 th congress that establishes a comprehensive approach to the timely return of analog broadcast spectrum as early as december 31 , 2006" and that any delay in the adoption of such legislation will "delay the ability of public safety entities to begin planning to use this needed spectrum. .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108 - 458 ) was signed into law on december 17 , 2004 .

during the first session of the 109 th congress , lawmakers debated when and how a "hard date" for the dtv transition might be implemented , thereby freeing reclaimed analog spectrum .

policy questions included should the then - existing statutory digital transition deadline of december 31 , 2006 , be implemented by modifying or removing the 85% digital penetration threshold requirement , or would a later and redefined transition deadline be more appropriate ? .

should the reclaiming of analog spectrum for public safety uses be singularly designated , or should it be included as part of a comprehensive approach to returning all of the analog spectrum ? .

appendix b in this report provides a listing of dtv - related legislation introduced into the 109 th congress .

aside from ensuring that consumers enjoy the benefits of digital television , reclaiming the analog spectrum was a prime motivation in the desire of congress and the fcc to complete the digital transition as soon as possible .

a portion of reclaimed analog spectrum will be allocated for first responder communications , while the rest will be auctioned to the private sector for development and use of innovative telecommunications technologies such as wireless broadband .

budgetary considerations were also an important factor .

auctioning the analog spectrum could raise revenues in the billions of dollars .

estimates of possible auction revenues varied , from $10 billion to $28 billion to $50 billion .

all or part of these auction proceeds could be used to reduce the federal budget deficit .

a key issue in the debate was addressing the millions of american over - the - air households whose existing analog televisions will require converter boxes in order to receive digital signals when the analog signal is turned off .

many policymakers asked whether should some form of financial assistance ( subsidies or tax credits , for example ) should be provided by the federal government to enable over - the - air households to purchase converter boxes or digital televisions .

should such assistance be provided to low - income households exclusively or to all households ? .

should subsidies , if warranted , be financed by proceeds garnered by auctioning the analog spectrum ? .

and finally , how much funding would a subsidy program require , and how much revenue is likely to be raised by auctioning the commercial portion of the reclaimed analog spectrum ? .

at the request of the house committee on energy and commerce , the government accountability office ( gao ) conducted a television characteristics survey involving 2,471 randomly selected american households .

based on the survey , gao found that 19% or 21 million households rely exclusively on over - the - air television ; 57% or 64 million households rely on cable ; and 19% or 22 million have a subscription to dbs ( satellite ) television .

additionally , gao found that low - income , non - white , and hispanic households are more likely to rely on over - the - air television broadcasting .

gao estimated that if a subsidy were needed only for over - the - air households , the cost could range from about $460 million to $2 billion , depending on the cost of the set - top box ( from $50 to $100 per box ) and whether subsidy recipients are limited to low - income households .

under this scenario , gao is assuming that cable and satellite providers would convert broadcasters' digital signals to analog at the "head - end," such that cable and satellite tv consumers with analog sets would be able to receive the signal without a converter box .

under a different scenario , gao assumed that cable and satellite providers would deliver high - definition signals to the home , thereby requiring consumers with analog sets to purchase converter boxes .

gao estimated that if subsidies were available to cable and satellite subscribers as well as to over - the - air households , the cost would range from $1.8 billion to over $10 billion , again depending on the cost of the converter box and the use of means testing .

the gao estimate assumes a subsidy for one converter box per household — it should be noted that the vast majority of television households have more than one over - the - air analog television .

each analog television set would need its own converter box to be able to receive a digital signal .

the gao cost estimates also do not include the cost of implementing a subsidy program , nor do they take into account what form a subsidy might take , be it a voucher , tax credit , rebate , government supplied equipment , or other means .

on may 26 , 2005 , gao testified before the house energy and commerce committee on the administrative challenges that could arise in implementing a subsidy for dtv equipment .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109 - 171 ) set a february 17 , 2009 deadline for the digital transition and established a digital converter box coupon program to mitigate the switch - over costs to consumers with analog televisions .

the preeminent issue for congress is ensuring that american households are prepared for the february 17 , 2009 dtv transition deadline , thereby minimizing a scenario whereby television sets across the nation "go dark. .

specifically , congress is actively overseeing the activities of federal agencies responsible for the digital transition — principally the fcc and the ntia — while assessing whether additional federal efforts ( including enhanced coordination and leadership ) are necessary , particularly with respect to public education and outreach .

the congress is also monitoring the extent to which private sector stakeholders take appropriate and sufficient steps to educate the public and ensure that all americans are prepared for the digital transition .

table 1 shows a listing of hearings held in the 110 th congress on the dtv transition .

appendix c in this report provides a listing of dtv - related legislation introduced into the 110 th congress .

other dtv issues — some of which were considered by the 109 th congress , but remain unresolved — include digital multicast must - carry , downconversion , and the broadcast flag .

additionally , there remain issues related to the auctioning and use of spectrum made available by the digital transition .

on july 25 , 2006 the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) released a request for comment and notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) to implement and administer a coupon program for digital - to - analog converter boxes .

in the nprm , ntia proposed that up to two $40 coupons will be available to households with analog televisions that exclusively rely on over - the - air broadcast signals .

cable or satellite television households would not be eligible , even if they also happened to contain over - the - air analog televisions not connected to cable or satellite systems .

ntia proposed that applying households would self - certify that they only receive over - the - air signals using an analog television .

ntia also asked for comments on whether economic need should determine whether a household is eligible for the program , and if so , how economic need should be determined ( i.e .

"means testing" ) .

in the nprm , ntia also asked for comments on consumer education .

given that the deficit reduction act allocates no more than $5 million for consumer education concerning the digital transition and the converter box program , ntia noted that considering "the costs of media production and paid advertising time , the $5,000,000 limit necessitates that ntia carefully leverage the program's consumer education spending by collaborating with and complementing the consumer education efforts of broadcasters , equipment manufacturers , retailers , consumer groups and others with a stake in a successful and timely transition to digital television broadcasting. .

acknowledging the difficulty in reaching households most likely to rely solely on over - the - air television , ntia asked for ideas and comments on how best to reach those households .

on november 16 , 2006 , representative john dingell and nineteen other democrats on the house committee on energy and commerce sent a letter to ntia expressing concerns regarding the converter box program .

specifically , the letter urged ntia not to restrict eligibility for converter box coupons to exclusively over - the - air households , and instead to make coupons available also to any cable or satellite television households which may contain an over - the - air analog television .

the letter also opposed "means testing," arguing that determining economic eligibility imposes too many administrative burdens on consumers ; urged performance standards for converter boxes which would ensure picture and audio quality and the ability of converter boxes to be updated , modified or repaired ; and stated that $5 million for consumer education was inadequate , urging ntia to target especially lower income households and other vulnerable groups .

on march 12 , 2007 , ntia released its final rule implementing the converter box program .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109 - 171 ) initially allocates $990 million for the converter box program , and may subsequently allocate an additional $510 million ( totaling $1.5 billion ) if ntia notifies congress that additional funding is needed .

the final rule states that starting on january 1 , 2008 , for the initial $990 million program ( the "initial period" ) , up to two $40 coupons will be available to any and all requesting u.s. households to be used towards the purchase of up to two digital - to - analog converter boxes .

in the event that ntia determines that the additional $510 million is needed , only exclusively over - the - air households will be eligible for coupons during this "contingent period. .

households will be required to self - certify that they are exclusively over - the - air and do not subscribe to cable , satellite , or other pay television services .

cable and satellite households that contain extra over - the - air televisions will be eligible for coupons during the "initial period" of the program ( the first $990 million ) , but will not be eligible for coupons if there is a second phase or "contingent period" of the program ( the additional $510 million ) .

the rule also sets forth procedures and requirements for manufacturers and retailers who wish to participate in the converter box program .

manufacturers must submit test results and sample converter boxes to ntia for approval .

approved devices must meet prescribed technical specifications that are intended to ensure an affordable state - of - the - art converter box .

additional permitted features include a smart antenna interface connector and program guide .

features that would disqualify a converter box from being covered by the coupon program include video recording , playback capability , or other capabilities which allow more than simply converting a digital over - the - air signal .

meanwhile , retailers must receive a certification from ntia in order to participate in the converter box coupon program .

certified retailers must agree to have systems in place capable of processing coupons electronically for redemption and payment , track every transaction and provide reports to ntia , train employees on the purpose and operation of the coupon program with ntia - provided training materials , use commercially reasonable methods to order and manage inventory , and assist ntia in minimizing incidents of waste , fraud , and abuse , including reporting suspicious patterns of customer behavior .

retailers are not responsible for verifying household eligibility .

on august 15 , 2007 , ntia announced it had entered into a contract with ibm to run the digital - to - analog converter box coupon program .

the total award is $119,968,468 , which breaks down to $84,990,343 for the initial period and $34,978,125 for the contingent period .

the contract performance began immediately and is to close out on september 30 , 2009 .

the ibm - led team will provide services in three areas: consumer education , coupon distribution to consumers and retail store participation , and financial processing to reimburse retailers , to maintain records , and to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse .

as of january 1 , 2008 , consumers may apply to ntia for up to two converter box coupons , either by logging onto www.dtv2009.gov , or by calling the toll - free number: 1-888-dtv - 2009 ( 1-888-388-2009 ) .

ntia will begin sending out coupons by late february or early march of 2008 .

given that coupons are required by statute to expire after 90 days , ntia has stated its intention not to mail coupons to consumers until converter boxes are available in local retail outlets .

with the february 17 , 2009 deadline for the digital transition approaching , and with the public launching of the converter box program in january 2008 , congressional concern is focusing on the adequacy of efforts to inform the public of the digital transition .

a primary goal is preventing analog over - the - air households from losing television service in the event that these households do not purchase a converter box or take other measures to ensure the ability to receive digital broadcasts after february 17 , 2009 .

a survey conducted by the national association of broadcasters ( nab ) found that 56% of over - the - air viewers have never seen , heard , or read anything about the digital transition , that only 10% were able to guess the right year when analog broadcasts will cease , and that only 1% to 3% knew that the transition would be complete by february 2009 .

a subsequent survey conducted by the association of public television stations ( apts ) in august 2007 found that 51.3% of americans were unaware of the dtv transition .

a previous apts survey in november 2006 found the percentage of americans unaware of the dtv transition at 61.2% .

two federal agencies — the ntia and the fcc — are directly engaged in consumer education efforts regarding the digital transition .

currently , the ntia is statutorily funded ( by p.l .

109 - 171 , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ) at "not more than $5,000,000 for consumer education concerning the digital television transition and the availability of the digital - to - analog converter box program. .

the ntia's dtv consumer education efforts are focused on raising awareness of the coupon program , particularly with five target groups most likely to be affected by the digital transition: senior citizens , the economically disadvantaged , rural residents , people with disabilities , and minorities .

to reach those groups and the american public in general , the ntia is pursuing a strategy of leveraging its resources by partnering with private sector stakeholder groups representing those constituencies most at risk .

ntia is also working with the dtv transition coalition , a broad - based coalition of business , trade , and industry groups as well as grass roots and membership organizations .

in addition to working with private sector groups , ntia is working with federal government agencies that target economically disadvantaged americans .

meanwhile , the administration has requested $1.5 million for the fcc in fy2008 for dtv consumer education ; the fy2008 house financial services and general government appropriations bill ( h.r .

2829 ; h.rept .

110 - 207 ) , passed by the house on june 28 , 2007 , would provide $2 million .

similar to the ntia , the fcc is pursuing collaborative partnerships with private and public sector entities to target outreach to vulnerable populations and to raise the general awareness of the american public about the dtv transition .

the fcc has become a member of the dtv transition coalition , prepared and issued consumer publications and web materials , and is promoting dtv awareness by attending and holding events and conferences .

the significant reliance of the fcc and the ntia on the private sector for dtv public education has led some to question whether the federal government should assume a more proactive role in promoting dtv public education activities .

on july 30 , 2007 , in response to criticisms and suggestions on dtv consumer education raised by a may 24 , 2007 letter from the house energy and commerce committee , the fcc released a notice of proposed rule making ( nprm ) on a dtv consumer education initiative .

the nprm requests public comments on a number of proposals to raise awareness among the public of the dtv transition , including broadcaster public service announcements , broadcaster consumer education reporting , multichannel video programming distributor ( mvpd ) customer bill notices , consumer electronics manufacturer notices , consumer electronics retailer reporting on its staff training , and other proposals .

meanwhile , in testimony before the senate special committee on aging , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that difficulties remain in implementing consumer education programs .

gao testified that because private sector dtv outreach efforts are voluntary , government cannot be assured of their extent and that "given the different interests represented by industry stakeholders , messages directed at consumers vary and might lead to confusion. .

as requested by the house committee on energy and commerce , gao is performing an ongoing assessment of public and private sector dtv consumer education programs and is planning a series of consumer surveys leading up to the transition date .

a major component of any dtv public education campaign is likely to be the airing of public service announcements ( psas ) .

the national association of broadcasters ( nab ) is preparing psas to be delivered to local broadcasters by december 2007 .

it will be up to local broadcasters to decide when and how often to air the psas .

on october 15 , 2007 , the nab announced a $697 million consumer education campaign , including dtv spots , crawls , and 30 minute educational programs .

meanwhile , in september 2007 , the national cable & telecommunications association ( ncta ) began running on cable channels a $200 million english and spanish language advertising campaign on the digital transition ; ncta will continue the advertising spots through february 2009 .

in its nprm , the fcc states its belief that psas are the most effective and efficient way to reach over - the - air television viewers about the digital transition .

the fcc is proposing to require television broadcast licensees to conduct on - air consumer education efforts and is asking for comments on the content of such psas , when and how often they should be run , whether similar requirements should be imposed on all broadcasters , and other related questions .

digital multicasting refers to the ability of broadcasters to divide their 6 mhz of digital spectrum into separate and discrete streams of content .

thus , for example , a broadcaster could transmit alternate channels of programming — such as weather , news , or foreign language , for example — in addition to its primary digital video broadcast .

on february 10 , 2005 , the fcc affirmed its prior decision that cable operators are not required to carry more than a single digital programming stream from any particular broadcaster .

at issue is whether "must carry" requirements should be expanded such that cable operators would be required to carry any or all additional multicasted channels transmitted by commercial broadcasters .

commercial broadcasters argue that their incentive to develop additional digital programming streams is diminished if they have no guarantee that cable systems will carry that programming .

cable providers counter that their decision whether or not to carry additional programming streams from a broadcaster should be dictated by the market , rather than mandated .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5252 , as reported by the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation , did not explicitly address multicast must - carry , and to date , no multicast must - carry legislation has been introduced .

however , fcc chairman kevin martin has publicly stated his support for requiring multicast must - carry , and suggested the possibility of reconsidering the fcc's 2005 decision ( which was issued under the previous fcc chairman , michael powell ) .

two of the fcc commissioners who voted against multicast must - carry , michael copps and jonathan adelstein , stated that they may be willing to reexamine the issue if public interest obligations of broadcasting multicast signals are also addressed .

an attempt to require multicast must - carry at the fcc's june 2006 meeting was withdrawn by chairman martin when it became clear that the order lacked votes necessary for passage .

a related issue is the extent to which cable providers may be permitted or required to carry downconverted analog signals after the digital transition takes place .

many cable households will likely continue to use analog televisions which cannot receive a digital signal .

cable companies might offer or lease converter boxes to these customers , or customers may be required to purchase their own converter box .

as an alternative , it is possible that cable providers might seek authority from congress to "downconvert" the digital signal of selected local broadcast stations to analog format .

to serve customers with digital televisions , cable providers would continue to provide digital signals as well ( in other words , "dual carriage" ) .

under this scenario , a key issue is whether ( and if so , how ) congress should mandate which local broadcast stations would receive the benefit of "dual carriage" to cable customers .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5252 , as reported by the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation , contained language that would require satellite carriers and cable operators with capacities of greater than 550 megahertz to offer , through february 17 , 2014 , must - carry locally broadcast digital signals in formats viewable on both analog and digital televisions .

cable operators with capacities of 550 megahertz or less would be required only to offer those signals in analog format through february 17 , 2014 , while maintaining the option of offering digital signals as well .

cable operators and satellite carriers would have the option of providing standard definition digital signals in lieu of high definition signals , and would be allowed to perform conversions at any location , from the cable head - end or local receive facility , to the customer premises .

the provision in h.r .

5252 allowing cable operators and satellite carriers to provide digital signals in a standard definition format was opposed by broadcasters and the consumer electronics industry .

they argued that permitting conversions of broadcasters' signals to a standard definition format removes the incentive for consumers to purchase high definition television sets , while also giving cable and satellite providers the opportunity to offer their own programming in a higher quality format ( i.e .

high definition ) than what they might offer for broadcasters' digital programming .

cable companies asserted that the legislation provides a seamless digital transition for the majority of consumers who have not yet purchased high definition sets .

on april 25 , 2007 , the fcc adopted a second further notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) asking for comment on proposals to ensure all cable subscribers , including those with analog tv sets , can view must - carry television stations on cable systems after the transition to digital television occurs on february 17 , 2009 .

in the nprm , the fcc pointed out that about 50% of all cable subscribers ( approximately 32 million households ) are analog cable subscribers .

additionally , many digital cable subscribers have one or more television sets that only receive analog cable service .

by statute , cable operators must ensure that all subscribers are able to view all must - carry local broadcast stations .

in the nprm , the fcc proposes that cable operators must either: ( 1 ) carry the signals of all must - carry stations in an analog format to all analog cable subscribers , or ( 2 ) for all - digital systems , carry those signals only in digital format , provided all subscribers have the necessary equipment to view the broadcast .

the fcc also reaffirmed that cable systems must carry high definition broadcast signals in hd format , and asked for comment on whether the commission should move from a subjective to an objective measure of what constitutes "material degradation. .

on september 11 , 2007 , the fcc adopted rules intended to ensure that cable customers continue to receive local tv stations after the transition .

specifically , the fcc will require cable operators to comply with a "viewability requirement" by choosing to either ( 1 ) carry the signal in analog as well as digital formats ( dual carriage ) , or ( 2 ) carry the signal in a digital only format , provided that all subscribers have set - top boxes which will enable them to view digital broadcasts on their analog tvs .

the viewability requirement extends to february 2012 , at which time the fcc will reassess the need for the requirement .

small cable companies — which had sought an exemption — may request a waiver of the viewability requirement .

many content providers ( eg , movie studios and broadcast networks ) may be reluctant to provide high quality digital content to households until they are assured that technologies are in place to prevent consumers from making unauthorized copies and internet transmissions of copyrighted digital content .

two of these technologies currently under consideration are the "broadcast flag" and technology to "plug" what is commonly referred to as the "analog hole. .

the "broadcast flag" applies only to content that is broadcast over - the - air .

the "analog hole"problem applies to all digital content , whether it is transmitted over - the - air , by cable , or by satellite .

for further explanations of these technologies , see the section , "copyright protection technologies" in appendix a of this report .

on november 4 , 2003 , the fcc adopted a rule which gives broadcasters the option of inserting a "broadcast flag" into their over - the - air broadcast transmissions .

by july 1 , 2005 , all consumer electronics devices capable of receiving an over - the - air dtv signal would have been required to be manufactured to incorporate content protection technologies that would limit the redistribution of digital television content when the broadcast flag is recognized .

however , on may 6 , 2005 , the u.s .

circuit court of appeals for the district of columbia struck down the fcc's broadcast flag rules .

the court ruled that the fcc has no authority to regulate consumers' use of televisions and other devices which receive broadcast transmissions .

with the fcc's broadcast flag rule negated by the court , congressional policymakers are considering whether to introduce legislation mandating a broadcast flag .

in the 109 th congress , discussion draft legislation released by the house committee on the judiciary , subcommittee on courts , the internet and intellectual property , the broadcast flag authorization act , would give the fcc authority to proceed with the broadcast flag rule .

on november 3 , 2005 , the committee heard witnesses in support and opposition to the draft legislation .

on january 24 , 2006 , broadcast flag draft legislation ( which would also give the fcc authority to proceed with the broadcast flag rule ) was discussed at a hearing held by the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation .

another hearing addressing the broadcast flag issue was held by the house committee on energy and commerce on june 27 , 2006 .

h.r .

5252 , as reported by the senate commerce , science and transportation committee , would give the fcc statutory authority to proceed with its broadcast flag rule .

the legislation provided that within 30 days after enactment , the fcc shall initiate a further proceeding for the approval of digital output protection technologies and recording methods for use in distance learning activities .

the fcc's authority is not limited with respect to approving technologies that allow for the redistribution of digital broadcast content within the home or similar environment .

finally , a broadcast flag could not be used to restrict the distribution of news and public affairs programming of which the primary commercial value depends on "timeliness. .

the fcc would allow broadcasters to determine whether that "timeliness" criteria is met .

such determination by broadcasters would be subject to fcc review under certain conditions .

meanwhile , on november 3 , 2005 , the house committee on the judiciary heard witnesses in support and opposition to draft legislation that would require consumer electronics devices ( such as digital video recorders ) to incorporate technology designed to prevent unauthorized copying and distribution of digital content obtained through the analog hole .

the draft legislation was the basis for the digital transition content security act of 2005 ( h.r .

4569 ) , introduced by house judiciary committee chairman james sensenbrenner and ranking member john conyers on december 16 , 2005 .

appendix a .

background on selected policy issues digital "must carry" under the "must carry" provisions of the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 , cable tv providers are required to transmit local analog programs to their customers .

this decision was based on the reasoning that since cable tv has a predominant position in the market , "without mandatory carriage provisions , the economic viability of local broadcast television and its ability to produce quality local programming would be jeopardized. .

the commercial broadcasters ( primarily the smaller networks and independent stations , represented by the association of local television stations , but also the national association of broadcasters ) believe that the same principles and conclusions of the 1992 act should apply to dtv services , leading to mandatory carriage of the dtv programming by cable operators .

broadcasters argue that because most americans receive their tv via cable , the carriage of dtv programming by cable providers is essential for consumers to purchase dtv receivers .

the cable companies ( led by the national cable television association , ncta ) oppose any "must carry" requirements for cable operator carriage of dtv programming , arguing that it would be an unlawful taking of their property , and that they should be able to decide what content they provide on their own networks .

ncta points out that , unlike the commercial broadcasters who were given free spectrum licenses for dtv , cable operators must build their own infrastructure to be able to transmit dtv signals .

cable operators say they will carry commercial broadcasters' dtv programming as soon as consumer demand warrants it .

cable television services provide a finite number of channels to consumers , and any mandate to provide dtv programming would require cable companies to remove other non - broadcast channels .

many cable operators are investing in the upgrades needed to provide dtv , although the video transmission standards adopted by cable operators may not be the same as those used by the broadcasters .

this could mean that different home equipment may be necessary for cable services than for over - the - air tv reception .

in addition , hdtv programming will require cable operators to build a more robust transmission ( i.e. , greater bandwidth ) capability than is required by sdtv , and some cable operators may want to offer sdtv but not hdtv services .

the cable industry also contends that mandating carriage of all dtv broadcast transmissions will financially devastate many smaller cable operators .

responding to the debate between the broadcast and cable industries over whether cable tv providers should be required to transmit dtv programming , in july 1998 the fcc initiated a proceeding on the matter .

on january 22 , 2001 , the fcc announced its adoption of rules for cable carriage of digital tv signals .

most notably , the fcc ruling did not require cable systems to simultaneously carry both the analog and digital signals ( "dual carriage" ) of local tv stations .

the fcc tentatively concluded that "such a requirement appears to burden cable operators' first amendment interests more than is necessary to further a substantial governmental interest. .

while not approving a dual carriage mandate , the fcc did rule that a digital - only tv station , whether commercial or non - commercial , can immediately assert its right to carriage on a local cable system .

additionally , a tv station that returns its analog spectrum and converts to digital operations must be carried by local cable systems .

cable systems must carry "primary video," defined as a "single programming stream and other program - related content. .

the fcc continued to examine the must - carry issue through 2004 .

of particular interest was how must - carry rules would ultimately apply to "digital multicasting," which refers to the ability of broadcasters to divide their 6 mhz of digital spectrum into separate and discrete streams of content .

at issue is whether cable operators should be required to carry any or all additional multicasted channels transmitted by commercial broadcasters as part of their 6 mhz digital allotment .

on january 31 , 2005 , the national cable television association ( ncta ) and the association of public television stations ( apts ) announced an agreement under which cable companies would provide dual - carriage ( both analog and digital ) of at least one public television station in a market during the transition , as well as carrying up to four multicasts of public stations after the transition .

under the agreement , apts will no longer lobby the fcc or congress for government must - carry mandates .

on february 10 , 2005 , the fcc affirmed its prior decision that cable operators are not required to carry more than a single digital programming stream from any particular broadcaster .

the fcc also affirmed the previous tentative conclusion not to impose a dual carriage requirement on cable operators .

mandating digital tuners after the digital transition , existing analog television sets will not be able to receive digital signals unless they are attached to a converter box .

however , it is possible to manufacture analog televisions with a digital tuning capability already built in .

such televisions would not require a separate converter box in order to receive over - the - air broadcasted digital signals .

on august 8 , 2002 , the fcc adopted a phase - in plan requiring most new television sets to contain digital tuners by 2007 .

specifically , the fcc's second report and order and second memorandum opinion and order ( fcc 02-230 ) requires all television sets with screen sizes of at least 13 inches , and all television receiving equipment ( such as video cassette recorders and dvd players / recorders to include dtv reception capability according to the following schedule: receivers with screen sizes 36 inches and above — 50% of a responsible party's units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2004 ; 100% of such units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2005 .

receivers with screen sizes 25 to 35 inches — 50% of a responsible party's units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2005 ; 100% of such units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2006 .

receivers with screen sizes 13 to 24 inches — 100% of all such units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2007 .

tv interface devices vcrs and dvd players / recorders , etc .

that receive broadcast television signals — 100% of all such units must include dtv tuners effective july 1 , 2007 .

the fcc's phase - in plan was opposed by the consumer electronics association ( cea ) , consumer groups , and antitax groups .

the cea , citing the "scant percentage of households relying on over - the - air television reception" argued that the mandate is a "multi - billion dollar tv tax on american consumers," and called instead for an fcc mandate on cable - dtv compatibility standards .

this position was countered by the national association of broadcasters , who argued that the mandate is necessary to hasten the dtv transition and ensure the survival of free over - the - air broadcasting , which nab says is currently received by roughly one third of all tv sets in use .

subsequently , the agreement between the consumer electronics and cable industries on a cable - dtv interoperability standard dampened cea's opposition to the digital tuner mandate , because the circuitry enabling "plug and play" compatibility between digital televisions and cable systems could be modified to receive digital over - the - air signals at an incremental cost .

however , in november 2004 , the cea , along with the consumer electronics retailers coalition ( cerc ) , petitioned the fcc to eliminate the deadline of july 1 , 2005 for digital tuners in 50% of televisions in the 25 to 36 inch ( mid - sized ) screen size range .

alternatively , cea and cerc proposed that the digital tuner deadline for all ( 100% ) of televisions in that size range be moved up from july 1 to march 1 , 2006 .

on february 14 , 2005 , the fcc announced a notice of proposed rulemaking to consider whether to adjust the schedule by which televisions with screen sizes of 25 to 36 inches are required to contain digital tuners .

on june 9 , 2005 , the fcc denied the cea and cerc petition to eliminate the deadline of july 1 , 2005 for 50% of televisions in the 25 to 36 inch screen size range to have digital tuners .

at the same time , the fcc did agree to move up the digital tuner deadline for mid - size televisions from july 1 to march 1 , 2006 .

the fcc also proposed to move up the date by which all televisions with screen sizes over 13 inches must have digital tuners , from july 1 , 2007 to december 31 , 2006 ; and asked for comments on whether digital tuner requirements should be extended to televisions with screen sizes smaller than 13 inches .

on november 3 , 2005 , the fcc announced its decision to require all sets shipped in interstate commerce or imported into the united states ( including sets with screen sizes smaller than 13 inches ) to contain digital tuners by march 1 , 2007 .

while newly manufactured or imported sets must have a digital tuner , retailers are permitted to sell analog - only television sets from existing inventory .

on april 25 , 2007 , the fcc adopted a rule requiring retailers to put a label on all analog - only televisions which informs the consumer that the television will require a converter box after february 17 , 2009 .

the fcc is monitoring compliance with the labeling rule , and has levied over $3 million in fines , in the aggregate , against retailers who fail to display required labels .

copyright protection technology many content providers ( eg , movie studios and broadcast networks ) are reluctant to provide high quality digital content to dtv owners until they are assured that interoperability standards and technology licensing agreements are in place to prevent consumers from making unauthorized copies and internet transmissions of digital content .

in 1998 , five consumer electronics manufacturing companies — hitachi , intel , matsushita , sony , and toshiba — formed an entity called the digital transmission licensing administrator ( dtla , also known as "5c" ) to license a jointly developed digital transmission content protection ( dtcp ) technology .

dtcp is designed to protect audiovisual and audio content against unauthorized interception or retransmission in the digital home environment .

on july 17 , 2001 , two major studios — warner bros. and sony pictures entertainment — announced a licensing agreement to adopt dtcp .

the agreement is designed to permit the studios to protect prerecorded media , pay - per - view , and video - on - demand transmissions against unauthorized copying , and to protect all content against unauthorized internet retransmission , while assuring consumers' ability to continue customary home recording of broadcast and subscription programming .

broadcast flag while dtcp protects content delivered to the home via cable or satellite , the technology does not protect over - the - air broadcast content .

other major studios have been reluctant to sign licensing agreements with dtla until broadcast content can also be protected .

additionally , broadcast networks ( abc , cbs , and fox ) have opposed the 5c standard , arguing that the technology's inability to encrypt over - the - air broadcasts will cause high quality content to migrate toward cable and satellite exclusively .

a week after the 5c agreement with sony pictures and warner bros. was announced , the five other major studios ( disney , paramount , fox , universal , and mgm ) submitted a proposal to dtla which would require digital broadcast content to be encrypted with a "broadcast flag" preventing internet distribution or retransmission of digital content broadcast over - the - air .

on june 3 , 2002 , a group of engineers from the motion picture and technology industries released a detailed "broadcast flag" proposal .

while the proposal is strongly supported by the content industry , the technology industry remains divided , with some companies supporting and others opposing this particular proposal .

some consumer groups have also expressed opposition .

those supporting a broadcast flag ( such as the motion picture association of america and other content providers ) argue that the protections against piracy offered by a broadcast flag are crucial to ensure that content providers make high - value programming available over the digital airwaves .

supporters also argue that a broadcast flag will not prevent consumers from making physical copies of dtv programs , or from distributing such copies within a person's home digital network .

opponents of a broadcast flag ( many consumer electronics and high tech companies , as well as consumer groups ) assert that because electronic devices will have to be meet certain specifications in order to process the broadcast flag , the innovation and functionality of consumer electronics equipment will be adversely affected .

additionally , they argue , because the broadcast flag would effectively ban any retransmission not approved by content providers , legitimate consumer rights ( e.g .

"fair use" ) would be compromised .

on august 9 , 2002 , the fcc issued a notice of proposed rulemaking ( fcc 02-231 , mb docket 02-230 ) in the matter of digital broadcast copy protection .

noting that the lack of digital broadcast copy protection is a significant impediment to the dtv transition , the fcc solicited public comment on whether the fcc can and should mandate the use of a copy protection mechanism for digital broadcast television .

the comment period closed on february 18 , 2003 ; over 6000 comments were received , most from individual citizens .

on november 4 , 2003 , the fcc adopted a rule which gives broadcasters the option of inserting a "broadcast flag" into their over - the - air broadcast transmissions .

by july 1 , 2005 , all consumer electronics devices capable of receiving an over - the - air dtv signal would have been required to be manufactured to incorporate content protection technologies that will limit the redistribution of digital television content when the broadcast flag is recognized .

before dtv devices can be manufactured , however , content protection technologies must be approved .

the fcc set forth an "interim procedure" whereby parties would certify that their content protection technology meets fcc criteria .

after a period of public comment , the fcc would determine whether or not to approve that particular technology .

the fcc issued a further notice of proposed rulemaking in order to formulate a permanent approval procedure for content protection technology .

on august 4 , 2004 , the fcc adopted a report and order approving thirteen digital output protection technologies and recording methods .

on february 22 , 2005 , the u.s .

circuit court of appeals for the district of columbia heard an appeal filed in march 2004 by library and consumer groups objecting to the fcc rule mandating that copy protection technology be included in digital televisions and related electronics by july 1 , 2005 .

on may 6 , 2005 , the court struck down the fcc's broadcast flag rules .

the court ruled that the fcc has no authority to regulate consumers' use of televisions and other devices which receive broadcast transmissions .

with the fcc's broadcast flag rule negated by the court , the 109 th congress considered legislation mandating a broadcast flag .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5252 , as reported by the senate commerce , science and transportation committee , would have given the fcc statutory authority to proceed with its broadcast flag rule .

the legislation provided that within 30 days after enactment , the fcc shall initiate a further proceeding for the approval of digital output protection technologies and recording methods for use in distance learning activities .

the fcc's authority is not limited with respect to approving technologies that allow for the redistribution of digital broadcast content within the home or similar environment .

finally , a broadcast flag could not be used to restrict the distribution of news and public affairs programming of which the primary commercial value depends on "timeliness. .

the fcc would allow broadcasters to determine whether that "timeliness" criteria is met .

such determination by broadcasters would be subject to fcc review under certain conditions .

h.r .

5252 was not enacted by the 109 th congress .

analog hole another copyright protection issue of concern to content providers is what is commonly referred to as the "analog hole. .

in the foreseeable future , many consumers will continue to use analog televisions .

in order to display the content carried by digital signals , analog televisions will be equipped with a digital tuner ( a set - top box ) which converts the signal from digital to analog .

at this point , the digital signal , even if content protected , is converted into an unprotected analog form which could then be easily converted into a similarly unprotected digital form subject to the unauthorized copying and internet transmission the content providers are seeking to prevent .

during the 109 th congress , discussion draft legislation released by the house committee on the judiciary , subcommittee on courts , the internet and intellectual property , the analog content protection act , would require devices ( such as digital video recorders or pc - based tuners ) to recognize an analog rights signaling mechanism called "cgms - a plus veil" ( analog copy generation management system coupled with the veil technologies rights assertion mark ) .

on november 3 , 2005 , the committee heard witnesses in support and opposition to the draft legislation .

the draft legislation was the basis for the digital transition content security act of 2005 ( h.r .

4569 ) , introduced by house judiciary committee chairman james sensenbrenner and ranking member john conyers on december 16 , 2005 .

cable / dtv interoperability standards interoperability standards between digital televisions and cable systems are necessary in order for consumers to be able to watch digital programming over their cable systems .

traditionally , interoperability has been achieved via the proprietary set - top box leased to the subscriber by the local cable company .

given the absence of a national interoperability standard , consumers had been unable to purchase dtv products from consumer electronics stores which can be directly connected to cable systems without the use of a set - top box .

two separate entities — the consumer electronics industry ( including manufacturers and retailers ) and the cable system operators — have embarked on an often contentious process of determining the specific technical details of how dtv devices might achieve nation - wide compatibility and interoperability with cable systems .

section 304 of the telecommunications act of 1996 directed the fcc to adopt regulations to assure the commercial consumer availability of "navigation devices" ( i.e .

set - top boxes , remote control units ) without jeopardizing the rights of a cable provider to protect its signal from theft .

currently , proprietary set - top boxes are "integrated" with two overall functions: security and navigation ( i.e .

allowing the subscriber to flip from channel to channel ) .

a 1998 order adopted by the fcc ( fcc 98-116 ) required the cable operators to separate the security functions from non - security functions and to make available ( by july 1 , 2000 ) modular security components to the consumer electronics industry .

allowing time for transition , the fcc order permitted cable operators to continue to provide integrated set - top boxes through january 1 , 2005 .

after that date , the sale or lease of new integrated boxes would be prohibited .

this deadline was subsequently extended to july 1 , 2006 , and again extended to july 1 , 2007 .

on february 22 , 2000 , the consumer electronics association ( cea ) and the national cable television association ( ncta ) announced a voluntary agreement on a set of technical requirements that permit the direct connection of digital television receivers to cable television systems .

in january 2002 , cablelabs ( a research organization of the cable industry ) published specifications for the opencable applications platform ( ocap ) , which would serve as a uniform interoperability cable / dtv standard .

however , consumer electronics manufacturers and retailers and the cable industry continued to disagree over the pace and specific technical details ( including copy protection requirements ) of how interoperability should be implemented .

on december 19 , 2002 , the cable and consumer electronics industries announced they had reached an agreement on a cable compatibility standard for an integrated , unidirectional digital cable television receiver .

the two industry groups filed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with the fcc , outlining the agreement .

according to the mou , the industries will continue to negotiate a "bidirectional" standard that would enable consumers to receive advanced services ( such as video on demand ) without the need for an external navigation device .

on january 7 , 2003 , the fcc issued a further notice of proposed rulemaking ( fcc 03-3 ) seeking comment on the mou and proposing fcc rules necessary to implement the industry agreement .

opposition to the agreement's "encoding rules" was expressed by several organizations , including the motion picture association of america , makers of personal video recording technology ( tivo ) , and consumer groups .

on september 10 , 2003 , the fcc adopted a second report and order which adopted , with certain modifications , the mou agreement between the cable and consumer electronics industries .

the new rules allowed for the manufacture of "plug and play" television sets that would receive one - way digital signals ( from the cable company to the consumer ) without the need for a set - top box .

however , consumers would have to obtain from their cable operator a security card ( a "pod" or "cablecard" ) that must be inserted into the tv set .

a set - top box would still be required for two - way services such as video on demand or pay - per - view .

finally , the order initiated a subsequent proposed rulemaking ( second further notice of proposed rulemaking ) to examine remaining issues .

under the current fcc rule , after july 1 , 2007 , the security of the unidirectional digital signal must be protected by a cablecard ( supplied by the cable provider ) which can be inserted into the "plug and play" television set , and allow consumers to view scrambled programming .

new set - top boxes provided by cable operators to their customers can no longer be "integrated," that is , they must operate in conjunction with a cablecard .

in its ruling setting the july 1 , 2007 deadline for integrated set - top boxes , the fcc stated that it would entertain requests for waivers of the prohibition .

as the july 1 , 2007 deadline approached , many cable providers sought waivers from the fcc , urging that the july 1 , 2007 deadline be extended by two years .

cable providers argued that imposing the ban would raise the costs to consumers of leasing the new cablecard enabled boxes ( without adding any new functionality ) and divert industry resources from developing low - cost digital set - top boxes needed for the digital transition .

cable companies also argued that next - generation network architect security ( "downloadable security" ) will likely be available in 2008 or 2009 , rendering cablecard technology obsolete .

the consumer electronics industry , on the other hand , argued that if the july 1 , 2007 deadline was extended , the value of cablecard technology to consumers would be further diminished , thereby making it more likely that consumers would not purchase "plug and play" digital sets with integrated tuners , and continue to opt for sets which rely on the set - top boxes supplied by cable providers .

ultimately , the fcc granted some waivers for small cable operators experiencing difficulty obtaining new equipment , as well as for operators pledging an all - digital conversion by february 17 , 2009 .

large cable operators — such as comcast and time warner — have not been granted waivers , and must comply with the july 1 , 2007 deadline .

meanwhile , because cablecards do not provide signal security for two - way bidirectional signals ( used for pay - per - view or video - on - demand , for example ) , the cable and consumer electronics industry continue to negotiate on a standard for bidirectional navigation devices .

on june 29 , 2007 , the fcc released a third further notice of proposed rulemaking seeking comment on industry - proposed standards to ensure bidirectional compatibility of cable television systems and consumer electronics equipment .

the fcc is also seeking comment on whether such a proposed rule should apply to other non - cable providers such as direct broadcast satellite ( dbs ) or internet protocol ( ip ) - based video services .

digital conversion of public broadcasting stations the fcc set a deadline of may 1 , 2003 for public television stations to convert to digital .

unlike commercial broadcasters , public television broadcasters were not opposed to an early deadline for returning analog spectrum , provided that a mechanism was put in place which would ensure that converter boxes are made available to exclusively over - the - air households .

public broadcasting stations view digital television as an opportunity to enhance and expand services to their local communities .

for example , public television stations are using multicast channels to provide programming streams dedicated to formal and children's education , workforce development , public affairs and local issues , and addressing underserved communities .

stations are also conducting pilot programs , whereby datacasts are used to establish homeland security public safety networks , including public alert systems and closed networks used by public safety and emergency management agencies .

according to the corporation for public broadcasting ( cpb ) , as of january 2007 , 340 public television stations ( out of a total of 349 ) were on the air with a digital signal .

stations are currently at different stages of the digital transition , some with high definition production capacity and / or multicasting , while others struggle to maintain a single digital broadcast service that meets fcc requirements .

cpb estimates that public television stations need $400 million to fully complete the digital transition .

raising money for the digital conversion is a challenge for many public television stations , especially those in small markets .

in 1997 , the corporation for public broadcasting and other public television stakeholders estimated the cost of digital conversion for public television stations at $1.7 billion .

in 2002 , gao reported that digital conversion would cost each station approximately $3 million .

public broadcasters have sought a substantial federal contribution for digital conversion .

there are three federal programs which provide funding to public television stations for digital conversion .

those programs are: 1 ) the public telecommunications facilities program ( ptfp ) , a grant program administered by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) at the department of commerce ; 2 ) the digital distribution fund at the cpb , and 3 ) the public television station digital transition grant program at the rural utilities service ( rus ) , u.s. department of agriculture .

table a - 1 shows funding histories for each of these programs .

ptfp funding is used to help public television stations pay for the new equipment and physical infrastructure required for digital conversion ( e.g .

transmitters , translators , and production equipment ) .

the ptfp , which has provided matching grants for public broadcasting equipment for over 40 years , began to fund digital conversion in fy1998 .

for fy2008 , as in previous years , the administration requested no funding for ptfp in fy2008 .

on june 29 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee approved a bill ( s. 1745 ; s.rept .

110 - 124 ) providing $20 million to ptfp in fy2008 .

on july 12 , 2007 , the house appropriations committee approved a bill ( h.r .

3093 ; h.rept .

110 - 240 ) providing $21.728 million .

the house passed h.r .

3093 on july 26 , 2007 .

the senate passed h.r .

3093 on october 16 , 2007 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110 - 161 ) provided $18.8 million for ptfp .

the digital distribution fund at the corporation for public broadcasting ( cpb ) provides matching grants to public television stations for the purchase of digital transmission equipment .

the administration requested $30.6 million for cpb's digital conversion program in fy2008 .

as in previous administration budget proposals , the $30.6 million would be taken from advance appropriations previously enacted .

on june 7 , 2007 , the house appropriations subcommittee on labor - hhs - education approved $29.7 million in "new money" for digital conversion ( h.r .

3043 ; h.rept .

110 - 231 ) .

the house passed h.r .

3043 on july 19 , 2007 .

on june 20 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee approved a bill ( s. 1710 ; s.rept .

110 - 107 ) that would also provide $29.7 million .

the senate passed h.r .

3043 on october 23 , 2007 .

the conference report ( h.rept .

110 - 424 ) , agreed to by the house on november 6 , 2007 , would provide $29.7 million .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110 - 161 ) also provided $29.7 million for digital conversion .

the public television station digital transition grant program at the rural utilities service ( rus ) provides funding to public televison stations serving rural areas for the purchase or lease of digital broadcasting equipment .

the administration requested no funding for the rus digital conversion program in fy2008 .

on july 19 , 2007 , the senate appropriations committee approved a bill ( s. 1859 ; s.rept .

110 - 134 ) providing $10 million for public broadcasting digital conversion in rural areas .

the committee noted that fy2008 is the last appropriation that can effectively make funding available before the transition deadline and that "future funding is not anticipated. .

the house agriculture appropriations act ( h.r .

3161 ; h.rept .

110 - 258 ) , approved by the house appropriations committee on july 19 , 2007 , included no funding for digital conversion .

the house passed h.r .

3161 on august 2 , 2007 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110 - 161 ) provided $5 million for public broadcasting digital conversion in rural areas .

meanwhile , the farm , nutrition , and bioenergy act of 2007 ( h.r .

2419 ) , passed by the house on july 27 , 2007 , contains a provision ( section 6028 , "assistance for rural public television stations" ) which gives the secretary of agriculture the authority to provide grants to "noncommercial education television broadcast stations that serve rural areas for the purposes of developing digital facilities , equipment , and infrastructure to enhance digital services to rural areas. .

the senate farm bill , passed by the senate on december 14 , 2007 , contains a provision ( section 6302 , "telemedicine , library connectivity , public television , and distance learning services in rural areas," ) which would authorize grants to rural public television stations for digital conversion .

satellite television and "digital white areas" under current law , satellite television providers are permitted to provide distant network signals ( from "out of market" network affiliates ) only to subscribers living in "white areas" — meaning they receive inadequate analog television broadcast signals from their local broadcasters .

legislation was introduced into the 108 th congress ( h.r .

4501 / h.r .

4518 / s. 2644 ) which would explore the possibility of creating "digital white areas" such that some subscribers may be eligible for distant network digital signals via their satellite dish if they cannot receive local digital tv signals .

in november 2004 , congress passed the satellite home viewer extension and reauthorization act ( shvera ) as part of the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108 - 447 ) .

shvera provides limited authority for satellite companies to offer "distant digital signals" if certain conditions are met .

for more information on this issue , see crs report rs21990 , satellite television and " digital white areas " : provisions of the 2004 satellite home viewer extension and reauthorization act , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

low power tv low power television ( lptv ) was created by the fcc in 1982 to serve rural areas and individual communities within larger urban areas .

lptv stations may not exceed 3 kilowatts for vhf channels or 150 kilowatts for uhf channels , and must not cause interference in the reception of full service television stations .

concerns have arisen that many lptv stations will lose their licenses in the transition to dtv .

while the fcc's february 1998 modification to its table of allotments for dtv licensees did provide for some lptv licensees to be relocated to new frequencies , many would still lose their licenses under fcc digital transition plans .

to provide some relief for lptv licensees , the community broadcasters protection act of 1999 was enacted as part of the intellectual property and communications omnibus reform act of 1999 ( p.l .

106 - 113 ) .

this law established a "class a" status to qualifying lptv licensees , giving them a measure of protection from full - power tv stations in the transition to dtv .

the act directs that class a licensees be accorded primary status as television broadcasters , prescribes the criteria lptv stations must meet to be eligible for class a status , and outlines the interference protection class a stations must provide to other television stations .

to implement the act , in april 2000 , the fcc established rules for class a lptv licensees , to facilitate the acquisition of capital for lptv stations to continue to provide free , over - the - air programming to their communities .

in accordance with the 1992 cable act ( 47 usc 534 ) , cable television providers are required to transmit to their audiences the locally - generated programming of all full - power tv broadcasters that request carriage , a provision known as "must - carry. .

under the 1992 act , some lptv stations are entitled to "must - carry"status if they meet certain criteria .

the fcc's april 2000 ruling did not address the question of whether class a licensees should be entitled to the "must - carry" provision , as are full - power broadcast tv stations .

a petition filed with the fcc argued that class a licenses should be granted the same "must - carry" status as full - power broadcasters .

the fcc subsequently ruled that class a stations do not have the same must carry rights as full service television stations .

on august 6 , 2003 the fcc adopted a notice of proposed rulemaking to seek comment on rules for digital low power television and digital television translator stations .

on september 9 , 2004 , the fcc adopted rules to allow for the digital conversion of lptv and translator stations .

while requiring the conversion to digital operation , the fcc did not set a digital transition deadline for lptv and translator stations .

the final transition date — on which analog operations will cease — will be considered in the fcc's third dtv periodic review proceeding .

the conference report accompanying the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109 - 171 ; h.rept .

109 - 362 ) clarified that "only full - power stations , not low - power stations must cease analog broadcasting by february 18 , 2009. .

low - power stations may continue analog broadcasts after that date , subject to future decisions by the fcc on how to complete the digital transition for low - power stations .

the conference report stated that low - power stations ( other than class a stations ) may continue broadcasting above channel 51 subject to fcc decisions "so long as those stations' use of those channels is secondary to the use of those channels by the auction winners and public safety officials. .

p.l .

109 - 171 also provides funding not to exceed $10 million during fy2008-2009 ( starting october 1 , 2007 ) to compensate low - power television stations ( including class a , translator , or booster television stations ) for the cost of a digital - to - analog conversion device in order to convert the digital signals received from their corresponding full - power television stations and provide analog signals to their customers .

in no case shall the compensation for a single digital - to - analog converter device exceed $1000 .

additionally , funding not to exceed $65 million during fy2009 ( starting october 1 , 2008 ) will be available to reimburse low - power television stations for equipment to upgrade stations from analog to digital in rural communities .

both grant programs are administered by the national telecommunications and information administration of the department of commerce .

on october 29 , 2007 , ntia announced the start of the lptv digital - to - analog conversion grant program that will help low - power television stations continue analog broadcasts .

the program will provide funds to eligible low - power stations that must purchase a digital - to - analog conversion device to convert the incoming digital signal of a full - power television station to analog for transmission on the low - power station's analog channel .

applications are being accepted between october 29 , 2007 , and february 17 , 2009 .

the low - power television and translator upgrade program , which will reimburse the costs of upgrading lptv and translator analog stations to digital , will be announced at a future date .

a growing issue of concern to lptv and class a stations is the capability of digital - to - analog converter boxes to pass through broadcasted analog signals in addition to receiving and converting digital signals .

lptv stations are not subject to the february 17 , 2009 digital conversion deadline , and will continue to broadcast analog signals .

a household that receives both full - power and lptv broadcast signals , and that installs a converter box in order to receive the full - power station's digital signal , would not be able to receive the lptv station's analog signal unless the converter box is equipped with an analog signal pass through capability .

ntia permits but does not require manufacturers to install an analog signal pass through capability in certified converter boxes , arguing that such a requirement could raise the cost of the boxes and pose possible interference problems for the digital signal .

the community broadcasters association ( cba ) , representing lptv and class a stations , has filed a complaint against the fcc asserting that the ntia - certified converter boxes violate the all - channel receiver act if they block reception of analog over - the - air television broadcast signals .

fees for ancillary or supplemental services the telecommunications act ( p.l .

104 - 104 ) states that if a dtv licensee offers ancillary or supplemental services for which they receive a subscription fee or other compensation , the fcc "shall establish a program to assess and collect from the licensee...an annual fee or other schedule or method of payment..." the act further states that the collection of fees "shall be designed ( i ) to recover for the public a portion of the value of the public spectrum resource made available for such commercial use , and ( ii ) to avoid unjust enrichment through the method employed to permit such uses of that resource. .

congress is overseeing the fcc's actions regarding implementation of this law .

public interest groups have also maintained pressure on the fcc to establish a fee program , arguing that commercial broadcasters should compensate the american people for the use of the dtv spectrum , and that fees should be required out of fairness to those who paid for spectrum at fcc auctions ( such as licensees for personal communications services ) .

in november 1998 , the fcc adopted rules to require broadcasters to pay 5% of their gross revenues from ancillary or supplementary uses of dtv spectrum for which they charge subscription fees or other specified compensation .

these include subscription video , software distribution , data transmissions , teletext , interactive materials , aural messages , paging services , and audio signals .

home shopping channels and "infomercials" are not subject to fees because the fcc did not consider them new services .

the fcc has initiated a separate proceeding to determine how much non - commercial stations can use the dtv spectrum for revenue - generating services , and whether they should have to pay spectrum fees .

some consumer groups say that the fcc's spectrum fees are not heavy enough on commercial broadcasters , arguing that most revenue will come from home shopping and infomercials .

they also warn that public broadcasters should not be over - regulated , arguing that too heavy a burden placed on public broadcasters could impair their long - term viability .

on october 11 , 2002 , the fcc ruled that noncommercial stations are required to use their entire digital capacity primarily for nonprofit , noncommercial , educational broadcast services .

however , the fcc also ruled that the statutory prohibition against advertising on noncommercial broadcasts does not apply to any ancillary or supplementary services presented on an excess dtv channels that does not constitute broadcasting .

the fcc further ruled that public stations must pay a fee of five percent of gross revenues generated by ancillary or supplementary services provided on their dtv service .

public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters in march 1997 , president clinton established an advisory committee on public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters , to make recommendations on how dtv licensees should compensate the public for their licenses .

committee members were selected from government , the broadcasting industry , academia , and consumer interest organizations .

after a series of public meetings in 1997 and 1998 , the committee submitted a set of recommendations to vice president gore in december 1998 .

the recommendations consist of mostly voluntary actions by broadcasters , including providing five minutes per night of air time for candidate - centered discourse in the 30 days prior to an election .

some panel members wanted to recommend mandating the free air time as well as other committee proposals .

the white house referred the report to the fcc , which on december 15 , 1999 , opened a notice of inquiry ( noi ) proceeding to solicit public comment on public interest obligations of tv broadcasters as they transition to dtv ( mm docket no .

99-360 ) .

after reviewing public comment , the fcc , in september 2000 , issued the dtv public interest form notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) which sought to require television broadcasters ( both digital and analog ) to disclose on a quarterly standardized form how they are serving the public interest .

also in september 2000 , the fcc issued the children ' s dtv public interest nprm ( mm docket no .

00-167 ) , which focused on the obligation of broadcasters to provide educational and informational programming for children , and the requirement that licensees limit advertising in children's programs .

the fcc has not yet issued any decisions in those proceedings .

given the significant amount of time that has passed , the second periodic review of fcc rules and policies affecting dtv conversion , issued on january 27 , 2003 , has asked for further comment on the public interest obligation issue .

on august 4 , 2004 , the fcc adopted a report and order ( fcc - 04-192 ) which implements several steps identified in the second periodic review .

however , no action was taken regarding public interest obligations .

on september 9 , 2004 , the fcc adopted a report and order addressing children's programming obligations for digital television broadcasters .

the fcc issued guidelines on the obligation to provide educational programming for children and the requirement that children are protected from excessive and inappropriate commercial messages .

specifically , the order increases the required amount of core educational programming proportionally to the amount of increased free video programming offered by the broadcaster on multicast channels .

regarding commercial limitations , the order concludes that commercial limits apply to all digital programming directed at children 12 and under , whether the programming is provided on a free or pay multicast channel .

two bills introduced into the 109 th congress — but not enacted — addressed the issue of public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters .

h.r .

2359 , introduced on may 12 , 2005 , by representative watson , sought to establish minimum public interest requirements for multicast digital television channels .

s. 616 , introduced on may 12 , 2005 by senator rockefeller , sought to require broadcasters providing digital television multicasts to increase educational and informational programming for children .

hearings held in the 110 th congress have addressed the issue of public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters .

on february 1 , 2007 , the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation held a hearing on the communications marketplace at which all five fcc commissioners testified .

in response to questions on public interest obligations of broadcasters , two opposing views emerged .

according to commissioner michael copps: [w]e have to really get serious about determining what those public interest obligations are going to be .

we're going into the digital age now .

we're giving the right to use that spectrum to broadcast six — or , if you have a duopoly , 12 — program streams in the community .

and we've done well on the mechanics of that , but the big question is , what do the american people have a right to expect from them ? .

can't they get more community affairs , local affairs and the things you're talking about ? .

 .

 .

 .

we ought to complete the proceedings that have already been begun .

we've had , since 1999 , pending a proceeding on the public interest obligations of dtv broadcasters .

and we've done the children's programming out of that , but all the other things are lying fallow , so we really need to tee that up and get done with that .

so , i absolutely share your sense of urgency .

there's no higher priority , i think , that the commission has .

on the other hand , fcc chairman kevin martin expressed reservations on placing certain obligations on broadcasters: well , you know , i guess i would say i'm hesitant to actually put specific requirements on the type of programming that they've got to put on .

there have been a lot of proposals that have been put forth — for example , that we should be requiring individual broadcasters to put free air time — a specific amount of free air time available to political candidates .

and there've been those who have come forward with this repeatedly in the context of the digital transition , saying we should make digital television broadcasters provide free air time to political candidates .

and i'm hesitant about saying that we're going to require broadcasters to provide that kind of free air time .

similarly , in response to questions from the house energy and commerce committee , both commissioners copps and adelstein called on the fcc to move forward on the dtv public interest obligation proceedings .

however , at the fcc oversight hearings held by the house energy and commerce committee on march 14 , 2007 , fcc chairman martin maintained that many of the rules that were part of that proceeding ( such as children's programming ) have already been addressed by the fcc .

chairman martin stated that the "one issue that's remaining is whether we're going to require minimum quantities of certain kinds of broadcasting .

i'm not convinced that that's necessary. .

tower siting one obstacle to the broadcasters' ability to offer dtv services has been the opposition from state and local communities over the building of new signal transmission towers .

in most cases , dtv antennas can be built on top of existing towers used for analog tv broadcasting .

if new towers are required , however , they must be constructed before the stations can transmit dtv signals .

in august 1997 , the fcc released an nprm ( fcc 97-182 ) to consider the preemption of state and local zoning restrictions on the siting , placement , and construction of dtv broadcasting facilities .

in its january 18 , 2001 report and order , the fcc concluded that "while some stations are facing problems with tower availability and / or local zoning issues , such problems do not seem to be widespread at this time. .

appendix b .

legislation in the 109 th congress related to digital television h.r .

1646 ( harmon ) .

homeland emergency operations response act .

prohibits any delay in reassigning 24 mhz in the upper 700 mhz band ( currently occupied by television broadcasters ) for public safety purposes , and requires those frequencies to be operational by january 1 , 2007 .

introduced april 14 , 2005 ; referred to committee on energy & commerce .

h.r .

2354 ( sensenbrenner ) .

tv consumer choice act .

prohibits the fcc from requiring digital tuners in television receivers .

introduced may 12 , 2005 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

2359 ( watson ) .

digital television accountability and governance enhancement act of 2005 ( dtv - age act ) .

establishes minimum public interest requirements for multicast digital television channels .

introduced may 12 , 2005 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

2512 ( regula ) .

digital opportunity investment trust act .

establishes a digital opportunity investment trust fund , part of which would provide public television digital educational grants to noncommercial educational television stations .

introduced may 19 , 2005 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce and to committee on education and the workforce .

h.r .

3032 ( gene green ) .

tv truth act of 2005 .

requires manufacturers and retailers to provide disclosure to consumers that analog televisions will no longer receive broadcast transmissions after the public broadcast spectrum changes to digital .

introduced june 22 , 2005 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

4569 ( sensenbrenner ) .

digital transition content security act of 2005 .

requires certain analog conversion devices to preserve digital content security measures .

introduced december 16 , 2005 ; referred to committee on judiciary .

h.r .

5252 ( barton ) .

communications act of 2006 .

senate commerce committee version contains a number of provisions related to the digital television transition , including mandating dtv consumer education , requiring large cable operators to provide to their customers their local broadcasters' digital signals in both digital and "downconverted" analog formats through february 14 , 2014 , and giving the fcc statutory authority to proceed with its broadcast flag rule , with certain limitations .

introduced may 1 , 2006 ; passed by house june 8 , 2006 .

reported by senate committee on commerce , science and transportation , september 29 , 2006 ( s.rept .

109 - 355 ) and placed on the senate legislative calendar .

h.r .

5264 ( engel ) .

digital television consumer education act .

directs manufacturers , retailers , and broadcasters to implement consumer education measures regarding the digital transition .

establishes a dtv transition federal advisory committee to lead the effort to educate the public about the digital television transition .

introduced may 2 , 2006 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

s. 616 ( rockefeller ) .

indecent and gratuitous and excessively violent programming and control act of 2005 .

requires broadcasters providing digital television multicasts to increase educational and informational programming for children .

introduced march 14 , 2005 ; referred to committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

s. 1023 ( dodd ) .

digital opportunity investment trust act .

establishes a digital opportunity investment trust fund , part of which would provide public television digital educational grants to noncommercial educational television stations .

introduced may 12 , 2005 ; referred to committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

s. 1268 ( mccain ) .

spectrum availability for emergency response and law enforcement to improve vital emergency services act ( save lives act ) .

designates digital transition date as december 31 , 2008 , and authorize $468 million — drawn from spectrum auction proceeds — to supply digital - to - analog converter boxes to over - the - air households with incomes not exceeding 200% of the poverty level .

introduced june 20 , 2005 ; referred to committee on commerce , science and transportation .

s. 1600 ( snowe ) .

digital translator and low power television transition act .

amends the communications act of 1934 to ensure full access to digital television in areas served by low - power television .

introduced july 29 , 2005 ; referred to committee on commerce , science and transportation .

s. 1932 ( gregg ) .

deficit reduction omnibus reconciliation act of 2005 .

title iii is the digital transition and public safety act of 2005 , which sets a digital transition deadline of february 17 , 2009 , and allocates up to $1.5 billion for a program to assist consumers in the purchase of converter boxes .

passed senate , november 3 , 2005 .

house agreed to conference report ( h.rept .

109 - 362 ) , december 19 , 2005 .

senate agreed to conference report with amendments , december 21 , 2005 .

house agreed to amended conference report , february 1 , 2006 .

p.l .

109 - 171 signed by president , february 8 , 2006 .

s. 2686 ( stevens ) .

communications , consumer's choice , and broadband deployment act of 2006 .

contains a number of provisions related to the digital television transition , including mandating dtv consumer education , requiring large cable operators to provide to their customers their local broadcasters' digital signals in both digital and "downconverted" analog formats through february 14 , 2014 , and giving the fcc statutory authority to proceed with its broadcast flag rule , with certain limitations .

introduced may 1 , 2006 ; referred to committee on commerce , science and transportation .

see h.r .

5252 for further action .

appendix c. legislation in the 110 th congress related to digital television h.r .

608 ( barton ) .

digital television consumer education act of 2007 .

requires the fcc to create a dtv public education program , to convene a dtv advisory group to coordinate consumer outreach , and to report to congress every six months on the progress of consumer education efforts .

requires ntia to report to congress every 90 days on the progress of the converter box coupon program .

requires retailers , cable and satellite operators , and broadcasters to take various measures to inform the public about the digital transition .

introduced january 22 , 2007 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

2566 ( engel ) .

national digital television consumer education act .

requires tv retailers and distributors to place signs next to all analog tv displays with an advisory that a set - top box is necessary after february 17 , 2009 , to continue using the tv .

also requires broadcasters to air public service announcements for more than a year before the transition to inform the public about the change and the set - top box subsidy program .

introduced june 5 , 2007 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

2829 ( serrano ) .

financial services and general government appropriations act , 2008 .

house appropriations committee report h.rept .

110 - 207 , passed by the house on june 28 , 2007 , would provide $2 million to the fcc for dtv consumer education .

senate appropriations committee report ( s.rept .

110 - 129 ) does not address dtv .

placed on senate legislative calendar , july 13 , 2007 .

h.r .

2917 ( butterfield ) .

transition education accountability report act of 2007 .

requires the fcc to submit a report to congress describing the measures taken by the fcc , ntia , and other federal agencies to inform the public of the transition to digital television .

introduced june 28 , 2007 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

3862 ( wynn ) .

preparing america's seniors for the digital transition act of 2007 .

establishes an interagency federal taskforce to educate older americans on the dtv transition .

requires retailers , cable and satellite operators , and broadcasters to take various measures to inform the public about the digital transition .

directs the fcc to award grants for dtv public education .

requires modifications in the digital - to - analog converter box program .

requires the ntia and the fcc to provide 90-day progress reports to congress .

introduced october 16 , 2007 ; referred to committee on energy and commerce .

s. 2125 ( kohl ) .

preparing america's seniors for the digital television transition act of 2007 .

establishes an interagency federal taskforce to educate older americans on the dtv transition .

requires retailers , cable and satellite operators , and broadcasters to take various measures to inform the public about the digital transition .

directs the fcc to award grants for dtv public education .

requires modifications in the digital - to - analog converter box program .

requires the ntia and the fcc to provide 90-day progress reports to congress .

introduced october 2 , 2007 ; referred to committee on commerce , science and transportation .

s. 2507 ( hutchison ) .

dtv border fix act of 2007 .

provides for television broadcast stations along the mexican border to continue analog broadcasts through 2014 , subject to certain conditions and limitations .

introduced december 18 , 2007 ; referred to committee on commerce , science and transportation .

