on february 20 , 2003 , the president signed into law the consolidated appropriations act forfy2003 , p.l .

108-7 , formerly h.j.res .

2 the act consolidates under one omnibusappropriations measure 11 appropriations acts , including the district of columbia appropriationsact for fy2003 , that the 107th congress failed to complete action on before it adjourned .

onfebruary 13 , 2003 , the house and senate approved the conference report ( h.rept .

108-10 ) accompanying h.j.res .

2 .

the senate approved its version of h.j.res .

2 on january 23 , 2003 .

a few weeks earlier , on january 8 , 2003 , the house approved its initialversion of h.j.res .

2 , extending until january 31 , 2003 , p.l .

107-229 , a continuingappropriations measure that froze at the fy2002 approved funding level appropriations for 11 ofthe 13 appropriations bill for fy2003 that had not yet been approved by congress , including thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 .

the house version of the bill included aprovision that would have allowed the district of columbia to spend $5.8 billion in locally raisedfunds while congress completed action on the proposed $517 million in federal contributions to thedistrict's fy2003 budget .

on november 13 , 2002 , congress passed h.j.res .

124 , acontinuing resolution extending until january 11 , 2003 , p.l .

107-229 , a continuing appropriationsmeasure .

the measure effectively postponed further congressional consideration of district ofcolumbia appropriations bill until the start of the 108th congress .

table 1 .

status of district of columbia appropriations: fy2003 ( 1 ) the 107th congressadjourned without the house or senate passing their respective versions of the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy2003 ( h.r .

5521 or s. 2809 ) .

the108th congress consideredthe fy2003 appropriations for the district of columbia as a part of an omnibus appropriations bill ( h.j.res .

2 ) which the senate amended and passed on january 23 , 2003 .

since the phaseout of the district of columbia financial responsibility andmanagement assistance authority ( the authority ) ( 1 ) in september 2001 , and thesigning of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , ondecember 21 , 2001 , the district of columbia government has continued to makeprogress in improving the delivery of services and in the city's long - term financialhealth ; however , issues remain .

most notably , the city faced a projected budgetshortfall of $323 million for fy2003 , if corrective action was not taken .

the cfo'scomprehensive annual financial report ( cafr ) , released in january 28 , 2002,certified that the city had achieved a $77.6 million budget surplus for fy2001,resulting in an accumulated general fund balance of $526 million .

this achievementmarks the city's fifth consecutive year of balanced or surplus budgets .

however , thesignificance of this achievement has been eroded by the city's projected fiscalimbalance of $323 million .

during the last year , the district of columbia's elected and appointed leadership addressed a number of other governance - related issues , including school reform andmedical services for the uninsured .

school reform , according to observers , is a work - in - progress .

the new boardof education also had to address a $40 million budgetdeficit and issues surrounding special education services and the certification ofcharter schools .

the downsizing of d.c. general hospital and the creation of analternative health care delivery system for the city's poor residents was , andcontinues to be , a contentious political issue .

the financial crisis facing the city'slead provider of health care for the city's indigent population , greater southeastcommunity hospital , has raised concerns about the viability of the new system thatreplaced the city's public hospital , d.c. general .

according to the city's cfo , the district faced a projected fy2003 budget deficit of $323 million .

this revenue shortfall can , in part , be attributable to theresidual effects of the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , which reduced tourism,convention , and business travel income .

other factors such as a slowing economy,lower returns on investments , and overspending in such areas as public educationalso have contributed to the looming deficit .

with a deadline of october 1 , 2002 , thestart of the 2003 fiscal year , city leaders , in order to avoid congressional interventionor the possible resurrection of the control board , developed an acceptable plan thatmay close the revenue and expenditure gap .

city officials considered several options aimed at addressing the projected $323 million deficit .

the mayor and city council considered action that would: reduce expenditures ; increase taxes and fees ; access the reserve fund ; or any combination of the three .

if city leaders had been unable to fashion a plan , the city faced the possibility that congress would have intervened and made the cuts .

according to press reportsat the time , , the most likely plan included significant cuts in the 10 agencies withthe largest budgets including education , health , and human services .

 ( 7 ) cuts in theseareas would affect children and the poor .

it could have also involved a significantreduction in the city's work force and the deferring of employee wage increases,planned capital expenditures or program increases .

the city leadership asked unionsrepresenting city employees to temporarily put off raises built into their contracts forfy2003 , which began october 1 , 2002 .

the raises average about 4% with policeraises at 5% .

according to estimates by the williams administration , if the unionsagreed to a 4-month delay , for instance , it could save the city $8 million to $10million .

 ( 8 ) if the city had chosen tax and fee increases , the mostly likely targets were increases on alcohol , hotel , and tobacco .

according to jack evans , chair of the citycouncil's finance and revenue committee , increases in general sales or propertytaxes could prove politically unpopular , since city residents are among the mostheavily taxed in the nation .

 ( 9 ) the city also consideredrolling back planned incometax relief .

another option considered was the use of the city reserve funds .

it should be noted that the district of columbia appropriations act of 2002 , p.l .

107-96 and thed.c .

code ( �1-204.50a ) require the district , when using reserve funds to close abudget gap in a given fiscal year , to replenish the fund the following fiscal year .

currently , the city's cfo projects annual budget deficits for the next 4 years that mayreach as much as $351 million in fy2006 .

 ( 10 ) .

in addition to the $15 million earmarked for emergency planning and security , the city's budget includes additional emergency planning and homeland securityrelated funding .

specially , the city requested $22 million for a unifiedcommunications system for regional emergencies .

the house bill includes $39.6million , including $19 million for a unified regional emergency communicationscenter .

table 4 .

emergency preparedness and security fundin .

whether to continue a needle exchange program funded with federal or district funds is one of several key policy issues that congress considered when reviewingthe district's appropriations for fy2003 .

the controversy surrounding funding aneedle exchange program touches on issues of home rule , public health policy , andgovernment sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs .

proponents of aneedle exchange program contend that such programs reduce the spread of hivamong illegal drug users by reducing the incidence of shared needles .

opponents ofthese efforts contend that such programs amount to government sanctioning of illegaldrugs by supplying drug - addicted persons with the tools to use them .

in addition,they contend that public health concerns raised about the spread of aids and hivthrough shared contaminated needles should be addressed through drug treatment andrehabilitation programs .

another view in the debate focused on the issue of homerule and the city's ability to use local funds to institute such programs free fromcongressional actions .

the prohibition on the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchange program was first approved by congress as section 170 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 .

the 1999 act did allow privatefunding of needle exchange programs .

the district of columbia appropriations actfor fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , continued the prohibition on the use of federal anddistrict funds for a needle exchange program , and restricted where privately fundedneedle exchange activities could take place .

section 150 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2001 made it unlawful to distribute any needle or syringefor the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug in any area in the city that is within1,000 feet of a public elementary or secondary school , including any public charterschool .

the provision was deleted during congressional consideration and passageof the district of columbia appropriations act of fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 .

the act alsoincluded a provision that allows the use of private funds for a needle exchangeprogram , but prohibits the use of both district and federal funds for such activities .

presently , only one entity , prevention works , a private nonprofit aids awarenessand education program , operates a privately funded needle exchange program .

thefy2002 district of columbia appropriations act requires such entities to track andaccount for the use of public and private funds .

district officials were seeking to lift the prohibition on the use of district funds for needle exchange programs .

however , p.l .

108-7 , prohibits the use of bothdistrict and federal funds for needle exchange programs .

the act allows the use ofprivate funds for needle exchange programs and requires private and public entitiesaccount for these funds separately .

the senate version of the district'sappropriations act , s. 2809 , would have allowed the use of localgovernment funds for needle exchange programs , but would have maintained theprohibition on the use of federal funds .

like the final conference provision , the house bill , h.r .

5521 , prohibited the use of both district and federalfunds for a needle exchange program .

the medical marijuana initiative provision in the district of columbia appropriations legislation is another issue that engenders controversy .

the districtof columbia appropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 , included a provision thatprohibited the city from counting ballots of a voter - approved initiative that wouldhave allowed the medical use of marijuana to assist persons suffering debilitatinghealth conditions and diseases including cancer and hiv infection .

congress's power to prohibit the counting of a medical marijuana ballot initiative was challenged in a suit filed by the d.c. chapter of the american civilliberties union ( aclu ) .

on september 17 , 1999 , district court judge richardroberts ruled that congress , despite its unique legislative responsibility for thedistrict under article i , section 8 of the constitution , did not possess the power tostifle or prevent political speech , which included the ballot initiative .

 ( 11 ) this rulingallowed the city to tally the votes on the november 1998 ballot initiative .

to preventthe implementation of the initiative , congress had 30 days to pass a resolution ofdisapproval from the date the medical marijuana ballot initiative ( initiative 59 ) wascertified by the board of elections and ethics .

language prohibiting theimplementation of the initiative was included in p.l .

106-113 , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy2000 .

opponents of the provision contend thatit and similar actions undercut the concept of home rule .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , includes a provision that continues to prohibit the district government from implementing theinitiative .

congress' power to block the implementation of the initiative was againchallenged in the courts .

on december 18 , 2001 , two groups , the marijuana policyproject and medical marijuana initiative committee , filed suit in u.s. district court,seeking injunctive relief in an effort to put a medical marijuana initiative on thenovember 2002 ballot .

the district's board of elections and ethics ruled that acongressional rider that has been included in the general provisions of each districtappropriation act since 1998 prohibits it from using public funds to do preliminarywork that would put the initiative on the ballot .

on march 28 , 2002 , a u.s. district court judge ruled that the congressional ban on the use of public funds to put such a ballot initiative before the voters wasunconstitutional .

 ( 12 ) the judge stated that the effectof the amendment was to restrictthe plaintiff's first amendment rights to engage in political speech .

the decision wasappealed by the justice department and on september 19 , 2002 , the u.s. court ofappeals for the district of columbia circuit reversed the ruling of the lower courtwithout comment .

the three - judge appeals court panel stated its decision would befully explained in an opinion to be issued at a later date .

the appeals court notedthat it issued its ruling on september 19 , 2002 , because that was the deadline forprinting ballots of the november general election .

consistent with provisions included in h.r .

5521 and s. 2809 , p.l .

108-7 includes a provision that continues the prohibitionagainst the implementation of the medical marijuana ballot initiative .

the public funding of abortion services for district of columbia residents is a perennial issue debated by congress during its annual deliberations on district ofcolumbia appropriations .

district officials cite the prohibition on the use of districtfunds as another example of congressional intrusion into local matters .

the districtof columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , included a provisionprohibiting the use of federal or district funds for abortion services , except in caseswhere the life of the mother is endangered or the pregnancy is the result of rape orincest .

this prohibition has been in place since 1995 , when congress approved thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 .

since 1979 , with the passage of the district of columbia appropriations act of 1980 , p.l .

96-93 , congress has placed some limitation or prohibition on the use ofpublic funds for abortion services for district residents .

from 1979 to 1988,congress restricted the use of federal funds for abortion services to cases where themother's life would be endangered or the pregnancy resulted from rape and incest .

the district was free to use district funds for abortion services .

when congress passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1989 , p.l .

100-462 , it restricted the use of district and federal funds for abortion servicesto cases where the mother's life would be endangered if the pregnancy was taken toterm .

the inclusion of district funds , and the elimination of rape or incest asqualifying conditions for public funding of abortion services , was endorsed bypresident reagan , who threatened to veto the district's appropriations act if theabortion provision was not modified .

 ( 13 ) in 1989,president bush twice vetoed thedistrict's fy1990 appropriations act over the abortion issue .

he signed p.l .

101-168 after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenuesto pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life was endangered .

 ( 14 ) the district successfully fought for the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l .

103-127 .

the fy1994 actalso reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the publicfunding of abortion services .

the district's success was short lived .

the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest .

p.l .

108-7 , continues the restrict on the use of district and federal funds for abortion services except in cases of rape or incest , or the life of the mother isendangered .

this is consistent with provisions included in the house and senate versions of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 .

p.l .

107-96 includes a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the use of district funds to implement its health care benefits expansion act .

 ( 15 ) theprovision permits unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples to register asdomestic partners .

under the health care benefits expansion act , which wasapproved by the city's elected leadership in 1992 , an unmarried person who registersas a domestic partner of a district employee hired after 1987 may be added to thedistrict employee's health care policy for an additional charge .

the act had not beenimplemented until 2002 because of a congressional prohibition first included in thegeneral provisions of district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 .

the city's health care benefits expansion act allows two unmarried and unrelated individuals to register as domestic partners with the district for the purposeof securing certain health and family related benefits , including hospital visitationrights .

under the law , district government employees enrolled in the district ofcolumbia employees health benefits program are allowed to purchase family healthinsurance coverage that would cover the employee's family members , includingdomestic partners .

in addition , a district employee registered as a domestic partnermay assume the additional cost of the family health insurance coverage for familymembers , which would include the employee's domestic partner .

opponents of the act believe that it is an assault on the institution of marriage , and that the act grants unmarried gay and heterosexual couples the same standing asmarried couples .

congressional proponents of lifting the ban on the use of districtfunds argue that the implementation of the act is a question of home rule and localautonomy .

supporters of the amendment noted that at least nine states , 136 localgovernments , and more than 4,000 companies offer benefits to domestic partners .

 ( 16 ) p.l .

108-07 , consistent with the provision included in the district's fy2002 appropriations act , includes a general provision that allows the use of district fundsto administer the program during fy2003 .

in passing the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 , congress included additional funds and authority to address issues related to special educationand public charter schools .

special education .

the district's special education program has long been characterized as ineffective and inefficient .

the system has been plagued by problems in transporting students to specialeducation facilities and in the timely evaluation of students who may have specialneeds .

delays in the period between the time a student is referred and assessedincreases the number of students placed in private educational institutions , whichadds to the cost of special education .

concern about the cost of these delaysprompted congress to include a provision in the district of columbia appropriationsact for fy1999 that extends the time period between referral and assessment of astudent with special education needs , as defined by the individuals with disabilitieseducation act ( idea ) ( 17 ) or the rehabilitationeducation act , ( 18 ) from 50 days to 120days .

 ( 19 ) p.l .

108-7 does not include the 120-dayspecial education evaluation andplacement time period included in previous appropriations acts .

in addition , the 1999 appropriations act for the district of columbia limited the amount of compensation payable to attorneys representing disabled students whoprevailed in an action brought against the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) under the idea .

subsequent appropriations acts for fy2000 and fy2001,also limited the amount of funds payable to attorneys successfully representingstudents seeking special education services .

the fy1999 act limited attorneys' feesto an hourly rate of $50 and a case ceiling of $1,300 ; the fy2000 limit was $60 perhour and a case ceiling of $1,560 ; and the fy2001 rate was $125 per hour with a caseceiling of $2,500 .

the district's fy2002 appropriations act lifted the ceiling , in part , in response to the argument that the ceiling placed a hardship on households with limitedfinancial resources .

district officials countered that the payment of attorney's feesdiverted significant funds from the provision of special education services , but wereunable to quantify the amount .

as a consequence the fy2002 appropriationsdirected the superintendent of the dcps to provide an itemized list of attorney's feesawarded plaintiffs who had prevailed in cases brought under the idea .

 ( 20 ) the actalso directed the general accounting office to report to the house and senateappropriations committees on attorneys' fees awarded to prevailing plaintiffsseeking remedy under the idea in excess of the payment ceiling established in theappropriations acts for fy1999 , fy2000 , and fy2001 .

 ( 21 ) copies of the gaoreports cited above may be obtained at the gao website .

 ( 22 ) section 144 of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 , limits to $4,000 , the amount of appropriated funds that may be used to pay attorneys feesfor actions brought against the dcps under the idea .

section 145 of the actrequires attorneys in special education cases brought under the idea to disclose allfinancial , corporate , legal , or other interest or relationships with any special educationdiagnostic services or schools to which the attorney may have referred any client .

charter schools .

faced with declining performance of the city's public schools , congress passed legislationallowing for the creation of public charter schools .

the district of columbia schoolreform act of 1995 granted to the district of columbia board of education , and anewly created district of columbia public charter school board authority toestablish charter schools .

these two entities act independently in granting charterschools , but combined the two boards can charter no more than 20 schools per year.charter schools can be established in one of three ways: private or existing publicschools may convert to charter schools , or a charter school may be created as a newstartup .

these schools are independent of the public school system , but like theirpublic school counterparts , they receive funds based on a uniform per pupil fundingformula .

the purpose of these independent public charter schools is to offer viablealternatives to students and parents .

currently , there are 39 public charter schoolsoperating in the district serving 14% of the school population .

p.l .

108-7 , includes several provisions in support of the public charter school movement in the district of columbia .

the act appropriates $17 million for charterschool activities including $8 million for a credit enhancement revolving fund , and$5 million for a facilities improvement fund .

in addition the act establishes theoffice of public charter school financing and support and amends the district ofcolumbia school reform act of 1995 to establish the charter school fund .

the actalso includes a provision directing the general accounting office to provide adetailed analysis of the district's and national efforts to establish adequate charterschools facilities .

these provisions demonstrate congress's continued support forthe district's charter school movement .

they are intended to address a major issueconfronting charter schools in the city - finding , financing , and renovating adequatefacilities .

