a broad range of plans that involve benefits to workers not in the form of cash currently exist,including a wide variety of plans that are for retirement purposes ( and that employees cannot receiveuntil they leave the firm ) .

these plans receive tax benefits in that contributions and earnings are nottaxed to individuals until received as pensions ( or payments on separation ) .

these plans fall into twobasic types: defined benefit plans ( where workers are guaranteed a certain benefit related to earningsand years of service ) and defined contribution plans , where employees receive benefits based on thesize of assets and accumulated earnings .

for most types of plans , contributions to these plans aretypically made by employers , and thus do not permit employees to choose between them and cashwages .

for a variety of reasons , defined benefit plans , which once dominated the pension landscape , have been in a decline over the past quarter of a century and defined contribution plans are on theincrease .

this rise in defined contribution plans particularly reflects a popular form of definedcontribution plan: a 401 ( k ) plan , where individual accounts are maintained , both employers andemployees contribute , and employee contributions are voluntary .

employees have some choice inthe allocation of their own contributions .

employer stock may be one of the choices ; employercontributions may also be made in the form of employer stock .

while all pension plans are subject to regulations of some type , the restrictions are greatest for defined benefit plans .

defined benefit plans are also covered by pension insurance , which insuresagainst total loss of assets .

some of the restrictions on plans , particularly defined benefit plans , weredesigned to insure sound investments and to make sure that the plans were not simply a tax shelterfor high ranking employees and managers .

only defined benefit plans have restrictions on theamount of employer stock that can be held ( 10% ) .

for defined contribution plans , employees bearthe risk of loss of investment or low returns .

some types of plans with retirement features ( employee stock ownership plans , or esops ) must hold assets primarily in the form of employerstock .

plans may be combined .

tax benefits are also provided for acquiring employer stock that is not restricted to retirement plans .

these benefits include benefits for stock options and stock purchase plans: the former aregenerally directed to high ranking employees and managers , while the latter are generally availableto all employees .

 ( 1 ) .

why should firms pay employee compensation in the form of pension or profit sharing plans ( or other fringe benefits ) rather than in cash ? .

does the existence of these plans hinge solely orlargely on tax benefits ? .

in this section we briefly discuss several reasons that firms might desire topay compensation , or that individuals might like to receive it , in the form of pensions or stock .

thefirst three reasons are largely associated with defined benefit pension plans while the last two areassociated with profit - sharing or stock ownership plans .

defined contribution plans not in the formof stock may , indeed , have largely arisen from a desire to exploit tax benefits , as it is difficult todiscern another reason for using them .

the previous section has suggested private motives even in the absence of tax benefits fordefined benefit pension plans and for stock ownership plans , but there does not appear to be a strongprivate rationale for defined contribution plans not held in the form of employer stock .

clearlyanother reason for pension and profit sharing plans that may play a crucial role in encouraging theseplans , particularly defined contribution plans not invested in employer stock , is the tax benefitsassociated with them .

amounts contributed to a pension plan and their earnings are not subject totax until received as pensions , usually many years into the future .

the combination of deferral of taxon the initial contribution and deferral of tax on earnings is the equivalent of an exemption ofearnings from tax , and is thus a valuable tax benefit .

why should the government intervene with tax subsidies ( and regulations ) to shape the compensation package ? .

and why should it intervene with mixed signals , including both benefitsfor and restrictions on ownership of employer stock in pension plans ? .

the first set of rationales for supporting pension plans are also are among the reasons for establishing social security: adverse selection in annuity markets and failure of individualoptimization ( failure to save a desirable amount ) .

 ( 3 ) adverse selection in annuity markets occursbecause individuals expecting to have a shorter life span will avoid the annuities market , therebymaking the annuities unattractive for the average individual .

this rationale would justify taxsubsidies to pension plans that provide retirement annuities , early vesting , and mandates for broadcoverage of employees .

 ( the latter rule is probably necessary in any case to prevent the tax benefitsfrom becoming a tax shelter for highly compensated employees. ) .

of course , it is not clear thatindividuals do not save enough , and it is not clear why using resources ( in the form of reduced taxes ) to encourage a private pension system that covers about half of workers should be preferred todevoting those resources to an expansion of social security .

the entire pension system has been shifting away from plans that address these goals: many defined contribution plans have a lump - sum payoff option , and defined benefit plans have beenincreasingly displaced by defined contribution plans .

401 ( k ) plans , which have become verypopular , allow voluntary , not mandatory , contributions .

outside of certain defined benefit plans,the current systems have simply become primarily ways to obtain tax benefits .

of course , arguments are made that these tax benefits have encouraged saving , but neither economic theory nor empirical evidence has confirmed that view .

 ( 4 ) in any case , this rationalesuggests that prudence in investment is important to encourage .

in that case , many of the proposalsfor revision , including limits on employer stock holding in any type of pension plan , and reducingor eliminating any required holding period , might be justified .

of course , such an approach alsosuggests that employee stock ownership plan subsidies be discontinued or modified .

some of the rules made to insure safe and broadly available worker pensions have been in conflict with solutions to other economic problems .

for example , as noted earlier , a marketeconomy tends to under - invest in human capital .

there are obviously massive governmentinterventions through direct spending , low - interest loans , and tax benefits to provide for formaleducation and training .

pension rules may , however , have undermined the use of defined benefitpensions for encouraging spending on on - the - job training .

for example , rules mandating earlyvesting are in conflict with objectives to increase on - the - job training ( objectives that might be worthyof pursuit by the government as well ) , although they may be appropriate to increase pension coverageand employee security .

similarly , non - discrimination requirements have been used to prevent theuse of the tax subsidies as a tax shelter for highly compensated employees and increase coverage,even though on - the - job training benefits may not be uniform across employees .

diversification ofassets is consistent , however , with both government and private rationales for defined benefitpension plans .

economic problems arising from principal - agent costs or worker monitoring costs may beargued to justify government subsidies to stock ownership plans to increase efficiency beyond whatprivate markets may do .

however , they are unlikely to be addressed by ownership of employerstock among rank and file employees of large companies , where most tax subsidies for pensions aredirected .

moreover , encouraging practices that make companies resistant to takeover may reducerather than increase economic efficiency .

nor is it clear that stock ownership plans benefits inpreserving cash flow outweigh the possible negative effects of using stock as compensation onstockholder information .

thus , the justification for government subsidies to stock ownership is notreally established .

as discussed above , the discussion of justifications for government intervention based oneconomic problems suggests rationales for traditional pension plans , particularly those with definedbenefits , but do not necessarily suggest a justification of tax subsidies for plans such as 401 ( k ) plans,where participation by employees is voluntary .

these subsidies may not even increase retirementsaving .

however , given that subsidies do exist , there does appear to be a case for increasing thesafety of investments by limiting investment in employer stock , while the rationale for supportingemployer stock ownership plans appears weak .

if limits on ownership are to be imposed , how should constraints work ? .

it would appear better for administrative and other reasons to impose the limits on the share of contributions made ratherthan the share of assets .

a reason for limiting the share of assets in employer stock in defined benefitplans is in part because of pension insurance and because of limits on excess contributions , issuesthat do not exist for 401 ( k ) plans .

in the case of a defined contribution plan , a successful employerstock may simply become a larger part of the asset base because it is appreciating rapidly and forcedsales may not be sensible .

other legislative changes might be requirements that employees be ableto sell employer contributed stock immediately or within a few years ( which is proposed in somelegislation ) , disallowing deductions for stock contributions until employees are allowed to sell , oreven prohibiting these types of contributions altogether .

it is not clear whether these restrictions willbe successful , however , if esops remain as an option .

another legislative proposal that has been made to increase the security of individual investment plans ( which might be used instead of explicit restrictions ) is to require firms to provideinvestment advice , since firm managers may have a conflict of interest .

of course , investmentadvice is not costless , and it could significantly discourage the use of these plans in the case of smallfirms .

moreover , virtually any independent investment advisor would counsel against holding alarge part of retirement assets in a single stock , but many advisors would suggest taking on generalstock market risk .

if explicit restrictions are imposed on ownership of a single stock , suchindividual advice might not be necessary .

alternatively , a general public information campaign maybe considered .

moreover , the publicity associated with the enron bankruptcy , along with other firmfailures and the decline in the stock market , may be adequate to alert individuals to the need forportfolio diversification .

one criticism that has been made of these proposals is that firms may respond by reducing their contributions .

it is not clear that such a reduction would occur or should be a problem if it did ( andmany contributions are currently made in cash rather than stock ) .

if stock contributions have anyvalue , then they are likely to substitute for cash wages .

it is not clear that policy should be concernedabout employer matches in a risky asset as a substitution for cash wages , particularly when theparticipation is voluntary , both on the part of individuals contributing to plans and firms setting upplans .

the beneficiaries in both cases are only part of the population ( and the more affluent part ) .

an argument could be made that the revenue derived from increased taxes on cash wages might bebetter used for other purposes .

