legislation to rewrite and reauthorize the export administration act of 1979 ( eaa ) ( p.l .

96-72 ) may be considered in the 111 th congress .

in the 110 th congress , several pieces of legislation were introduced that addressed various aspects of the current system , including penalties , enforcement , diversion or transhipment of goods , and the integration of export control data into the automated export system .

the eaa provides the statutory authority for export controls on sensitive dual - use goods and technologies , items that have both civilian and military applications , including those items that can contribute to the proliferation of nuclear , biological and chemical weaponry .

the eaa , which originally expired in 1989 , periodically has been reauthorized for short periods of time , with the last incremental extension expiring in august 2001 .

at others times , including currently , the export licensing system created under the authority of eaa has been continued by the invocation of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) ( p.l .

95-223 ) .

the eaa is the statutory authority for the export administration regulations ( ear ) , which are administered by the bureau of industry and security ( bis ) located in the department of commerce .

these regulations establish the framework for regulating exports of dual - use , potentially sensitive commodities , software , computers , and technology .

exports are restricted by item , country , and recipient entity .

the eaa , which was written and amended during the cold war , focuses on the regulation of exports of those civilian goods and technology that have military applications ( dual - use items ) .

export controls under the eaa were based on strategic relationships , threats to u.s. national security , international business practices , and commercial technologies many of which have changed dramatically in the last 20 years .

some members of congress and most u.s. business representatives see a need to liberalize u.s. export regulations to allow american companies to engage more fully in international competition for sales of high - technology goods .

other members and some national security analysts contend that liberalization of export controls over the last decade has contributed to foreign threats to u.s. national security , that some controls should be tightened , and that congress should weigh further liberalization carefully .

this report discusses the export administration act in terms of its evolution in the 20 th century , its major features including the types of controls authorized by the act , the commerce control list and export licensing procedures , and issues concerning the maintenance of export controls under ieepa .

it then highlights several controlled commodities that have been featured prominently in export control discussions .

finally , it discusses competing business and national security perspectives concerning several of more contentious themes in the export control debate: the controllability of technology , the effectiveness of multilateral control regimes , the organization of the export control system , and the impact of export controls on the u.s. economy and business .

export controls in time of war have been an element of u.s. policy for almost one hundred years .

the end of wwii , however , ushered in a new era in which export control policy would become an extensive peacetime undertaking .

the start of the cold war led to a major refocusing of export control policy on the soviet - bloc countries .

enactment of the export control act of 1949 ( p.l .

81-11 ) was a formal recognition of the new security threat and of the need for an extensive peacetime export control system .

the 1949 act identified three possible reasons for imposing export controls .

short - supply controls were to be used to prevent the export of scarce goods that would have a deleterious impact on u.s. industry and national economic performance .

foreign policy controls were to be used by the president to promote the foreign policy of the united states .

the broad issues of regional stability , human rights , anti - terrorism , missile technology , and chemical and biological warfare have come to be controlled under this rubric .

national security controls were to be used to restrict the export of goods and technology , including nuclear non - proliferation items , that would make a significant contribution to the military capability of any country that posed a threat to the national security of the united states .

coincident with the establishment of the post - war u.s. export control regime was the establishment of a multilateral counterpart involving our nato allies .

the large amount of critical technology being transferred from the united states to the nato allies , and the growing capability for technological development by the allies themselves required the establishment of a multilateral control regime .

toward this end , the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls ( cocom ) was established in 1949 .

cocom controls were not a mirror image of u.s. controls but generally did reflect a uniformly high level of restrictions .

with little change in the perceived threat , the export control act was renewed largely without amendment in 1951 , 1953 , 1956 , 1958 , 1960 , 1962 , and 1965 .

with the onset of the u.s. - soviet era of "detente" in the late 1960s , however , the first serious reexamination and revision of the u.s. export control system occurred .

at this time , the growing importance of trade to the u.s. economy and those of our allies began to exert significant political pressure for some liberalization of export controls .

congress passed the export administration act of 1969 to replace the near - embargo characteristic of the export control act of 1949 .

the continued shift of policy toward less restrictive export controls continued in the renewal of the act in 1974 and 1977 .

the act was comprehensively rewritten in 1979 , and this act forms the basis of the export control system today .

it was amended in 1985 , and some moderate further liberalization occurred in the following years .

the collapse of the soviet union in 1989 , an event some have partially attributed to the success of u.s. cold war export control policy , marked a dramatic change in the nature of the external threat the united states .

beginning with the george h.w .

bush administration , the export control system has been reduced in scope and streamlined , but the basic structure of the law remains intact .

there are many who see a need to revamp the act , whether to enhance exports , to shift the focus to current national security threats , or to increase penalties for violations .

the dissolution of cocom in 1994 and its replacement by the wassenaar arrangement in 1997 , also significantly changed the export control environment .

this new multilateral arrangement is more loosely structured than cocom and members do not have the authority to block transactions of other members .

generally more liberal control practices abroad raise important questions about the ultimate effectiveness of u.s. export controls ( under either the current or a revised eaa ) in achieving national security objectives and the fairness of unilateral controls to american industry .

congress has not been able to agree on measures to reform the export administration act that regularly have been introduced since the 101 st congress .

the export control process was continued from 1989 to 1994 by temporary statutory extensions of eaa and by invocation of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

thereafter , export controls were continued for six years under the authority of executive order no .

12924 of august 19 , 1994 , issued under ieepa authority .

many of those who favor reforming the act , whether to liberalize or to tighten controls , contend that operating under ieepa imposes constraints on the administration of the export control process and makes it vulnerable to legal challenge , thus undermining its effectiveness .

legislation passed by the house and senate and signed by the president on november 13 , 2000 ( p.l .

106-508 ) extended the eaa of 1979 until august 20 , 2001 , temporarily removing the need to operate the export control system under ieepa powers .

since then , export control authority has again been operating under ieepa provisions pursuant to executive order 13222 , issued august 17 , 2001 .

several principles and concepts have been common to the eaa and to efforts to renew and reauthorize the legislation .

generally , these provisions set out the types of export controls authorized ( including national security , foreign policy and short supply controls ) , licensing procedures , the license review process , and penalty and enforcement procedures , the latter currently subject to ieepa authority .

controversial exports have included telecommunications and advanced electronic equipment , precision machine tools ( especially computer assisted machines ) , guidance technology ( including global positioning system technology ) , aerospace and jet engine technology , synthetic materials ( especially high - strength , light - weight , heat - and corrosion - resistant materials ) , specialized manufacturing and testing equipment ( including mixers , high temperature ovens , heat and vibration simulators ) .

in the last few years , congressional attention has focused on the following goods and technologies .

a principal theme in debates on export administration legislation is the tension between commercial and national security concerns .

these concerns are not mutually exclusive , and thus it is often difficult to characterize opposing camps .

for example , nearly everyone favors reform of the current system , yet no one considers themselves opposed to national security .

generally , however , many who favor reform of the current export control accept the business perspective that such reform would assist u.s. business to compete in the global marketplace .

others view the issue more from a national security perspective .

to this group , reform should be concerned less with the abilities of u.s. industry to export and more with effective controls placed on potential exports to countries that threaten the security of the united states , terrorists , violators of human rights , and proliferators of weapons of mass destruction .

from these different perspectives , controversies arise regarding the controllability of technology , the effectiveness of multilateral regimes , the bureaucratic structure of the licensing process and the impact of export controls on the u.s. economy .

the foreign availability and mass market provisions of eaa reauthorization legislation , and the underlying concept of the controllability of technology , have proved controversial in the eaa debate .

industry groups that have taken an active position on legislation to replace the 1979 eaa have considered the adoption of these provisions as a key benefit of potential eaa legislation .

the foreign availability and mass market concepts are integral to their contention that the flow of technology cannot be effectively controlled , and that u.s. dominance of cutting - edge technology can no longer be assumed .

according to their arguments , unilateral controls will not stop other countries from obtaining advanced technology .

advocates of this viewpoint claim that "countries of concern" will simply obtain this technology from other nations .

adherents to this view regard current multilateral controls on dual - use articles as ineffectual .

from this perspective , only american business suffers from the unilateral nature of u.s. export controls .

in the process , foreign business wins new markets or gains an incentive to enter new markets .

according to the industry position , unilateral export controls are also becoming increasingly unworkable as the economy undergoes globalization .

the current export control system is predicated on goods being manufactured or assembled in one country .

in many industries , however , component parts are manufactured worldwide and are considered commodities .

if these parts are not available from one source on a timely basis , they can be obtained elsewhere .

purchasing managers at daimler chrysler aerospace , for example , reportedly have been instructed to reduce dependence on american components for defense and space technology products because of delays associated with american licensing procedures .

other participants in the export control debate are concerned about the mass market and foreign availability arguments advanced by industry proponents .

critics charge that the mass market standard would effectively nullify the whole u.s. control regime by decontrolling any item that met the criteria under the law .

they assert that virtually any product , including dual - use items used for proliferation purposes , could qualify for mass market status .

similarly , as one non - proliferation advocate testified regarding eaa legislation in the 106 th congress , the foreign availability criterion would allow the sale of "anything a controlled country can purchase from a rogue buyer. .

a related argument made by industry is that national security is enhanced by robust export industries .

this argument is predicated on the changing nature of defense procurement , research and development .

during the cold war , the formative period of the current export control regime , the military conducted considerably technical research on its own and provided funds for research and development .

now that situation is largely reversed .

the military now purchases many items 'off - the - shelf' and relies to a greater extent on commercial applications .

industry argues that it is in the national security to sell current technology to generate funds to develop future technology .

if american firms are competitively hindered because of export controls , the argument goes , foreign firms will gain market share , increase profits , invest more in r&d , shrink and possibly surpass our technological lead .

these circumstances , in turn , potential could affect the quality of the technology available for national security purposes .

thus , industry argues it needs a streamlined export process , one that will not needlessly impede exports .

critics of industry's national security position reject this argument .

they maintain that the united states does not promote its national security by selling advanced technology to potentially hostile states .

this technology , if sold to a regime of dubious stability , could be used against the united states or allies in the future .

proponents of this argument point to the case of iraq , which received u.s. weaponry in the 1980s when saddam hussein was considered a useful counterweight to iran .

subsequently , this technology was used against kuwait and allied forces in the persian gulf war .

reliance on the civilian sector for r&d , they claim , is a policy decision brought about by declining defense budgets in the 1990s .

some further argue that r&d that advances defense capabilities should be funded within the defense department if it is necessary to maintain controls on technology to certain nations .

industry groups and some other observers have used the rapid rise in computing power as an illustration both of the uncontrollable nature of technology and the inability of the export control system to account for such innovation .

according to one national security analyst , attempting to control computing power is not "feasible or effective. .

he maintains that the restraint of computer trade is self - defeating because it cedes markets and profits that could be used for r&d .

increasing computing speeds combined with networking advances have blurred the distinction between super - computers and commodity computers .

microprocessors that individually comply with export regulations can be linked together to create servers with mtops capabilities that breach export thresholds .

if enough processors are linked together , they can create a parallel processing system with capabilities that approach those of a super - computer .

the defense science board noted that the ability to cluster commodity computers in order to multiply computing power erodes the ability to restrict access to high - performance computing , even if high - performance stand - alone machines can be controlled .

other observers believe the united states can restrict access to the highest computer technology by limiting exports .

they maintain that american - made computers are perceived as superior , and thus carry greater cachet than products from other nations .

they note that the purchase of an american - made computer product also buys superior networking and service , often at a better price .

control advocates maintain that these distinctions are significant , that qualitative differences are important .

in addition , networking a parallel processing system , as those without access to advanced computing technology must do to increase computing capability , presents additional challenges distinct from those faced by engineers of commodity computers .

one policy that has been attempted to monitor and verify the end - use of controlled goods is the post - shipment verification requirement ( psv ) on the export of hpcs mandated by sec 1213 of ndaa98 ( see above ) .

this section requires that a psv be made for computers destined for computers controlled to tier iii destinations , including china , russia , india , pakistan , israel and other nations in areas of regional instability .

lawmakers have been especially concerned with exports of hpcs to the people's republic of china .

the gao has reported that china has restricted access to facilities that contain u.s. hpc exports .

it has also found that bis has made limited efforts to monitor or to verify compliance with the terms and conditions specified by the export license .

reportedly , the difficulty in monitoring the end - use of hpc exports in china has been exacerbated by the close ties that chinese state owned enterprises have with the chinese military .

the united states participates in several multilateral export control regimes .

the principal multilateral regime related to dual - use goods and technology is the wassenaar arrangement ( wa ) on dual - use goods and munitions .

the wa was created in 1996 and is the successor organization to the coordinated committee ( cocom ) , the cold war era dual - use control regime that ended in 1994 .

the wa dual - use control list is generally consistent with u.s. ccl items subject to national security controls .

the united states also participates in four proliferation related control regimes: the australia group ( chemical and biological weapons and precursors ) ; the missile technology control regime , and the nuclear suppliers group .

generally , these groups are characterized by national discretion , a common control list , and regular reporting requirements .

each group has formulated a common control list and member nations control the exports of those goods under their own national laws , a policy know as national discretion .

unlike cocom , however , these organizations do not perform a review function prior to the grant of a national export license .

the regime's members do pledge disclosure of export licensing decisions , and pledge consultation on sensitive export licenses .

some groups adhere to a "no undercut" provision — that is , a member state will not license the sale of an item in which a license has been denied by another state .

however , these groups operate by consensus and are hampered by limited institutional structures .

some observers contend that the wassenaar arrangement , in particular , is ineffective because it relies on consensus of member states .

the necessity for consensus , critics charge , results in a level of control acceptable to all .

its minimal reporting requirements mandate notification only that an item has been sold , thus preventing effective pre - export consultation among member states .

industry representatives stress the necessity of effective multilateral controls .

they argue that export controls are effective only if they are adhered to by all states capable of exporting a given technology .

for example , the machine tool industry has been at the forefront in criticizing the unilateral nature of our export policies , especially concerning exports to china .

it notes that there is no consensus among wassenaar arrangement countries on the proper limits of technology transfer to china .

 ( indeed , no country is explicitly targeted by wassenaar. ) .

stringent domestic controls combined with minimal multilateral constraints only damage american companies , according to industry spokesmen .

they fault the u.s. for having an overly rigorous licensing policy towards china , without noticeably pursuing a strategy to convince our allies to follow our lead .

proponents of tighter export restrictions note that america traditionally has taken the lead in export controls and non - proliferation efforts .

these efforts included the original eaa , adopted in 1949 , and the establishment of cocom .

they argue that efforts to strengthen cocom's successor regime , the wassenaar arrangement , cannot succeed if washington itself is loosening export restrictions .

thus , the united states must take the lead in order to convince other nations to follow the u.s. example .

adherents of this viewpoint argue that the successful negotiating strategy in these multilateral fora is to adopt controls first and then persuade other countries to follow suit .

hence in their view , an export control strategy pegged solely on the policies of other nations , negotiated by consensus , is ineffectual and harmful to national security .

both industry spokesmen and advocates of heightened export controls agree that the multilateral controls need to be strengthened .

yet , to do this requires consensus on which goods and which countries represent a threat .

there does seem to be agreement among western nations to restrict dual - use items to a limited number of 'countries of concern,' yet consensus breaks down with regard to other states , notably china .

the export control dilemma in this context becomes clear .

without consensus on a particular target country , the question becomes whether the united states should impose controls unilaterally .

one then needs to determine either: which non - proliferation or other foreign policy goals are sufficiently important to offset possibly damaging american business , and possibly costing american jobs ; or how large an economic benefit would justify risking important national security goals .

debate over export controls has often focused on china .

the dilemma that encapsulates u.s. export control policy to china is how to benefit from the potentially vast chinese market and low chinese production costs while minimizing the risk to u.s. security interests of exporting sensitive dual - use technologies to china .

some representatives of the business community have argued that u.s. export control policy toward china is too stringent .

they claim such controls have hampered technology transfers to china in the past few years while the controls of u.s. allies have not .

they reported that chinese companies will not ask u.s. companies to bid on sales because of the delays associated with the u.s. licensing process .

as one industry spokesman has testified: "the result has been that the chinese are denied nothing in terms of high technology , but u.s. firms have lost out in a crucial market .

this serves neither our commercial nor our strategic interests. .

however , other analysts and several members of congress have expressed grave concerns about china's dual - use technology acquisitions .

they cite findings of the cox commission that china evaded existing export controls to illegally obtain missile design and satellite technology and that china has circumvented end - user controls on high - performance computers .

according to this view , the commission's findings show the need for both tightened controls and greater enforcement of export controls against china .

in addition , china has been implicated in several nuclear , missile , and chemical proliferation activities .

on june 19 , 2007 , bis published the final rule entitled "revisions and clarification of export and re - export controls for the people's republic of china" ( 72 fed .

reg .

33646 ) .

the final rule is composed of three parts: a new licensing requirement for certain products for military end - use in china , a validated end - user ( veu ) program , and a requirement to obtain an end - user statement for certain licensed products .

the proposed rule has been driven by the concern that the export of commercial technology to certain end - users is undermining the arms embargo that the united states and others maintain against china .

others , including industry , have questioned the scope and efficacy of these new controls .

the new licensing policy has two distinct components: the establishment of new military end - use controls for the prc and a revised license review policy for national security controlled items destined for the prc .

the aspect that has received the most attention is the establishment of new military end - use controls on 20 product categories consisting of 31 export control classification numbers ( eccn ) .

currently , these items are controlled primarily for anti - terrorism reasons , thus a license is required only for exports to countries determined to be state sponsors of terrorism ( cuba , iran , north korea , sudan , syria ) .

under the new rule , bis will require a license for the export , reexport , or in country transfer of these items if the exporter knows , has reason to know , or is informed by bis that the item is or may be intended for military end - uses in the prc .

the final rule also revises the long - standing licensing policy for national security controlled items destined for the prc contained in the ear , part 742.4 ( b ) ( 7 ) .

it clarifies that there is a presumption of denial for license applications to export , reexport , or transfer items that would make a direct and significant contribution to the prc's military capabilities in certain key weapons systems .

the second component of the final rule also increases the exemption threshold for obtaining end - use statements ( eus ) from the ministry of foreign commerce ( mofcom ) of the prc .

the prc requires that mofcom issue an eus before bis can conduct a pre - license check or post - shipment verification for an export .

a u.s. exporter must request that the importer obtain the eus for a license application because the bis inspection is often a statutory or regulatory pre - requisite for approving some applications .

the rule increases the amount of the value of the license exempted from the eus requirement from $5,000 to $50,000 for most goods to the prc .

however , it expands the eus requirement to cover all license applications to the prc reaching this threshold .

previously , eus were required only for items under national security controls .

the veu is the third component of the china rule .

the veu establishes a method by which trusted prc civilian end - users can be nominated for the program , and , if approved by bis , the eligible end - users may receive items eligible under the program without a license .

the rule sets up an applications process by which an end - user can be nominated for the program .

in approving a candidate for veu status , the erc will evaluate the entity's exclusive engagement in civilian end - use activities , its compliance record with u.s. export controls , its capability to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of the veu authorization , agreement to on - site review prior to approval and subsequently to ensure adherence to veu conditions , and its relationship with u.s. and foreign companies .

on september 11 , 2007 , china's minister of foreign commerce ( mofcom ) announced that any company seeking veu status would need authorization from mofcom before allowing plant or records inspections .

not all items on the ccl are eligible for export under this program .

items controlled for crime control or missile technology by the ear do not qualify for export under this program due to statutory reasons .

in addition , not all items that are eligible for export under this program can be exported to all validated end - users .

the approved veu application will be accompanied by a list of items that can be exported to the end - user , and this list can be expanded or contracted by the erc .

once approved , the veu can import approved items from any exporter , not just the nominee .

according to bis , the proposal would streamline licensing for certain companies for whom exporters routinely request and receive licenses for the same product over time .

thus , resources that currently process these routine applications could be diverted to staff more problematic license applications .

on october 2 , 2007 , bis announced the expansion of the veu program to eligible companies in india , and general electric india was named as the first eligible company on june 17 , 2009 .

on october 19 , 2007 , bis announced the first five veu companies: applied materials china , national semiconductor , boeing hexcel avic i joint venture , semiconductor manufacturing international corporation ( smic ) , and shanghai hua hong nec corporation ( hhnec ) .

bis reported that these companies had imported licensed goods valued at $54.3 million in 2006 .

in january 2008 , the wisconsin project on nuclear arms control charged in a report that two of the entities , avic i and hhnec , present diversion risks through their corporate affiliations with government - owned companies that do business with the chinese military .

the wisconsin project also contend that some of these entities' affiliates have run afoul of u.s. proliferation sanctions and export control laws .

then bis undersecretary mario mancuso responded to the report by maintaining that the companies had a "demonstrable history of using u.s. technology in the past...we know a lot about these companies and know a lot about how they use the technologies they are authorized to receive through veu .

these technologies were previously available to these companies by license , and [the veu] judgment was based on data , not conjecture. .

controversy regarding the veu has not abated .

a gao study of september 2008 recommended the suspension of the veu program with china because bis has not been able to reach a veu - specific inspection agreement with china for conducting on - site reviews of validated end - users .

nor has the agency developed criteria for selecting candidates for on - sites , or the procedures for conducting the on - site review itself , according to gao .

commerce notes that it has conducted checks under the pre - existing 2004 end - use verification understanding ( euvu ) .

however , checks conducted under this system require the aforementioned mofcom end - use statement , running counter to the trade facilitation rationale of the program , and if the companies do not voluntarily seek an eus from mofcom , then an inspection cannot take place .

on january 13 , 2009 , bis announced full implementation of the veu to china "with agreement on procedures to ensure the program's secure and efficient operation. .

more recently , at a june 4 , 2009 , house energy and commerce committee hearing , representative markey cited information from the wisconsin project claiming that another veu approved entity , aviza technology china , shared an address with a state - owned firm that was sanctioned by the state department in december 2006 for illicit sales to iran and syria .

as noted earlier , the bureau of industry and security ( bis ) within the department of commerce ( doc ) is responsible for regulating dual - use exports .

however , other agencies also provide input into the licensing process .

bis consults with other members of the national security community on license applications and commodity classifications .

the defense technology security agency in the department of defense conducts national security reviews for license applications referred from commerce and state .

the department of energy also reviews dual - use license applications referred by bis for nuclear uses and nuclear end - users , and it and the nuclear regulatory commission license exportation of nuclear materials .

in addition , the directorate of defense trade controls ( ddtc ) at the state department administers the international traffic in arms regulations .

through the u.s .

munitions list , ddtc controls the export of weapons and military technology .

industry leaders identify several problems with the existing licensing system .

first , overlapping jurisdiction between the commerce and state departments with regard to certain dual - use products makes it unclear where the exporters need to apply for licenses .

second , extended time periods required for license approval compromise the reliability of u.s. suppliers and make it hard for manufacturers and customers to plan ahead .

third , the licensing system does not reflect advances in technology , foreign availability of dual - use items , and the economic impact of export controls on the industrial base .

finally , there is no opportunity for judicial review of licensing decisions .

others consider foreign availability and economic impact to be important considerations , yet secondary to national security .

export administration officials claim that they conduct thorough , fair , and expeditious license reviews .

time is required to check proposed export items against lists of controlled items , check end users and end uses against lists of suspect recipients , and coordinate with several government agencies .

officials say they must be able to "stop the clock" to obtain additional information and investigate certain issues on a case - by - case basis to insure that sensitive technologies do not find their way into the wrong hands .

some analysts who see national security as the primary purpose of the export control regime question whether bis belongs in the department of commerce .

they claim that doc's mission is mostly one of promoting exports and generally serving commercial interests .

this , in some eyes , may create an institutional bias towards the granting of export licenses and skew the process against national security goals .

other analysts point to the full and equal participation of other agencies , particularly the department of defense , in the current structure to argue that such bias is unlikely to prevail .

