the house appropriations committee marked up the military construction appropriations billfor fy2002 ( h.r .

2904 ) on september 20 , 2001 , with house passage the next day ona 401-0 vote ( vote no .

344 ) .

the senate appropriations committee marked up its version of the bill ( s. 1460 ) on september 25 and passed it the next day on a unanimous vote of 97-0 ( voteno .

288 ) .

although both bills appropriated $10.5 billion , falling within adjusted 302 ( b ) budgetallocations , they differed in how the funding was allocated .

conferees met on october 16 , 2001 , andissued the conference report ( h.rept .

107-246 ) on h.r .

2904 .

the house approved thereport on october 17 with a vote of 409-1 ( vote no .

394 ) .

the senate approved the report on october18 with a vote of 96-1 ( vote no .

305 ) , clearing the measure for the president .

the president signedthe bill on november 5 , 2001 , enacting it as p.l .

107-64 ( 115 stat .

474 ) .

the department of defense ( dod ) manages the world's largest dedicated infrastructure,covering more than 40,000 square miles of land and a physical plant worth more than $500 billion .

the military construction appropriations bill provides a large part of the funding to enhance andmaintain this infrastructure .

the bill funds construction projects and real property maintenance ofthe active army , navy and marine corps , air force , and their reserve components ; additionaldefense - wide construction ; u.s. contributions to the nato security investment program ( formerlyknown as the nato infrastructure program ) ; and military family housing operations andconstruction .

 ( 1 ) the bill also provides funding for thebase realignment and closure ( brac ) account , which finances most base realignment and closure costs , including construction of newfacilities for transferred personnel and functions and environmental cleanup at closing sites .

the military construction appropriations bill is one of several annual pieces of legislation that provide funding for national defense .

other major appropriation legislation includes the defenseappropriations bill , which provides funds for all non - construction military activities of thedepartment of defense and constitutes more than 90% of national security - related spending , and theenergy and water development appropriations bill , which provides funding for atomic energy defenseactivities of the department of energy and for civil projects carried out by the u.s. army corps ofengineers .

two other appropriations bills , va - hud - independent agencies andcommerce - justice - state , also include small amounts for national defense .

 ( 2 ) the annual defense authorization bill authorizes all of the activities in the defense appropriation measures described above .

therefore , major debates over defense policy and funding issues,including military construction , can be also found in the authorization bill .

since issues in thedefense authorization and appropriations bills intertwine , this report includes salient parts of theauthorization bill in its discussion of the military construction appropriation process .

the separate military construction appropriations bill dates to the late 1950s and early 1960s when congress funded a large defense infrastructure build - up precipitated by the heightened securitythreat posed by the soviet union .

defense construction spending soared as facilities were hardenedagainst potential nuclear attack , missile silos were constructed , and other infrastructure was built.the appropriations committees established military construction subcommittees to deal with thisnew level of activity , and the separate military construction bill was created .

the first stand - alonemilitary construction bill was written for fy1959 ( p.l .

85-852 ) .

previously , militaryconstruction funding was provided through annual defense appropriations or supplementalappropriations bills .

military construction appropriations are the major , but not the sole , source of funds for facility investments by the military services and defense agencies .

the defense appropriations bill providessome funds for real property maintenance in operation and maintenance and minor constructionaccounts .

in addition , funds for construction and maintenance of morale , welfare , andrecreation - related facilities are partially provided through proceeds of commissaries , recreation userfees , and other non - appropriated income .

most funds appropriated by congress each year must be obligated in that fiscal year .

military construction appropriations , though , are an exception .

because of the long - term nature ofconstruction projects , these funds can generally be obligated for up to five fiscal years , reflecting thelong - term nature of capital building programs .

consideration of the military construction budget starts when the president's budget is delivered to congress each year , usually in early february .

this year is unusual , though , because the presidentdid not submit his amended dod fy2002 budget request until june 27 , 2001 .

table 1 shows the key legislative steps necessary for the enactment of the fy2002 militaryconstruction appropriations .

it will be updated as the appropriation process moves forward .

table 1 .

status of military construction appropriations , fy200 .

elective quality of lifeconstruction .

budget actions affect service member perceptions ofthe quality of military life through its impact on matters such as pay and benefits,health care , deployment schedules , and the like .

in recent years , quality of life,including the use of military construction funds , has been a focus of the defensedebate .

recent committee attention has focused on improvements to housing , workplaces , and installation infrastructure ( such as water , sewer , and electricitysystems ) , through both new construction and improved operations and maintenanceof existing facilities .

subcommittee hearings have discussed at length the applicationof military construction funds to housing and workplace improvements at basesoverseas and within the continental united states .

efforts to leverage appropriatedfunds through the partial privatization of military housing and installation utilityservices have also been subjected to protracted dialogue in committee hearings .

foran in - depth discussion of the privatization of housing see crs report rl31039 ( pdf ) , military housing privatization initiative: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

requested congressional additions to the military construction budget .

in recent years , some analysts have criticizedthe military construction appropriations process for being prone to the insertion ofunwanted and unnecessary undertakings .

others , though , have supported theaddition of construction projects not requested by the department of defense asbeing necessary for military viability .

an historical comparison shows that thedivergence between dod budget requests and congressional appropriationenactments originated relatively recently and has mainly affected the less than 20 %of military construction funding dedicated to the national guard and reserves ( see table 5 at the end of this report ) .

military construction funding since the mid 1980s can be broken into three distinct periods: prior to fiscal year 1989 ; fiscal years 1989 - 1994 ; and fiscal year1995 to the present .

before fy1989 , the relationship between funding requested bythe administration and budget authority enacted by congress appeared stable.congress typically appropriated approximately 80 % of dod requests for militaryconstruction funds .

beginning with fy1989 , regular ( i.e. , active duty ) componentfunding continued in the established pattern , but reserve component requests ( whichinclude the federal reserves and the army and air national guard ) took a sudden andsharp downturn ( see figures 1 and 2 ) .

congress responded by adding morethan35% to that year's budget reserve component submission .

this gap between reserveconstruction requests and appropriations has remained and widened .

finally , withfy1995 , the pattern of funding for the regular forces inverted .

although presidentialrequests reversed their downward direction and began to rise , congress began toappropriate more than was requested and has continued to do so to the present .

environmental remediation on closed military bases .

the continuing costs associated with the four completedbrac rounds , funded through the military construction appropriation , are nowreduced to covering environmental and other caretaker efforts .

funding requestedand appropriated for brac fell sharply from a high of $3,898 million for fy1996to a low of $664 million for fy2000 as closure and realignment wound down .

 ( 4 ) thecost of environmental remediation contributed to a $1,024 million fy2001 bracappropriation , of which $865 million was dedicated to base environmental cleanup .

members of the senate appropriations and armed services committees , in hearings held a few days after the submission of the president's amended fy2002budget request , noted that department of defense had requested only $532 millionin brac funds at a time when the navy and air force had announced a combinedshortfall of between $140 million and $150 million in immediate brac cleanupneeds .

 ( 5 ) dod witnesses responded by indicating thatthe request would be sufficientfor upcoming requirements , explaining that the shortfall estimates had been based ona set of assumptions that were no longer thought to be accurate .

the upturn in expenditures had come about through recent legal requirements and agreements between the services and local communities .

dod expected theinsufficiency to be satisfied through transfers of unused funds from other accountsand by adjustments in the end - use of some property that would significantly reducethe cost of needed remediation .

the passed bill added more than $100 million inbrac funds to the request , primarily for remediation of the environmental impactof the 1995 round of base realignments and closures .

the efficient facilities initiative ( efi ) .

the efficient facilities initiative ( efi ) was announced by thedepartment of defense on august 2 , and the department's general counselsubmitted proposed legislation to congress on august 3 .

the efi includes threemajor actions: the potential realignment and closure of u.s. military installationsoverseas ; the potential realignment and closure of installations within the unitedstates ; and the permanent authorization of the brooks air force base developmentdemonstration project , expanded to include all military services .

in support of the first action , the secretary of defense has instructed the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff to undertake a thorough assessment of alloverseas military installations based on the results of the upcoming quadrennialdefense review ( qdr ) .

his recommendations on the retention , realignment orclosing of bases are due to the secretary six months after the completion of the qdr .

in support of the second action , the secretary will likewise use the results of the qdr to generate a list of recommended actions regarding the future of militaryinstallations within the united states and its territories .

the proposed legislationsuggests the establishment of a review commission and a process for endorsing thesecretary's recommendations for submission to the president and congress .

both ofthese differ somewhat from the brac process of the 1990s .

 ( 6 ) for an understanding of the third action , one must look to recent activity at brooks air force base , texas .

the brooks air force base developmentdemonstration project ( also known as the "base efficiency project," or the "brookscity - base project" ) is a partnership between the secretary of the air force and thecity of san antonio , texas , and represents an alternative to traditional base closingsor realignments .

congress has authorized the secretary to "convert any military orcivil service appropriated or non - appropriated fund activity at brooks air force base,texas , into a contracted activity or an exchange of services compensated for by thelease , sale , conveyance , or transfer of real or private property. .

 ( 7 ) this has empoweredthe secretary to convey , in exchange for appropriate compensation , the whole offederal real property at brooks to the city and to lease back for military use thoseparts which directly support the base's military mission .

 ( 8 ) the cost of maintainingand operating the facility's physical plant , including fire and police protection,upkeep , and the like , is effectively transferred along with ownership from thedepartment of defense to the local community .

funds generated from the lease orsale of property , reimbursements , and so on , is placed in a special project fund,which the secretary of the air force may employ for operations , leaseback,maintenance and repair of department facilities , and other uses at brooks .

 ( 9 ) efi proponents have maintained that conducting a single definitive round of base closures and realignments could relieve communities of uncertainty about theirfuture .

proponents further contend that a review commission with restricted abilityto change the secretary of defense's recommendations might reduce the potential forpolitics to influence its outcome ; and that joining the military departments with localand state governments and private enterprise could significantly reduce the need formilitary construction and defense appropriations .

critics , though , have suggestedthat the selection of the commission's members and the method used for creating thelist of recommendations may actually repoliticize the brac process , and haveasserted that benefits to the defense budget accrued to date from the brooks projectare hypothetical .

real property costs , the broader picture .

with military construction comes maintenance .

plantmaintenance , adequately funded and conscientiously carried out , preventsdeterioration and reduces the need for replacement .

as a facility ages , though , ittends to demand greater effort and expense to maintain it in usable condition.inadequate maintenance accelerates facility deterioration , requiring early demolitionand replacement .

construction and maintenance , therefore , are closely related , andthe effort expended on one will have a direct effect on the other .

much of the funding for"real property maintenance" ( rpm ) is contained within the operations and maintenance function of the defense budget , which falls withinthe jurisdiction of the defense subcommittees of the appropriations committees .

 ( 10 ) figure 3 gives a graphic representation of the relative sizes of the militaryconstruction and rpm appropriations for fy2001 .

rpm funding includes not only repairs and maintenance for existing structures , but also "minor construction" ( projects whose costs do not exceed $500,000 ) .

thefy2001 defense budget request included $5,325.6 million for real propertymaintenance and repair and $251.1 million for minor construction .

even that totaldoes not capture the full cost incurred in maintaining dod real property .

to gain amore complete picture , one should add items not easily broken out from the generalbudget submission , such as the pay and benefits of military personnel assigned torpm activities ( installation maintenance , for example ) , projects financed throughdod working capital funds , and construction supported through dod research,development , test and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriations .

 ( 11 ) therefore , the finalcost to the department of defense of building , maintaining , and operating itsholdings in real property is extremely difficult to capture in its entirety .

conflicting priorities and construction funding .

overall administration proposals for military constructionfunding have fallen in nearly every year since the mid - 1980s .

nevertheless , until themid - 1990s , congress consistently granted significantly less budget authority to thedepartment of defense than had been requested by the administration ( see figure4 ) .

this pattern of partial funding reversed with the fy1995 budget .

the administration's fy1994 military construction budget request was $4,007 million,while congress authorized $3,787.9 million .

 ( 12 ) the fy1995 request fell to $2,240.2million , to which congress added $431.9 million .

 ( 13 ) every year since then , congresshas added significant amounts to the administration requests , countering whatmembers have termed "inadequate" funding for military construction .

three related explanations have been given for recent congressional actions .

first , some members of the military construction subcommittees have argued thatmilitary construction has been chronically underfunded .

this viewpoint wasreiterated in hearings on the fy2001 and 2002 budgets and the reports from thehouse appropriations committee and the defense authorizing committees on billsfor fy1998-2000 .

second , congress often has different priorities than the administration , as reflected in frequent congressional cuts to overseas construction requests andcontributions to the nato security investment program and its predecessor , thenato infrastructure program ( see figure 5 ) .

 ( 14 ) third , although congress has found the president's overall requests for militaryconstruction insufficient , members have deemed dod treatment of the army andair national guard and the federal reserves particularly so .

 ( 15 ) until the late 1980s,the amount of military construction funds appropriated by congress for the guardand reserve rose steadily , closely matching the amounts requested by dod .

forfy1989 , though , the administration requested $472.9 million in militaryconstruction for the guard and reserve , a decrease of $106.4 million from theprevious year .

congress responded by appropriating $605.1 million .

senator bondcommented during floor debate on fy1996 military construction appropriations thatmembers believed that the pentagon artificially lowered the amount of budgetauthority requested , counting on congress to add money to guard and reserveprograms .

since fy1989 , congress has consistently appropriated more than theadministration request , and the gap between request and enactment has grownconsiderably .

 ( see figure 1 and table 5 . ) .

requested military construction funds declined steadily from a high of $7.2billion for fy1985 to a low of $1.6 billion for fy2000 .

enacted funding similarlydeclined , though at a slower rate , from a level of $5.5 billion to a low of $2.7 billionfor fy1995 .

since then , though , enactments have risen steadily , reflecting thedivergence from presidential requests , reaching $5.4 billion for fy2001 , well abovethe administration request of $4.6 billion .

the amended administration request forfy2002 of $5.4 billion was increased by congress to $5.9 billion .

 ( 16 ) table 2 shows overall military construction program funding since fy1998 .

table 3 breaks down the fy2002 request by appropriations account and comparesit to fy2000 and fy2001 levels .

table 4 shows congressional action on militaryconstruction appropriations by account .

table 5 compares administration militaryconstruction requests and enactments for guard and reserve projects fromfy1985-2002 .

crs report rl31005 .

appropriations and authorization for fy2002: defense , by [author name scrubbed] , mary tyszkiewicz , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib96022 .

defense acquisition reform: status and current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30002 ( pdf ) .

a defense budget primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30447 ( pdf ) .

defense budget for fy2001: data summary , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30995 .

supplemental appropriations for fy2001: defense readiness and other programs by [author name scrubbed .

legislative branch sites house committee on appropriations http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations senate committee on appropriations http: / / www.senate.gov / ~appropriations / crs appropriations / budget page http: / / www.loc.gov / crs / products / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov general accounting office http: / / www.gao.gov u.s. department of defense sites u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , fy2001 budget materials http: / / www.dtic.mil / comptroller / fy2001budget / u.s. department of defense , installations home page http: / / www.acq.osd.mil / installation white house sites executive office of the president , office of management and budget , fy2002 budget materials http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / budget / index.html office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / .

