the library services and technology act ( lsta ) was originally adopted as part of the museum and library services act of 1996 , which was enacted on september 30 , 1996 , as part of p.l .

104-208 , the omnibus consolidated appropriation act of 1997 .

the lsta's authorization expired at the end of fy2002 ; however , funding was not interrupted .

p.l .

108-81 , the museum and library services act of 2003 ( mlsa ) , reauthorized the lsta as title ii , library services and technology ( lst ) , of the mlsa .

p.l .

108-81 authorized $232 million for library services and technology in fy2004 , and such sums as may be necessary for fy2005-fy2009 .

the bulk of lst funding is distributed to states via formula grants .

funding is also provided for library services for native americans , and for national leadership projects .

lst grants to the states are allocated to state library administrative agencies ( slaas ) , and may be used for the following basic purposes: ( a ) expanding services for learning and access to information in a variety of formats in all type of libraries , developing and improving electronic or other linkages and networks connecting providers and consumers of library services and resources ; and / or ( b ) targeting library services to under served or disadvantaged populations , such as persons with disabilities , those with limited literacy skills , or children from poor families .

although the bulk of funds appropriated for lst are used for state grants , a percentage of total funds is reserved for national activities , native americans , and federal administration .

out of total lst appropriations for a given year , 3.75% must be reserved for national activities .

the latter may include competitively awarded grants or contracts for research , demonstrations , preservation , and conversion of materials to digital form , plus education and training for librarians .

congressionally directed grants have also been included in this category , and president bush's librarians for the 21 st century program ( described below ) is included under this heading .

in addition , 1.75% of appropriations is reserved for services to native americans ( including indian tribes , alaskan natives , and native hawaiians ) , and up to 3.5% of appropriations may be used for federal administration of lst programs .

of the total funding reserved for state grants , each state receives a "flat grant" of $340,000 ( $40,000 in the case of outlying areas ) ; remaining funds are allocated on the basis of total population in each state .

the federal share of the total costs of assisted activities is 66% in all cases .

if there is no year - to - year decline in federal funding for lst , states must maintain levels of spending for library programs , or their lst grants will be reduced in proportion to the reduction in state funding .

p.l .

108-81 provides for an increase in minimum state allotments for library services and technology to $680,000 , if the amount appropriated for a year , and available for state allotments , exceeds the amount of allotments to all states in fy2003 .

in addition , minimum state allotments for outlying areas are increased to $60,000 , if appropriations in a given year are sufficient to meet the higher state minimums of $680,000 .

if remaining funds are insufficient to reach $60,000 , they are to be distributed equally among outlying areas receiving such funds .

however , the level of fy2004 and fy2005 appropriations for the imls were not sufficient to trigger the higher state grant amounts authorized by p.l .

108-81 .

participating states are required to develop five - year plans that set goals and priorities consistent with the purposes of lst grants ( i.e. , to enhance information - sharing networks and target library services to disadvantaged populations ) .

the plans must provide for independent evaluations of federally assisted library services .

a wide variety of types of libraries—public , public school , college or university , research ( if they provide public access to their collections ) , and ( at state discretion ) private libraries—may receive lst aid , not just the public and research libraries eligible for aid under the predecessor legislation , the library services and construction act ( lsca ) .

no more than 4% of each state's grant may be used for administration ; however , there is no limit on the share of funds that can be used at the state level to provide services , as opposed to being allocated to local libraries .

library services and technology grants are intended to provide states with considerable latitude in the use of funds .

lst funds are allocated within states on a competitive basis by the slaa .

lst is administered by the institute of museum and library services ( imls ) .

the imls was created through expansion of the previous institute of museum services ( ims ) .

the imls contains an office of museum services ( oms ) and an office of library services ( ols ) .

the imls is under the general aegis of the national foundation on the arts and the humanities , which also includes the national endowment for the arts ( nea ) and the national endowment for the humanities ( neh ) .

nevertheless , the institute acts as an independent agency .

the imls directorship alternates between persons with "special competence" in library and information services or in museum services .

the current imls director is robert martin , who includes in his past professional experience service as a director and librarian of the texas library and archives commission .

at all times , an office of library services within the imls is directed by a deputy director with a graduate degree in library science , and expertise in library and information services .

 table 1 below , shows the fy1997-fy2007 appropriations for library services and technology ( lst ) .

for fy2006 , lst was funded at $210.597 million .

the administration has requested increasing that funding to $220.855 million in fy2007 .

the house committee on appropriations has recommended $220.855 million in funding for fy2007 ; the senate committee on appropriations has recommended funding of $213.337 million .

the fy2006 budget includes $23.8 million for an initiative first funded in fy2003 to train and recruit librarians , provide scholarships , support distance learning in under served rural areas , and enhance the diversity of librarians to better serve communities .

beginning in fy2003 , the oms and the ols were combined in one appropriation account within the labor , health and human services , and education ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations bill .

in the past there had been two funding streams , one account for oms within the department of the interior appropriations and one for ols within the l - hhs - ed appropriations .

the federal government has provided direct aid for public libraries since initial adoption of the library services and construction act ( lsca ) in 1956 .

the 104 th congress considered legislation to extend and amend lsca programs , as well as to consolidate these programs with separate authorizations of federal aid to elementary and secondary school and college libraries .

the library services and technology act consolidated and replaced a number of programs under title vii , subtitle b of the l - hhs - ed appropriations act of 1997 within p.l .

104-208 .

these programs included the lsca , plus library assistance programs authorized by title ii of the higher education act ( hea ) , and title iii , part f , of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

p.l .

108-81 , the museum and library services act of 2003 ( mlsa ) , reauthorized the lsta as title ii , library services and technology ( lst ) , of the mlsa .

while states have had a large degree of discretion in selecting grantees and deciding how funds are to be used under both the former lsca and the current lst , overall state discretion would appear to be increased under the current program .

at the same time , some funds—particularly aid for construction under the former lsca title ii—were intended for specific purposes that are not authorized for lst grants .

in fact , p.l .

108-81 includes a provision explicitly prohibiting the use of funds for construction .

the library services and technology provisions of p.l .

108-81 also focus more thoroughly on relatively new forms of information sharing and networking , such as the internet , than the lsca .

issues that were discussed during the reauthorization of the lsta included the adequacy of minimum state grants and overall authorization levels ; the need for additional funding to provide for evaluations of the lsta ; and new provisions disallowing grants for projects deemed obscene .

on september 25 , 2003 , the museum and library services act of 2003 was signed into law ( p.l .

108-81 ) .

the lsta was reauthorized as title ii , library services and technology of the mlsa .

the major changes regarding library services adopted in the reauthorized museum and library services act of 2003 include the following: prohibiting the funding of projects deemed obscene ; defining "obscene" and the term "determined to be obscene" ; requiring the director of the imls to establish procedural standards for reviewing and evaluating grants ; increasing minimum state allotments for library services to $680,000 if the amount appropriated for a year , and available for state allotments , exceeds the amount of allotments to all states in fy2003 ( the level of fy2004 appropriations for the imls is not sufficient to trigger the higher state grant amounts authorized by p.l .

108-81 ) ; increasing minimum state allotments for outlying areas to $60,000 , if appropriations in a given year are sufficient to meet the higher state minimums of $680,000 .

if remaining funds are insufficient to reach $60,000 , they are to be distributed equally among outlying areas receiving such funds ; authorizing $232 million for library services and $38.6 million for museum services for fy2004 , and such sums as may be necessary for fy2005-fy2009 ; locating advisory functions ( which for libraries were previously delegated to the national commission on libraries and information sciences ) within a new national museum and library services board ( previously solely a museum services board ) in the imls ; making the chairman of the national commission on library and information science a member ( nonvoting ) of the national museum and library services board ; requiring the director to carry out and publish analyses of the impact of museum and library services , and increasing from 3% to 3.5% the amount available for federal administrative costs , to provide funding for this new function ; prohibiting the use of imls funds for construction ; and permitting the director of the imls to make national awards for library service , in addition to the already authorized national awards for museum service .

h.r .

13 ( hoekstra ) , a bill to reauthorize library services and technology within the museum and library services act of 2003 , was introduced on january 7 , 2003 , and was reported favorably by the house committee on education and the workforce on february 13 , 2003 .

h.r .

13 was passed by the full house on march 6 , 2003 .

h.r .

13 , as passed by the house , would have changed the authorization for library services and museum services to $210 million and $35 million , respectively , for fy2004 and such sums as may be necessary for 2005 through 2009 .

h.r .

13 contained new provisions that would have required the imls director to establish procedural standards for reviewing and evaluating grants , including a provision prohibiting the funding of projects determined to be obscene .

new provisions in h.r .

13 also provided a definition of "obscene" and of the term "determined to be obscene. .

it would have required the director to carry out and publish analyses of the impact of museum and library services , and would have increased from 3% to 3.5% the amount available for federal administrative costs , to provide funding for this new function .

h.r .

13 would have located advisory functions ( which for libraries were previously delegated to the national commission on libraries and information sciences ) within a new national museum and library services board ( previously solely a museum services board ) in the imls .

it would have permitted the director of the imls to make national awards for library service , in addition to the already authorized national awards for museum service .

it would have increased minimum state allotments for library services to $680,000 , if the amount appropriated for a year , and available for state allotments , exceeded the amount of allotments to all states in fy2003 .

finally , the bill would have increased minimum state allotments for outlying areas to $60,000 if appropriations in a given year were sufficient to meet the higher state minimums of $680,000 .

s. 888 ( gregg ) , was introduced on april 11 , 2003 , and reported favorably by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions on may 14 , 2003 .

on august 1 , 2003 , the senate incorporated s. 888 into h.r .

13 and passed h.r .

13 in lieu of s. 888 with an amendment by unanimous consent .

authorization levels for fy2004 contained in the senate passed bill were reduced from the authorization levels contained in s. 888 as reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( from $250 million to $232 million for library services and technology ; and from $41.5 to $38.6 million for museum services ) .

the senate - passed bill included the following provisions that were contained in s. 888 as reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , but were not contained in h.r .

13 as passed by the house: provisions that would have made the chairman of the national commission on library and information science a member ( nonvoting ) of the national museum and library services board ; a prohibition against using imls funds for construction ; and provisions that would have raised liability amounts in the arts and artifacts indemnity act .

s. 238 ( reed ) was introduced on january 29 , 2003 , and was referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions .

the library services and technology provisions of this bill were essentially the same as those in s. 2611 ( reed ) , introduced in the 107 th congress .

authorization levels in s. 238 were $350 million for library services and technology and $65 million for museum services .

s. 238 , however , unlike s. 2611 , also included amendments raising liability amounts in the arts and artifacts indemnity act .

