in a sweeping decision issued on june 26 , 2003 , the supreme court struck down a texasstate statute that made it a crime for homosexuals to engage in certain private sex acts .

specifically,the court's ruling in lawrence v. texas held that the due process privacy guarantee of the fourteenthamendment extends to protect consensual gay sex .

 ( 1 ) although the court also considered whether the texas state statuteviolated the constitutional right to equal protection , the court ultimately based its ruling on broaderprivacy grounds .

in addition , the court also overturned its 1986 decision in bowers v. hardwick , acontroversial case in which the court ruled that there was no constitutional right to privacy thatprotects homosexual sodomy .

this report provides an overview of the supreme court's opinion in lawrence v. texas , coupled with a discussion of its implications for future cases involving gay rights in general and same - sex marriage in particular .

for a more detailed discussion of currentdevelopments regarding gay marriage , see crs report rl31994 , same - sex marriages: legalissues , by [author name scrubbed] .

in their petition seeking supreme court review , attorneys for lawrence and garner posedthree questions to the court: ( 1 ) did the texas statute violate the equal protection clause of thefourteenth amendment ; ( 2 ) did the texas statute violate the right to privacy embedded in the dueprocess clause of the fourteenth amendment ; and ( 3 ) should bowers be overruled ? .

 ( 20 ) the court's considerationof these and other issues is discussed in the following section .

because many observers had expected the court to issue a ruling on the more narrow equalprotection grounds favored by o'connor , the court's privacy ruling was more sweeping thanpredicted .

 ( 48 ) the broaddecision in lawrence is sure to have lasting consequences for other cases involving , among otherissues , sexual privacy and gay rights .

some of these potential consequences are highlighted below .

one immediate effect of the court's ruling in lawrence was to invalidate all thirteen of theexisting state anti - sodomy laws , regardless of whether they applied to homosexual couples only orto all couples both heterosexual and homosexual .

had the court issued its ruling on the more narrowequal protection grounds favored by o'connor , the effect of the decision would have been toinvalidate only those state statutes that discriminated against gays by prohibiting homosexualsodomy exclusively .

since the court issued a broader ruling that the government cannot criminalizeprivate , consensual , adult sexual behavior , the lawrence case appears to create a more expansiveright to sexual privacy that prohibits the states from making sodomy a crime for anyone , homosexualor heterosexual .

in another development , the court also vacated the kansas court of appeals' ruling in limonv .

kansas , a similar case involving an equal protection challenge to a state law that treatshomosexuals and heterosexuals differently .

 ( 49 ) under kansas law , sodomy with a child between the ages of 14and 16 is punishable with probation if the partner is an older teenager of the opposite sex , but thesame act is punishable with a prison sentence if the partner is an older teenager of the same sex .

asa result of the kansas statute , 18-year old matthew limon received a 17-year sentence for engagingin consensual gay sex with a 14-year old boy , despite the fact that he would have received a farlighter sentence for engaging in similar conduct with a youth of the opposite sex .

the supreme courtordered the kansas court to reconsider the case in light of the lawrence ruling , ( 50 ) but the court of appealsof kansas distinguished the lawrence case and upheld the sentence , ruling that the state's interestin protecting children provided a rational basis for criminalizing homosexual sodomy more severelythan heterosexual sodomy .

 ( 51 ) the kansas supreme court subsequently issued a petition toreview the lower court's decision , but has not yet ruled in the case .

 ( 52 ) .

the court's broad decision in lawrence is likely to prompt a series of challenges to an arrayof governmental policies involving privacy interests and / or gay rights .

indeed , the case , whichappears to greatly expand constitutional protection for sexual privacy , may give rise to challengesagainst statutes that prohibit same - sex marriage , gay adoption , gays in the military , or similar issues.how the courts will resolve these controversies , however , remains unclear .

on the one hand , the court's ruling emphasized that "our laws and tradition affordconstitutional protection to personal decisions relating to marriage , procreation , contraception,family relationships , child rearing , and education" and that "persons in a homosexual relationshipmay seek autonomy for these purposes. .

 ( 53 ) if lawrence is viewed as establishing a broad constitutional rightto sexual privacy , then the court's decision may be interpreted as supporting challenges to laws thatprohibit activities such as same - sex marriage or gay adoption .

on the other hand , the court also distinguished the lawrence decision from cases involvingminors or prostitution , and it noted that the case "does not involve whether the government must giveformal recognition to any relationship that homosexual persons seek to enter. .

 ( 54 ) indeed , the courts maypoint to other government interests , such as an interest in preserving marriage or national securityfor example , to distinguish the private sexual conduct involved in lawrence from the issues at stakein cases involving gay marriage or gays in the military .

like the courts , congress may also respond to the lawrence decision .

for example , severallegislators in the 108th congress introduced proposals to amend the constitution to prevent same - sexmarriage , and similar proposed constitutional amendments have been introduced during the 109thcongress .

 ( 55 ) .

