the people of south africa are highly diverse .

black africans make up more than three - quarters of the population , but come from several different ethnic backgrounds .

most whites are afrikaans speakers of dutch , german , and french huguenot ancestry , but there is a substantial english - speaking white minority .

the remainder of the population are asian , largely of indian descent , and people of mixed race .

south africa's economy , the largest on the continent , is diverse as well .

south africa produces wine , wool , maize and other agricultural products for export , although only about 12% of the country's land is suitable for agriculture .

moreover , south africa is the world's leading producer of gold , platinum , and chromium .

major industrial sectors include automobile assembly , chemicals , textiles , foodstuffs , and iron and steel production .

south african cell phone companies and other firms are active throughout africa , and sabmiller , formerly south african breweries , operates on a global scale .

the country's stock exchange is among the 20 largest in the world , and south africa is one of the few countries on the continent to rank as an upper middle income country .

despite its many economic strengths , however , the country ranks as one of the most unequal societies in the world in terms of income distribution .

the majority of black south africans live in poverty , and south africa's cities are surrounded by vast informal housing settlements known as "townships. .

shortages of water , electricity , and other social services in the townships have contributed to growing tensions , as evidenced by a rise in township protests in recent years .

south africa is an influential actor in the international relations of africa .

south africa served from 2007 through 2008 as one of the 10 non - permanent members of the united nations ( u.n. ) security council ; it has been elected to serve another two - year term beginning in january 2011 .

the country remains a member of the u.n. human rights council .

its voting record on both bodies has been considered by some to be controversial .

south africa was a founding member of the african union ( au ) , successor to the organization of african unity ( oau ) , and then - president thabo mbeki served as the au's first chairperson .

president mbeki also took a lead role in the creation of the new partnership for africa's development ( nepad ) , an african - designed plan for improved governance within africa and increased western aid , trade , and investment that was adopted by the au as a blueprint for the continent's economic development .

south africa has repeatedly put itself forward as a venue for major international conferences , such as the 2002 world summit on sustainable development , the 2001 world conference on racism .

in 2010 , south africa was the first african nation to host the soccer world cup , and in december 2011 , the country will host the u.n .

framework convention on climate change .

south africa is the only african member of the g20 , the premier forum for international economic cooperation .

weak regimes and instability elsewhere in the region have historically had a negative impact on south africa , and the country continues to face a large influx of illegal immigrants .

by some estimates , more than three million zimbabweans currently reside illegally in south africa .

some south africans blame these immigrants for the country's high crime and unemployment rates , and in may 2008 tensions erupted in the townships , sparking a wave of xenophobic attacks that displaced over 25,000 and left over 60 dead .

isolated attacks have occurred since then , and the potential for further violence cannot be ruled out .

in order to promote greater stability , south african officials have played prominent mediator roles in african conflicts , and south african troops actively support peacekeeping missions throughout the continent .

in 2002 , they helped to persuade the parties to the prolonged conflict in the democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) to sign a peace agreement following negotiations in south africa .

president thabo mbeki was less successful in mediating the conflict in cote d'ivoire , a country which continues to face political turmoil .

former president nelson mandela played a leading role in brokering a peace agreement in burundi , and south africa contributed hundreds of troops to the peacekeeping mission there .

over 1,200 south african troops are currently participating as peacekeepers in the u.n. stabilization mission in the drc ( monusco ) , and over 900 south african soldiers and police serve under the u.n. - african union mission in darfur ( unamid ) .

in a move believed by many to protest the sudanese government's policies in darfur , the mbeki government was instrumental in preventing sudan from attaining the chairmanship of the african union in 2006 .

it has , however , protested the imposition of tougher u.n. sanctions against sudan and an international criminal court ( icc ) indictment of sudanese president omar al bashir as counterproductive .

former president mbeki continues to play an active mediation role in sudan .

the country has supported democratic advances on the continent , providing millions of ballots in 2006 for elections in the drc .

in 2007 , the heads of state of the southern african development community ( sadc ) nominated then - president mbeki as mediator between the zimbabwean government and the opposition in an effort to resolve its political and economic crises .

mbeki's role was controversial .

president jacob zuma and a team of his own mediators took over in late 2009 .

the republic of south africa held its first universal suffrage elections in april 1994 .

the african national congress ( anc ) , which led the struggle against white minority rule and the apartheid system of state - enforced racial segregation , won control of the national assembly .

the assembly chose as president nelson mandela , the anc leader who had been released from prison in 1990 , after serving 27 years .

his release followed years of secret contacts between the anc and key white business and political figures .

these contacts had led both sides to conclude that a settlement could be negotiated that would protect the interests of all south africans .

the negotiations themselves encountered many difficulties , including several outbreaks of violence that threatened to destroy the peace process .

finally , however , in november 1993 , all - party negotiations resulted in a final agreement on a new constitution and free elections , held in 1994 .

south africa's second universal suffrage elections were held in june 1999 , and the anc retained control of the national assembly .

deputy president thabo mbeki , who had served in key anc posts overseas during the anti - apartheid struggle , was chosen by the assembly to succeed mandela .

mbeki retained his position as president following the april 2004 parliamentary elections , in which the anc won almost 70% of the votes .

south africa's politics continue to be dominated by the anc , which has enjoyed support among many black south africans because of its role in spearheading the long struggle against white minority rule .

until december 2007 , when he lost the party presidency to a rival , thabo mbeki served as president both of the party and the country .

he was expected to remain president of south africa until the 2009 elections but resigned from the position in september 2008 .

he was replaced by an interim president , former deputy anc leader kgalema motlanthe .

following mbeki's resignation , several prominent members of the party led a breakaway faction , now known as the congress of the people ( cope ) .

prior to the 2009 elections , the anc held a 72% majority of the seats in the 400-member national assembly , where the country's legislative power principally resides , far ahead of its nearest rival , the democratic alliance ( da ) , which had 12% of the seats .

the inkatha freedom party ( ifp ) , headed by mangosuthu buthelezi , had about 6% of assembly seats .

buthelezi , who has been active in south african politics for decades , holds a zulu chieftainship , and the party is largely zulu in membership .

the ifp has experienced a steady decline in parliamentary seats since the 1994 election , while the anc and the da have gained electoral support .

other parties represented in parliament include the new national party ( nnp ) , the united democratic movement ( udm ) , the independent democrats ( id ) , and the african christian democratic party ( acdp ) .

in addition to the national assembly , there is a higher legislative body , the national council of provinces ( ncop ) , with limited powers .

its members are chosen by the governments of the nine provinces .

in 2009 , south africa weathered its first recession in 17 years .

the rate of growth in gross domestic product ( gdp ) averaged 3% per year in the first decade after apartheid and rose to an average of 5% from 2004 to 2007 .

the growth rate fell to 3.7% in 2008 and - 1.8% in 2009 , due in part to the global economic downturn ; it rose to an estimated 2.8% in 2010 .

the growth rate is expected to rise to 3.7% in 2011 .

much higher rates will be needed if south africa is to substantially increase employment among the black majority and reduce the sharp inequalities in income distribution among the races .

unemployment estimates range from 25% to 40% , far above the government's target of 15% .

the vast , poverty - stricken townships surrounding south africa's cities remain a potential source of political instability .

in recent years periodic riots have erupted in several poor municipalities to protest local government corruption and inadequate service delivery .

although turnout and support for the anc remained high nationally in the country's last nationwide municipal elections , voters boycotted the polls in a number of townships in which the anc had formerly enjoyed strong support , and several hundred former anc supporters stood as independent candidates .

conditions in the townships have improved marginally with the expanded availability of electricity and the provision of clean water taps .

however , the widening gap between the rich and poor is likely to pose a continuing challenge .

u.s. policymaking toward south africa and the anti - apartheid struggle was contentious from the 1960s through the 1980s , with many arguing that the united states was doing too little to promote human rights and democratic rule .

congress enacted the comprehensive anti - apartheid act of 1986 ( p.l .

99 - 440 ) over president reagan's veto in order to affirm u.s. support for democratic change .

the legislation imposed a number of sanctions against south africa .

the reagan administration , by contrast , had been pursuing a policy of "constructive engagement" ( i.e. , dialogue ) with the white south african regime , regarding this approach as the most effective way to promote change .

in the early 1990s , the united states assumed a lead role in supporting south africa's transition to democracy .

policy makers at that time saw the south african democratization process as a model for other african countries , and expected that the country would soon become a stabilizing force as well as an engine for economic growth throughout the sub - saharan region .

south africa's need to focus on domestic economic and social problems meant that u.s. expectations for the country's regional role were perhaps not met in full in the first post - apartheid years .

but south africa's leadership in the launching of nepad ; the deployment of south african peacekeepers to burundi , cote d'ivoire , and sudan ; and intensive south african involvement in the peace process in the democratic republic of the congo have highlighted south africa's capabilities as a regional actor .

south africa also assisted u.s. efforts to resolve haiti's political crisis in 2004 by providing an exile location for former president bertrand aristide .

given south africa's role in conflict mediation and resolution throughout the continent , the united states has worked to expand the country's peacekeeping abilities .

since 1992 , south africa has been among the leading african recipients of u.s. aid .

u.s. assistance to south africa has increased in recent years , rising from an estimated $224 million in fy2006 , to an estimated $574 million for fy2008 , almost $545 million for fy2009 , and an estimated $578 million in fy2010 .

the overwhelming majority of this funding goes to hiv / aids and related health programs .

in its fy2008 congressional budget justification , the state department reported that "the u.s. government's relationship with south africa is transforming from that of donor to one of strategic partnership," and accordingly , "activities in peace and security will continue to increase in importance while development programs will be phased out in the next couple of years. .

u.s. assistance continues to focus on fighting hiv / aids and tuberculosis , promoting economic growth , and improving south africa's capacity to support regional peacekeeping operations and counter transnational crime .

usaid programs have supported efforts to promote good governance , reduce unemployment and poverty , increase access to shelter and municipal services , and improve the quality of education and healthcare .

the south african government places a strong emphasis on budget transparency , ranking second , after the united kingdom , in public spending transparency in the open budget index .

the united states provides significant assistance to south africa's fight against hiv / aids through the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , having contributed more than $2 billion since the program's inception in fy2004 .

in fy2010 , the pepfar program provided arv therapy to an estimated 917,700 patients , transmission prevention treatment to over 682,400 pregnant hiv - infected women , counseling and testing for over five million , and palliative and / or tuberculosis care for 2,160,300 south africans .

pepfar's south africa program also funds public education efforts to promote abstinence , faithfulness , and healthy behavior to reduce the risk of transmission among high - risk groups .

in december 2010 , the united states and south africa signed a five - year partnership framework to improve coordination on pepfar .

the obama administration has publically emphasized south africa's important leadership role , both regionally and globally .

the united states supports south africa's efforts to deliver foreign assistance to other african countries through a $1.3 million trilateral assistance program .

this partnership began in 2008 with the two countries working together to develop local government structures in the drc ; the programs currently supports south african efforts in southern sudan and malawi .

during secretary of state hillary clinton's visit to south africa in august 2009 , she pledged to "deepen and broaden our engagement with south africa" and noted that the two governments had agreed to reengage in a "high - level , bilateral , strategic dialogue. .

that dialogue was launched in april 2010 , and the first round of bilateral meetings were held in december 2010 .

the working - level meetings focused on law enforcement , trade , transportation , human rights , health , and agriculture .

prior to the december talks , according to the state department , u.s. - south africa cooperation had already resulted in progress on renewable energy , nuclear power , aids and other health programs , and defense cooperation .

analysts seem generally confident that south africa will remain politically stable for some time to come .

there are tensions in rural areas over land , but south africa seems far from a rural upheaval over the issue , as has been the case in zimbabwe .

social tensions over perceived inequalities in the distribution of wealth and inadequate service delivery , which resulted in violent attacks on african immigrants in 2008 , are likely to continue in the near term as the government struggles to address the needs of its poorest citizens .

south africa's longer - term stability is linked to the success of the south african government and its partners in fighting poverty and reducing the toll of the aids pandemic .

the principal worry for some analysts has been that south africa would become a de facto one - party state under the anc , weakening checks and balances in the political system .

should this happen , some fear that the regime could become increasingly authoritarian and unresponsive to the needs of its citizens .

anc leaders reject this view , arguing that their party is a national liberation movement committed to transforming south africa and fulfilling the aspirations of the poor .

others have argued that the power of the ruling party is limited by the country's very active press , independent judiciary , and a bill of rights enshrined in the constitution .

in any event , anc leaders want their country to be seen as a leader in africa , and as a spokesman for africa and developing countries generally in world affairs .

to play such roles , south africa must continue to be recognized as a successful democracy .

