on december 21 , 2001 , president bush signed into law the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 ( formerly h.r .

2944 ) .

the house ondecember 6 , 2001 and the senate on december 7 , 2001 approved the conference reportaccompanying h.r .

2944 , after resolving significant differences in the generalprovisions of their respective versions of the act .

the act as approved by congress reduces thenumber of general provisions from 67 to 42 .

p.l .

107-96 appropriates $408 million in specialfederal payments and approves the district's $7.1 billion total budget , including $5.3 billion ingeneral operating funds .

the act includes $12.6 million in special federal payments for securityplanning , in the wake of the terrorist attacks on the pentagon and world trade center on september11 , 2001 .

the city also received $3.4 million to cover the cost of security for a world bank andinternational monetary fund ( imf ) meeting scheduled for late september 2001 .

the world bankand imf meeting was postponed amid concerns about security following the events of september11 .

in response to the attacks , congress appropriated $40 billion in fy2001 emergencysupplemental assistance to address national needs .

the costs of providing federal , state , and localpreparedness for mitigating and responding to the attacks , and repairing public facilities andtransportation systems damaged by the attacks , are two of the eligible uses of funds appropriatedunder the act .

the defense appropriations act , p.l .

107-117 , signed on january 10 , 2002,appropriates $200 million in special federal payments to the district of columbia and metropolitanarea regional entities to assist the city and region in upgrading and executing emergency responseplans .

table 1 .

status of district of columbia appropriations , fy2002: p.l.107-96 ( formerly h.r .

2944 ) .

since the signing of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , on november 22 , 2000 , the district of columbia government hascontinued to make progress in improving the delivery of services and in the city'slong - term financial health .

the cooperative efforts of the city's elected leadership,the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistanceauthority ( the authority ) ( 1 ) , the chief financialofficer ( cfo ) , the courts , andcongress have enabled the city to meet the requirements for the return of home rule .

the cfo's comprehensive annual financial report ( cafr ) , released in january2001 , certified that the city had achieved a $241 million budget surplus for fy2000 .

this achievement satisfied the final requirement of the district of columbiafinancial responsibility and management assistance act , p.l .

104-8 , for the returnto home rule - - four consecutive years of balanced or surplus budgets .

the favorablereport means the end of a control period , and the dissolution of the authority'spowers on september 30 , 2001 .

the city also has met the preconditions for the returnof four city agencies from court - ordered receivership , yet another sign , according tocity leaders , that the district has made progress in addressing government servicedelivery issues .

during the last year , the district of columbia's elected and appointed leadership addressed a number of other governance - related issues , including school reform andmedical services for the uninsured .

school reform , according to observers , is awork - in - progress .

the new board of education faces an $80 million budget deficitand issues surrounding special education services and the certification of charterschools .

the debate among city officials on the downsizing of d.c. general hospitalwas contentious and resulted in fractured relations between the city's appointed andelected leadership .

the continuation of a needle exchange program funded with federal or district funds is one of several key policy issues that congress considered when approvingthe district's appropriations act for fy2002 .

the controversy surrounding fundinga needle exchange program touched on issues of home rule , public health policy , andgovernment sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs .

proponents of aneedle exchange program contend that such programs reduce the spread of hivamong illegal drug users by reducing the incidence of shared needles .

opponents ofthese efforts contend that such programs amount to government sanctioning of illegaldrugs by supplying drug - addicted persons with the tools to use them .

in addition,they content that public health concerns raised about the spread of aids and hivthrough shared contaminated needles should be addressed through drug treatment andrehabilitation programs .

another view in the debate focuses on the issue of homerule and the city's ability to use local funds to institute such programs free fromcongressional actions .

the prohibition on the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchange program was first approved by congress as section 170 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 .

the 1999 act did allow privatefunding of needle exchange programs .

the district of columbia appropriations actfor fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , continued the prohibition on the use of federal anddistrict funds for a needle exchange program , and restricted where privately fundedneedle exchange activities could take place .

section 150 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2001 makes it unlawful to distribute any needle or syringefor the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug in any area in the city that is within1,000 feet of a public elementary or secondary school , including any public charterschool .

provisions contained in an earlier house version of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2000 ( h.r .

3194 ) would have prohibited anyorganization that received federal or district funds from funding a needle exchangeprogram with private funds .

this prohibition was dropped during conferenceconsideration of the bill , which was signed by the president on november 29 , 1999 .

presently , only one entity , prevention works , a private nonprofit aids awarenessand education program , operates a privately funded needle exchange program .

at a minimum , district officials were seeking to remove restrictions on needle exchange activities , and to lift the prohibition on the use of district funds for needleexchange programs .

the final version of the act , p.l .

107-96 , lifts the restrictionthat prohibits the operation of needle exchange programs within 1,000 feet of publicelementary and secondary schools , including public charter schools .

it also maintainsthe restriction on the use of federal and district funds for needle exchange programs.the bill as initially approved by the house would have continued the prohibition onthe use of federal and local government funding of needle exchange programs .

thesenate bill would have allowed the use of local government funds for needleexchange programs , but would have maintained the prohibition on the use of federalfunds .

the medical marijuana initiative provision in the district of columbia appropriations legislation is another issue that engenders controversy .

the districtof columbia appropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 , included a provision thatprohibited the city from counting ballots of a voter - approved initiative that wouldhave allowed the medical use of marijuana to assist persons suffering debilitatinghealth conditions and diseases including cancer and hiv infection .

congress's power prohibiting the counting of a medical marijuana ballot initiative was challenged in a suit filed by the d.c. chapter of the american civilliberties union ( aclu ) .

on september 17 , 1999 , district court judge richardroberts ruled that congress , despite its unique legislative responsibility for thedistrict under article i , section 8 of the constitution , did not possess the power tostifle or prevent political speech , which included the ballot initiative .

this rulingallowed the city to tally the votes on the november 1998 ballot initiative .

to preventthe implementation of the initiative , congress had 30 days to pass a resolution ofdisapproval from the date the medical marijuana ballot initiative ( initiative 59 ) wascertified by the board of elections and ethics .

language prohibiting theimplementation of the initiative was included in p.l .

106-113 , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy2000 .

opponents of the provision contend thatit and similar actions undercut the concept of home rule .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , includes a provision that continues to prohibit the district government from implementing the initiative .

the public funding of abortion services for district of columbia residents is a perennial issue debated by congress during its annual deliberations on the districtof columbia appropriations .

district officials cite the prohibition on the use ofdistrict funds as just another example of congressional intrusion into local matters .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , includes aprovision prohibiting the use of federal or district funds for abortion services exceptin cases where the life of the mother is endangered or the pregnancy is the result ofrape or incest .

this prohibition has been in place since 1995 , when congressapproved the district of columbia act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 .

since 1979 , with the passage of the district of columbia appropriations act of 1980 , p.l .

96-93 , congress has placed some limitation or prohibition on the use ofpublic funds for abortion services for district residents .

from 1979 to 1988,congress restricted the use of federal funds for abortion services to cases where themother's life would be endangered or the pregnancy resulted from rape and incest .

the district was free to use district funds for abortion services .

when congress passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1989 , p.l .

100-462 , it restricted the use of district and federal funds for abortionservices to cases where the mother's life would be endangered if the pregnancy wastaken to term .

the inclusion of district funds , and the elimination of rape or incestas qualifying conditions for public funding of abortion services , was endorsed bypresident reagan , who threatened to veto the district's appropriations act if theabortion provision was not modified .

in 1989 , president bush twice vetoed thedistrict's fy1990 appropriations act over the abortion issue .

he signed p.l .

101-168 after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenuesto pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life was endangered .

the district successfully fought for the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l .

103-127 .

the fy1994 actalso reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the publicfunding of abortion services .

the district's success was short lived .

the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest .

the prohibition on the use of district and federal funds is included in the house , senate , and conference versions of the district of columbia appropriations act forfy2002 , p.l .

107-96 .

the fy2002 district of columbia appropriations bill as approved by the senate appropriations committee on october 11 , 2001 , and the house on september 25,2001 , included $16 million in funding for emergency planning .

the district's initialfy2002 budget request included a $16 million federal payment specifically for costsassociated with security support - - including counter - terrorism and crowd control - - for the imf / world bank meeting that was scheduled for late september 2001 .

themeeting , which has been postponed to a date to be determined , also was scheduledto receive $17 million in funding from the imf and world bank for security support .

p.l .

107-96 includes a provision that reallocates the $16 million special federal payment to emergency security planning activities in response to the september 11,2001 terrorist attacks .

the act allocates $3.4 million as reimbursement to thedistrict for costs associated with security planning for the world bank / imf meeting .

three additional budget items include funding that may be used to combat or respondto terrorist acts .

however , funds for these operations are derived from local revenuesources: the metropolitan police department ; district of columbia national guard ; and the district of columbia emergency management agency .

budget requests forthese operations are identified in the following table .

in addition , congressappropriated $1.4 billion in a special federal payment for the development anddeployment of a wireless telecommunication system linking the district government,the u.s. capitol police , the u.s. park service police , and the secret service .

table 5 .

district of columbia federal and localappropriations that may be used to respond to terrorismthreats congress provided additional assistance for emergency preparedness and terrorism response activities in the department of defense appropriations forfy2002 , p.l .

107-117 .

the act includes $200 million in special federal paymentsto district of columbia and selected regional agencies , including the washingtoncouncil of governments and the washington metropolitan transit authority , foremergency response - related activities .

the defense appropriations act for fy2002was signed by the president on january 10 , 2002 .

table 6 .

fy 2002 defense appropriations act , p.l.107-117: district of columbia emergency preparedness fund .

p.l .

107-96 includes a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the use of district funds to implement the helath care benefits expansion act .

onseptember 20 , 2001 , the house appropriations committee approved , by a vote of 28to 21 , an amendment introduced by representatives kolbe and moran that wouldremove the congressional prohibition on the use of district funds for theimplementation of the city's health care benefits expansion act .

the act , whichwas approved by the city's elected leadership in 1992 , has not been implementedbecause of a congressional prohibition first included in the general provisions ofdistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 .

the city's health care expansion act would allow two unmarried and unrelated individuals to register as domestic partners with the district for the purpose ofsecuring certain health and family related benefits , including hospital visitationrights .

under the law , district government employees enrolled in the district ofcolumbia employees health benefits program would be allowed to purchase familyhealth insurance coverage that would cover the employee's family members,including domestic partners .

in addition , a district employee registered as a domesticpartner would assume the additional cost of the family health insurance coverage forfamily members , which would include the employee's domestic partner .

opponents of the act believe that it is an assault on the institution of marriage , and that the act grants unmarried gay and heterosexual couples the same standing asmarried couples .

congressional proponents of lifting the ban on the use of districtfunds argue that the implementation of the act is a question of home rule and localautonomy .

supporters of the amendment noted that at least 115 local governments,and more than 4,000 companies offer benefits to domestic partners .

on september 25 , 2001 , during house consideration of h.r .

2944 , representative weldon offered an amendment ( h.amdt .

310 ) thatwould have reaffirmed the band on the use of district funds to implement the healthcare expansion program .

the weldon amendment failed by a vote of 194 to 226 .

thesenate bill also included a provision that allows the district to use city , but notfederal , funds to implement the district of columbia employees health benefitsprogram .

congress passed legislation in 1999 that required the district to create a $150 million reserve fund to guard against unexpected expenditures undermining cityfinances .

 ( 5 ) reserve funds may only be expendedunder three conditions: expenditures must be based on criteria established by the chief financial officer and approved by the mayor , the city council , and the control board ( during a control year ) ; but in no case may funds be expended before all other surplusfunds have been used .

the funds may not be used for agencies under court - ordered receivership .

funds may not be for shortfalls in projected productivity savings and management reforms .

in 2000 , ( 6 ) and in addition to the budget reserve fund , congress required thedistrict to establish two additional funds: an emergency reserve fund ; and acontingency reserve fund .

these funds total 7% of the district's operating revenue,or about $250 million , by 2007 .

the emergency reserve fund requires a 4% positivefund balance above the projected general fund expenditure level for the followingyear .

the contingency fund would set aside up to 3% of each year's operating budgetfor unforeseen or nonrecurring needs such as natural disasters , federal mandates , andrevenue shortfalls .

the district government requested that congress eliminate the $150 million budget reserve .

a plan to abolish the fund was endorsed by the senateappropriations subcommittee on the district in june 2001 .

consistent with theprovisions found in the senate - passed measure , the final - - conference - - version ofact includes a provision that requires the district to maintain a budget reserve of $120million in fy2002 , and $70 million in fy2003 .

p.l .

107-96 also requires thedistrict to maintain a cumulative cash reserve of $50 million for fy2004 andfy2005 .

