the act providing trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to the president ( p.l.107-210 ) contained certain consultation and notification requirements in order forinternational trade agreements to be considered by congress under expeditedprocedures .

the requirements include the following: ( 11 ) at least 90 calendar days before entering into a trade agreement,the president must notify congress of the intent to enter into the agreement ; ( 12 ) at least 90 calendar days before entering into the tradeagreement , the president must notify the revenue committees of possible changes tou.s .

trade remedy laws ; no later than 30 days after the president notifies congress of theintention to enter into a trade agreement , private sector advisors must submit theirreports on the agreement ; within 60 days of entering into a trade agreement , the presidentmust submit to congress a description of changes to existing laws ; and not later than 90 days after the president enters into anagreement , the itc must submit a report assessing the likely impact of theagreement .

 ( 13 ) since the implementing bill and fta agreement cannot be amended , thehouse ways and means and senate finance committees and house and senatejudiciary committees held mock ( non - markup ) markups with administrationrepresentatives as witnesses to make changes to the draft implementing legislation .

non - markup markups are essentially the same as usual markups except they focuson draft legislation rather than formally introduced bills .

once the implementing bill met the requirements under tpa , it wasconsidered under the following expedited procedures: the implementing bill is to be introduced in each house on thefirst day each house meets after the president submits his draft bill ; the bill is referred to the committees of jurisdiction , whichhave 45 days of session to report the bill ; otherwise they are automaticallydischarged .

however , since bills to implement trade agreements are usually revenuebills , the senate committees must report the house bill and , for that reason , have anaddition 15 days of session to report the bill ; floor consideration is limited to 20 hours , equally divided andcontrolled , and each house must complete floor action within 15 days ofsession ; no amendments may be offered to the implementing bill incommittee or on the floor .

singapore is a city state located in southeast asia at the southern tip ofmalaysia and across the strait of malacca from indonesia .

it has a population of 4.4million , an area roughly 3.5 times the size of the district of columbia , grossdomestic product ( gdp ) of about $88 billion , and per capita income of about$20,600 .

it is a major trading country whose imports and imports each generallyexceed its gdp .

singapore has been a major proponent of trade liberalization andsupports the u.s. security role in asia .

singapore is america's largest trading partner in southeast asia with two - waytrade of $31.7 billion and a u.s. bilateral merchandise trade surplus in 2003 of $1.4billion ( same as the $1.4 billion in 2002 ) , a reversal from the deficit of $1.4 billionin 2000 .

the united states generally runs a surplus in services trade with singapore .

singapore is the 11th largest export market for the united states with $16.6 billionin merchandise exports in 2003 .

it is the 17th largest source for goods imported intothe united states with $15.1 billion in 2003 .

the united states is singapore's secondlargest trading partner ( after malaysia - - japan is third ) .

as shown table 1 , inbilateral trade by sectors , the united states runs surpluses with singapore in aircraft ; electrical machinery ; plastic ; mineral fuel ; optical instruments , miscellaneouschemical products ; dyes , paints , and putty ; articles of base metals , and iron and steelproducts .

the u.s. incurs deficits with singapore in machinery ; organic chemicals ; a special other category ; knit apparel ; special other import provisions ; fish andseafood ; woven apparel ; and books and newspapers .

table 1 .

u.s .

merchandise trade balances with singapore , 1999-2002 , by major commodity category ( million dollars ) source: data from u.s. department of commerce through world trade atlas .

categories are by two - digit harmonized system codes .

some 1,600 u.s. companies and close to 20,000 american citizens are located in singapore .

 ( 14 ) many u.s. multinational corporations usesingapore as a regional headquarters and base to export around the world .

theunited states is singapore's largest foreign direct investor , while singapore is thesecond largest asian investor in the united states after japan .

as of the end of 2002,singapore accounted for $61.4 billion in american direct investment ( up from $26.7billion in 2001 ) or 4.0% of total u.s. direct investment abroad .

for 2002 , americandirect investment outflows of capital into singapore totaled $11.4 billion out of totalu.s .

capital outflows of $119.7 billion .

 ( 15 ) even before the fta , singapore already had 99% free trade .

only beer andcertain alcoholic beverages were subject to import tariffs .

singapore , however , doesimpose high excise taxes on distilled spirits and wines , tobacco products , and motorvehicles ( which are all imported ) .

these are aimed at discouraging consumption forenvironmental and health purposes .

the government also bans chewing gum ( itcaused subway doors to jam ) .

these practices are addressed in the fta .

singapore has implemented a free trade agreement with new zealand ( effective january 1 , 2001 ) and with european free trade area ( effective january 1,2003 that includes iceland , norway , switzerland , and liechtenstein ) , and in january2002 concluded one with japan that excludes agricultural products .

the country alsohas completed fta negotiations with australia ( signed on february 17 , 2003 ) andis negotiating with mexico ( begun in july 2000 ) and canada ( begun october 2001 ) and on november 14 , 2002 , established a study group to explore a fta with southkorea .

as a member of asean , singapore is a participant in the frameworkagreement on comprehensive economic co - operation between asean and thepeople's republic of china ( signed november 4 , 2002 ) .

the framework agreementsets out how asean and china are to cooperate in economic liberalization as wellas economic cooperation .

it marks the first stage of tariff reductions under theasean - china fta under which tariffs are to be reduced or eliminated by 2010 forasean - 6 ( singapore , indonesia , malaysia , the philippines , thailand , and brunei ) ,and 2015 for the newer asean countries of cambodia , laos , burma ( myanmar ) andvietnam .

 ( 16 ) as for the united states , it also has low trade barriers except for certainprotected sectors , such as light trucks and textiles and apparel .

as shown in table2 , in 2002 , the united states collected an estimated $87.5 million in duties onimports from singapore of $14,115.8 million for an average u.s. duty of 0.6% .

thislow average tariff comes from a combination of low duties on most products andrelatively high duties on a few protected products .

on knit apparel , for example , theunited states collected $43.4 million for an average duty of 18.6% and on wovenapparel collected $8.5 million for an average duty of $16.3% .

average duties onmiscellaneous food items at 7.3% and on plastics at 5.4% also were relatively high .

on electrical machinery and equipment , duties averaged only 0.3% and on machinery0.1% .

other duties fell in the range of 0.4 to 2.4% .

the elimination of u.s. importduties under the fta , therefore , would primarily affect duties on imports of apparel,miscellaneous food items , and to a lesser extent plastics .

table 2 .

u.s .

import duties and average tariffrates on commodities imported from singapore , 2002 ( percent and million dollars ) source: data from u.s. international trade commission the united states already has free trade agreements with canada , mexico,israel , and jordan and is negotiating ftas with central america , australia,morocco , the southern africa customs union , and bahrain .

the united states alsois a member of apec , an organization that is pursuing free trade and investment inthe pacific region , and has been in negotiations with 33 other western hemispherecountries to establish a free trade area of the americas .

given the trend towardnegotiating more ftas , the agreement with singapore would give that countryessentially the same status as the other nations who already benefit from ( or maybenefit from ) free trade with the united states .

as for investment , singapore generally has an open investment regime .

atthe end of 2002 , the stock of u.s. foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in singaporetotaled $61.4 billion ( on a historical - cost basis ) .

u.s. fdi in singapore isconcentrated largely in manufacturing ( mostly in industrial machinery and equipmentand electronics ) , finance , and petroleum .

 ( 17 ) as of 2002 , singapore had a net directinvestment position in the united states of $2.9 billion - - down from $3.5 billion in2001 .

most is in manufacturing , real estate , depository institutions , and wholesaletrade .

 ( 18 ) .

the following information on the specifics of the agreement are primarilyfrom its text and from news and other reports as well as information provided by theu.s .

trade representative and singapore ministry of trade and industry .

 ( 19 ) theagreement would establish a free trade area between the united states and singaporeconsistent with the rules and obligations under the world trade organization .

a fundamental issue with respect to the u.s. - singapore fta was whether theunited states should pursue free trade and investment relations on a bilateral basiswith the island nation of singapore rather than maintaining existing trade practiceson both sides or pursuing more liberalized trade relations through other means .

alsoat issue has been the effects of these liberalized trade and investment flows on u.s.employment , imports and exports as well as access by u.s. businesses to singapore'smarkets in services .

the underlying issue of whether the united states should pursue moreliberalized trade and investment relations with singapore dovetails into the largerissue of globalization and its effects on the united states , particularly on labor andwages .

those opposed to greater interaction with the global economy , perhaps toinclude singapore , generally point to increasing competition from imports , theaccompanying threat to economic security in certain industries , particularlylabor - intensive industries with significant u.s. production , the rising u.s. tradedeficit , and claimed negative effects of globalization ( such as income maldistributionand increased pollution from industrialization ) .

among the 31 administration trade advisory committees , only the laboradvisory committee did not endorse the u.s. - singapore fta .

the labor committee rejected the proposed fta ( along with the u.s. - chile fta ) stating that it repeated"the same mistakes of the north american free trade agreement" and would likely"lead to the same deteriorating trade balances , lost jobs , trampled rights andinadequate economic development that nafta created. .

the other 30 advisory committees , including the trade and environmentpolicy advisory committee , generally endorsed ( or were neutral ) on the agreement - - although there were dissenting opinions and reservations about particularprovisions .

 ( 42 ) the key advisory committee on trade policyand negotiations strongly endorsed the agreement , stating that it believed the ftastrongly promotes the economic interests of the united states and substantiallyachieves the overall and principal negotiating objectives set forth in the trade act of2002 .

the labor representative on that committee , however , dissented , saying thatit failed to meet the objectives in a number of areas , including labor and environment .

as for the benefits of ftas , those in favor of trade and investmentliberalization , including ftas , generally claim that it brings increased exportopportunities , greater business flexibility , and a more efficient economy .

they alsopoint out that foreign countries usually have higher trade and investment barriers thanthose in the united states .

trade agreements , therefore , usually require greaterlowering of barriers by the foreign country than by the united states .

they alsoargue that the united states may be in danger of being left behind as other nationsconclude ftas that do not include the united states .

several large corporations and business organizations have provided supportfor ftas .

the u.s. chamber of commerce provided input to the ustr on theissues that it thought should be covered in a final agreement .

the us - singapore ftabusiness coalition , which includes membership by the chamber of commerce , thebusiness roundtable , the national association of manufacturers , the coalition ofservice industries , and about 100 u.s. companies and other organizations signaledtheir strong support for the fta .

 ( 43 ) the national conference of state legislatures representing u.s. state andlocal governments indicated its support for the u.s. - singapore fta provided that thefta not infringe upon the u.s. federal system nor afford foreign investors greaterrights than those afforded u.s. investors and property owners as pertains to statelaws , local ordinances , and regulations .

 ( 44 ) this issue relates to the "no greater rights"language incorporated into the act providing trade promotion authority to thepresident .

 ( 45 ) as for the effect of trade with singapore on the u.s. economy , a group of analysts have quantified the welfare impact of the fta on the united states as apositive 0.19% of gnp , or about $18 billion .

 ( 46 ) for thepast three years , the united states has run trade surpluses with singapore .

the netmacroeconomic effect on u.s. employment of this trade , therefore , is generallypositive , although bilateral trade balances have little effect on overall u.s.employment levels .

on a microeconomic level , however , the electronic equipmentand other machinery and equipment industries could experience greater importcompetition under the fta .

the domestic apparel industry would appear to lose the most tariff andquota protection from imports under the fta , but u.s. import quotas on textiles andapparel are already scheduled to be eliminated on january 1 , 2005 under the wtoagreement on textiles and clothing .

the fta agreement also contains strict rulesof origin that tend to neutralize effect on imports of the tariff reductions .

in 2002 , theunited states imported from singapore $233.79 million in knitted or crochetedarticles of apparel and clothing ( hs 61 ) on which the duties totaled $43.4 million oran average duty rate of 18.6% .

the united states also imported $42.3 million fromsingapore in other articles of apparel and clothing ( not knitted or crocheted , hs 62 ) on which duties totaled $8.5 million for an average of duty rate 16.3% .

 ( 47 ) these ratesare relatively high .

other significant terms of the agreement appear to be in greater access tosingapore's services market by u.s. companies .

the agreement not only includesa lowering of regulatory barriers for u.s. subsidiaries operating in singapore andlegal protections comparable to those in the united states , but it ensures thatu.s. - based companies will be able to sell their services ( such as portfoliomanagement , consulting services , video , music , and software deliveredelectronically ) without border barriers or customs fees .

the singaporean market,however , is relatively small and highly competitive .

some have criticized bilateral ftas because they can introduce economicinefficiencies by distorting trade flows .

they tend to divert export and import tradetoward the countries involved .

 ( 48 ) for example , under the north american freetrade agreement , some u.s. importers have turned to suppliers in mexico ratherthan buying from asia , and some manufacturers from asia have relocated to mexicoto take advantage of the tariff - free access to the north american market .

inefficiencies caused by such trade diversion , however , may be offset by gains inefficiency through trade creation - - additional trade generated by the existence of thelarger , unified market .

several factors mitigate against significant trade creation or trade diversionbeing caused by the u.s. - singapore fta .

both singapore and the united statesalready have low trade barriers ; the two markets are separated by long distances ; andthe singaporean economy is relatively small ( population of 4.4 million in an arearoughly 3.5 times the size of the district of columbia ) .

still the country boasts asubstantial economy with a gdp of about $88 billion or about the same size as thatof oregon or south carolina and two - way trade with the united states of roughly$30 billion .

this trade , however , amounts to only 1.6% of total u.s. trade of $1,982billion .

the us - singapore fta , therefore , does not seem likely to create asignificant amount of new u.s. exports or imports of goods .

some trade diversion is possible under the fta .

manufacturers currentlyproducing elsewhere in asia could relocate to singapore .

however , with singapore'sper capita income at $20,600 , average hourly labor cost of $7.73 ( compared with$5.55 in taipei , taiwan , $1.12 in bangkok , thailand , and $0.64 in guangzhou,china ) , and office occupancy costs 67% higher than those in guangzhou and 330%higher than those in bangkok , ( 49 ) it seems unlikely that a great number of factorieswould move to singapore to take advantage of the fta .

attempted illegaltrans - shipments from regional producers , however , could increase .

the ftaaddresses this potential problem with strengthened customs procedures .

bilateral ftas , moreover , also play a role in the trade liberalizing process .

currently , markets are opened primarily through multilateral negotiations under theworld trade organization , through organizations such as apec , or by sectoralinitiatives .

given the slowness of the wto multilateral negotiating process and thelack of further progress on sectoral trade liberalization following the informationtechnology agreement ( 50 ) in 1996 , countries can do an "end run" around thewto and liberalize trade with other like - minded countries .

the trade diversioncreated by such ftas , however , unleashes pressures for governments to either createftas of their own or join into existing fta arrangements .

traditionallyprotectionist countries , such as china or japan , now are actively seeking fta - typearrangements with other nations .

bilateral ftas , therefore , can become buildingblocks , rather than stumbling blocks , to global trade liberalization .

fta provisions on the temporary entry of business personnel andprofessional workers are raising concerns among many in the field of immigrationbecause immigration law traditionally is spelled out by congress , not the executivebranch .

some maintain that the ustr has negotiated these immigration provisionswithout any authority or direction to do so from congress .

the labor advisorycommittee , in particular , was critical of the provisions on the temporary entry ofbusiness personnel and professional workers because it appears to enable workersfrom singapore who have no direct employment except a service contract to enter theunited states , and such visa programs , they argue , would be in addition to theexisting h - 1b system without the existing labor condition application ( lca ) protections for domestic workers .

 ( 51 ) the mock markup sessions in the house andsenate judiciary committees addressed this issue .

 ( see discussion in the abovesection of this report on temporary business personnel and workers for details. ) .

more generally , some point out that these provisions bound by the fta mayconstrain current and future congresses when they consider revising immigration lawon business personnel , treaty traders , intra - company transfers , and professionalworkers because the united states would run the risk of violating the fta .

in responding to the labor advisory committee report , the ustr maintainedthat the temporary entry of professionals falls within trade promotion authority actobjectives regarding the opening of foreign country markets for u.s. services andinvestment , in particular to reduce or eliminate barriers that restrict the operations ofservice suppliers or the establishment or operations of investments .

the ustrclaimed that ensuring cross - border mobility of professionals and other businesspersons is critical for u.s. companies in developing new markets and businessopportunities abroad .

the ustr also argued that it is incorrect to assert that thelabor attestations required under the fta would be less rigorous than the lca calledfor under current u.s. law .

according to the ustr , the labor attestation requiredunder the fta also is to be modeled after the lca that the department of laborrequires under the existing h - 1b visa program , and ( as is the case under the h - 1bprogram ) fees may be collected along with the labor attestations .

 ( 52 ) as discussed earlier in this report , the integrated sourcing initiative alsohas generated some debate .

at issue is the extent to which certain informationtechnology goods and medical equipment that trade duty free can be counted assingaporean .

since the items already trade duty free , the isi would allow them toavoid u.s. customs user fees of about 0.23% of the value of the import .

theinitiative was aimed at two indonesian islands where many producers located insingapore procure components .

indonesian manufacturers would not be covered bythe labor , environmental , and other provisions of the fta .

indonesia also would notbe required to provide any reciprocal access to its markets .

a concern was that othercountries , such as china , might also be able to use the provision to ship productthrough singapore to the united states in order to avoid u.s. customs users fees .

some language dropped from the final text of the fta appears to resolve this issue .

in order for a third country to take advantage of the isi , it would have to ship aqualifying product from the united states to singapore to be incorporated into aproduct subject to the regional content requirement and then shipped back to theunited states .

also at issue is the extent to which particular provisions of theu.s. - singapore fta would be used as a template for fta negotiations with othernations .

of particular concern are current negotiations with five countries of centralamerica , the southern african customs union , morocco , and with australia , as wellas the proposed free trade area of the americas that would cover the westernhemisphere .

in many of these countries , labor and environmental standards areconsidered to be lower than those in singapore .

the u.s. - singapore fta states that both parties are to ensure that theirdomestic environmental laws provide for high levels of environmental protectionand are to strive to continue to improve such laws .

the agreement also requires thatthe parties effectively enforce their own domestic environmental laws .

with respectto labor standards , both parties also are to reaffirm their obligations as members ofthe international labor organization .

they are to strive to ensure that their domesticlaws provide for labor standards consistent with internationally recognized laborprinciples .

the agreement further requires the parties to effectively enforce their owndomestic labor and environmental laws .

these obligations are to be enforceablethrough the agreement's dispute settlement procedures but with financial penalties ( capped in amount ) for non - compliance .

labor interests point out that while thesingapore agreement commits the signatories to enforce their domestic labor laws,it does not actually commit the signatories to have labor laws in place , or to ensurethat their labor laws meet any international standard or floor .

 ( 53 ) in terms of u.s. security interests , the fta would add a formal economiclink to the security relationship with singapore .

in 1990 and 1992 , singapore signedaccess agreements that provide for limited u.s. use of air and naval facilities insingapore .

this was partly a result of the u.s. withdrawal of forces from thephilippines .

the 1990 access memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with theunited states allows u.s. forces to operate resupply vessels from singapore and touse the naval base and ship repair facilities at sembawang port and the paya lebarmilitary airfield .

a 1998 amendment to the mou allows u.s. access to singapore'snew deep - draft pier at changi naval base .

in 2001 , the uss kitty hawk became thefirst foreign vessel to dock there .

 ( 54 ) while the fta would not materially affect suchdefense cooperation , it could provide an economic rationale to maintain closerelations with singapore on all fronts .

as for the anti - terror campaign , as al qaeda has been driven fromafghanistan , some radical islamist activity has shifted to southeast asia .

this wasmanifest in the october 12 , 2002 , bombings in a nightclub district in bali frequentedby western tourists as well as other attacks on civilian and military targets inindonesia and the philippines .

some analysts fear that southeast asia with itswidespread muslim populations could become a haven for terrorists , a hotbed fortraining radical islamists , a source of finance for terror operations , and a primelocation for so - called "soft terrorist targets," such as hotels , businesses , andtransportation facilities .

in december 2001 , the media reported that the singaporeangovernment arrested members of a terrorist jemaah islamiah cell with extensive linksto al qaeda that allegedly was planning to blow up western embassies , u.s. navalvessels , and a bus that transports american military service members .

 ( 55 ) althoughthe fta would not materially affect the anti - terror campaign , it would add a linkbetween singapore and the united states that could enhance cooperation on certainissues ( such as terrorist financing and customs inspections ) and in determiningcourses of action on issues of interest to the united states in fora such as asean,the asean regional forum , and the non - aligned movement .

 ( 56 ) as a major shipping hub , singapore also has taken measures to curb itspotential for becoming a transshipment point for illegal cargo bound for terroristbuyers , a loading point for hidden bombs in cargo containers , or a target point fordirect attacks on ships .

as a member of the international maritime organization,singapore already is implementing some of the anti - terrorism provisions of theinternational ship and port facility security code ( isps ) and the amendments to theinternational convention for the safety of life at sea ( solas ) , ( 57 ) both dueto come into effect in july 2004 .

for example , gamma - ray scanners reportedly aresoon to be used to screen containers passing through singapore ports .

 ( 58 ) in summary , since singapore is a relatively small economy , the overalleconomic effects of the u.s. - singapore free trade agreement are not expected tobe great .

the u.s. electronics equipment and other machinery and equipment sectorspotentially may face increased imports from singapore , although u.s. agriculturalexporters may gain from more exports .

the agreement would allow greater accessto singapore's service sector , and some see it as a standard for additional ftas withother nations .

the debate over implementation of the fta fell between business andfree - trade interests who favor more liberalized trade , particularly in services , andlabor or anti - globalization interests who oppose more ftas because of the overallimpact of imports on jobs and the general effects of globalization on incomedistribution , certain jobs , and the environment .

house committee on financial services , subcommittee on domestic andinternational trade policy , trade , and technology held a hearing entitled"opening trade in financial services - - the chile and singapore examples. .

april 1 , 2003 .

house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on commerce , trade,and consumer protection held a hearing entitled "trade in services ande - commerce: the significance of the singapore and chile free tradeagreements. .

may 8 , 2003 .

house committee on ways and means , subcommittee on trade held a hearingentitled "hearing on implementation of u.s .

bilateral free trade agreementswith chile and singapore," june 10 , 2003 .

house committee on international relations , subcommittee on asia and the pacificheld a hearing entitled "u.s. trade and commercial policy in southeast asiaand oceania," june 25 , 2003 .

s.con.res .

42 ( bond ) / h.con.res .

167 ( weldon ) .

aconcurrent resolution welcoming the prime minister of singapore , expressinggratitude to singapore for its strong cooperation with the united states in thecampaign against terrorism , and reaffirming the commitment of congress tothe continued expansion of friendship and cooperation between the unitedstates and singapore .

s.con.res .

42 passed the senate on may6 , 2003 .

referred to the house .

h.r .

2739 , the united states - singapore free trade agreementimplementation act , was introduced july 15 , 2003 , by representative delay .

s. 1417 , the united states - singapore free trade agreementimplementation act , was introduced july 15 , 2003 , by senator grassley .

house ways and means and senate finance committees and house judiciarycommittee held mock markups of the draft implementing legislation for theu.s. - singapore fta .

july 10 , 2003 .

the senate judiciary committee helda mock markup of the legislation .

july 14 , 2003 .

house judiciary committee reported out h.r .

2739 by voice vote .

july15 , 2003 .

house ways and means committee and senate finance committee approved h.r .

2739 , u.s. - singapore free trade agreementimplementation act by a vote of 32-5 .

july 17 , 2003 .

senate finance committee unanimously approved and ordered reported s. 1417 , the u.s. - singapore free trade agreementimplementation act .

senate judiciary committee also approved the act .

july17 , 2003 .

the house passed h.r .

2739 ( united states - singapore free tradeagreement implementation act ) by a vote of 272-155 ( roll no .

432 ) .

received in the senate .

read twice .

placed on senate legislative calendarunder general orders .

calendar no .

226 .

july 24 , 2003 .

the senate approved h.r .

2739 ( united states - singapore free tradeagreement implementation act ) by a vote of 66 to 32 ( record vote number:318 ) .

appendix a. u.s. imports from singapore,customs value by two - digit harmonized system commodity codes2000-2002 ( million u.s .

dollars ) source: u.s. dept .

of commerce , bureau of census appendix b. u.s. exports to singapore bytwo - digit harmonized system commodity codes , 2000-2002 ( million u.s .

dollars ) source: u.s. dept .

of commerce , bureau of census appendix c. reserved service sectors / activities ( subject to restrictions , licensing , local presence requirements , etc. ) .

for the unitedstates and singapore under the u.s. - singapore free tradeagreement source: text of the u.s. - singapore free trade agreement .

note: for details see text of the agreement .

