news reports and articles in professional tax journals in the early 2000s drew the attention of policymakers and the public to a phenomenon sometimes called corporate "inversions" or "expatriations": instances where firms that consist of multiple corporations reorganize their structure so that the "parent" element of the group is a foreign corporation rather than a corporation chartered in the united states .

a may 2002 study by the u.s. treasury department concluded that while inversions are not new — the statutory framework making them possible has long been in existence — there has been a "marked increase" in their frequency , size , and visibility .

a comprehensive list of firms that have inverted has not been compiled .

some of the more high - profile inversions , however , include ingersoll - rand , tyco , the pxre group , foster wheeler , nabors industries , coopers industries , and stanley works .

 ( stanley works , however , subsequently announced that it would not undertake its planned reorganization. ) .

according to the u.s. treasury department , the transactions are increasing in size , scope , and frequency .

firms engaged in the inversions cite a number of reasons for undertaking them , including creating greater "operational flexibility," improved cash management , and an enhanced ability to access international capital markets .

prominent , if not primary , however , is the role of taxes: each of the firms in the above list expects significant tax savings from its reorganization .

the tax structure that permits tax savings through inversions has long been a part of the u.s. tax system .

the question then arises: why now ? .

one plausible explanation is the decline in the stock market that followed the bull market of the 1990s .

as described in more detail below , an inversion is accompanied by a required payment of tax by individual shareholders on capital gains .

the capital gains tax may thus serve as a brake on inversions .

lower stock prices , however , may mean that capital gains are smaller and capital gains taxes less onerous .

another suggestion has been that increased globalization of markets has exposed u.s. firms to more competitive pressures , leading them to more avidly pursue tax - saving strategies .

and yet another reason is simply momentum: firms may have been reluctant to incorporate abroad for fear of public relations damage .

once several firms undertook reorganizations , the damage potential may have been perceived to have fallen , and other firms followed .

the corporate inversions apparently involve little , if any , shifts in actual economic activity from the united states abroad , at least in the near term .

 ( see , however , the section below on "policy issues" for a discussion of possible long - run effects. ) .

bermuda and the cayman islands are the location of many of the newly created parent corporations — jurisdictions that have no corporate income tax but that do have highly developed legal , institutional , and communications infrastructures .

but the actual headquarters of inverted firms typically remain in the united states , and an inversion does not apparently involve the outflow of capital from the united states abroad or the shifting of corporate jobs to foreign locations .

instead , the chief near - term economic impact of inversions is on u.s. federal tax revenues , which are reduced by the reorganizations , and concern has been expressed about the potential erosion of the u.s. corporate tax base .

this has also led some to draw conclusions about their impact on tax equity: unless federal spending is cut or the deficit is increased , the reduction in tax revenue must be made up by tax increases on other taxpayers .

some policymakers have sought a remedy within the existing u.s. system for taxing international transactions .

as discussed below in the section on " alternative policy responses and proposals ," the 107 th and 108 th congresses have considered a variety of proposals aimed at stemming the growth of inversions .

the proposals range from re - imposing u.s. taxes in a manner that would undo the effect of the inversion to more incremental approaches , such as denying the applicability of foreign tax credits and net operating losses to one - time u.s. "toll" taxes that may be triggered by an inversion .

the latter , more incremental approach was taken by the enacted version of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

others view inversions as symptomatic of more general problems with the u.s. tax system that have become evident as the world economy has become more integrated .

rather than disallowing inversions , they recommend a more general reevaluation of the tax code "that drives them to do such a thing. .

the u.s. treasury department views inversions as evidence of competitive problems with the u.s. tax system .

the administration initiated a study of inversions in february , 2002 and issued a preliminary report in may 2002 .

the report stated that a near - term response to inversions should ensure that inversions "cannot be used to reduce inappropriately the u.s. tax on income from u.s. operations," and thus makes several proposals designed to protect u.s. tax revenues generated by u.s. income .

in keeping with its concern for competitiveness , however , the report does not propose more stringent rules for foreign - source income and calls for a reexamination of the u.s. international tax system .

inversions have thus been discussed in terms of tax equity and competitiveness .

a more detailed look at their implications for the u.s. tax system in general is presented below in the section entitled "policy issues. .

first , however , it is useful to look at the mechanics of inversions and how they generate tax savings .

proposed policy responses to inversions vary widely , depending on what is viewed as their chief threat .

for example , those that are chiefly concerned about the revenue and tax equity results of inversions make little distinction between inversions' loss of tax revenue from u.s. source - income , on the one hand , and foreign - source income , on the other .

their proposals seek to re - impose u.s. taxes on firms when inversions occur .

in contrast , others view inversions as symptomatic of a competitive burden imposed by the u.s. tax system , and have suggested more general reforms of the u.s. method of taxing foreign - source income may be in order .

the 2002 treasury department report , for example , recommended more stringent treatment of u.s. - , but not foreign - source income — for example , more effective measures of limiting earnings - stripping — and called for a general reexamination of the u.s. system of taxing foreign income .

the apparent recent increase in corporate inversions has aroused concern in its own right .

the spectacle of u.s. corporations engaging in "expatriation" in a tax - saving technique not available to most individual taxpayers may , in the words of the treasury department , "reduce confidence in the fairness of the tax system. .

but inversions can be viewed in a broader context .

recent tax policy debate has tended to focus on the international economy , sparked in part by the european union's successful challenge of the u.s. foreign sales corporation export tax benefit , and in part by the perceived new challenges posed by an increasingly integrated world economy .

some observers and policymakers have suggested that the time is right to consider fundamental reform of the u.s. tax system ; one approach might be to adopt a territorial tax system under which the united states would exempt foreign business income from tax .

inversions present many of the same policy issues as would be presented by adoption of a territorial system .

the end result of an inversion , after all , is the exemption from u.s. tax of a firm's foreign income .

accordingly , the debate over the respective merits of capital import neutrality and capital export neutrality occur in much the same manner over inversions as they occur in a debate over territoriality .

and the administrative problems inversions present in protecting the u.s. domestic tax base — the problems presented by earnings stripping and income shifting transactions — would be presented by a territorial tax system .

thus , if the question of adopting a territorial tax system moves to the fore of the tax policy debate , the debate over inversions may have provided a preview .

