there are over 12 million refugees worldwide , included in the total of close to 20 million individuals characterized as "people of concern. .

the result is a continuing increase in costs and expenditures required to address the problem .

while the global trend suggests that the numbers of refugees may have stabilized in recent years , the ebb and flow of population movements remain largely dependent upon external events and usually require an immediate response .

two major factors influence u.s. decisions to aid refugees: ( 1 ) an american bipartisan tradition of humanitarian concern for suffering people and ( 2 ) a concern that refugee flows can lead to instability in countries important to u.s. foreign policy .

u.s. assistance takes the form of aid to refugees in their countries of asylum and admission to the united states for some refugees of special concern .

the problem for congress is how to respond programmatically to refugee needs in a way that satisfies both the american tradition of providing assistance and u.s. budgetary limitations .

this report examines the problem , and the response over time by congress and the executive branch .

it also considers the role of the international community through the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) .

before reviewing the u.s. financial assistance to refugees , this report will examine the evolution of the refugee problem worldwide and briefly review the international response to it .

there are many international actors involved in addressing the worldwide problems presented by refugees and idps .

these include the united nations , other international organizations ( ios ) , intergovernmental agencies , ngos , and private or religious groups ( pvos ) .

two international agencies of particular importance in dealing with international refugees are the unhcr and the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) .

within the u.s. government , three agencies provide some form of international refugee assistance .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the department of defense ( dod ) receive funds under the broader category of "humanitarian assistance. .

the state department also has specific programs dedicated to addressing refugee issues .

the next section will review briefly the roles of each agency .

each is guided by specific legislative authority , including but not limited to the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , the migration and refugee assistance act of 1962 , as amended , and the refugee act of 1980 , as amended .

how congress funds u.s. refugee assistance will be addressed later in the report .

while humanitarian assistance is assumed to consist of urgent food , shelter , and medical needs , the u.s. government agencies providing such support can expand or contract the definition of humanitarian assistance in response to circumstances .

funds may be used to deliver the service required directly or provided as grants to ios , foreign governmental agencies , ngos , and pvos , which in turn provide the assistance .

the total budget of the unhcr tripled in the early 1990s as a result of increasingly complex humanitarian situations .

the calendar year ( cy ) 2002 budget was $1.05 billion .

the cy2003 budget appeal is $876.5 million , although it is likely that this number will be increased through supplemental requests to cover new emergencies .

raising money in a timely fashion has become increasingly difficult for the international agencies , both for humanitarian assistance programs and for repatriation programs .

since many countries earmark their funds for specific programs , the shortages are not spread evenly to all the humanitarian emergencies or even to all programs in a country .

other disaster agencies have similar patterns of uneven expenditures .

the unhcr has expressed concern that the continuing failure of donors to meet the funding needs of the humanitarian aid programs means that unhcr has not been able to meet the very real needs of refugees , returnees , and idps .

the high level of contributions of rich nations to the kosovo crisis and lack of contributions to african crises have established what is described by some as a double standard .

although unhcr receives donations from a large number of governments , inter - governmental organizations , private voluntary agencies and individuals , nearly 95% of the funds contributed come from 15 donors — fourteen industrialized countries and the european commission .

the u.s. government is the largest contributor to unhcr , providing at least 25% of all contributions .

u.s. funding to unhcr comes through two channels: a small portion for administrative expenses comes from u.n. assessed dues through the commerce , justice , and state appropriation , and voluntary contributions through the foreign operations appropriation .

in fy2002 , the u.s. voluntary contribution to unhcr was $255 million .

until u.s. fy2003 funding has been appropriated , programs will continue to operate at fy2002 funding levels .

a key concern is whether unhcr will receive adequate contributions from the united states in fy2003 .

the state department's population , refugees , and migration bureau expects to have refugee needs equal to fy2002 and there could be a significant shortage in refugee program funding , including funding to unhcr .

any additional funds would depend on the possibility of a supplemental appropriation ( with a likely delay in funding of unhcr programs ) .

since 1999 , unhcr's annual budget has seen shortfalls , which have resulted in cutting planned programs .

since unhcr relies primarily on voluntary contributions , it depends on the annual generosity of its donors and cannot anticipate from year - to - year how much money will be available nor how much it will have to spend .

some pledged contributions are also late .

these problems create a general cash availability crisis .

in february 2002 , unhcr froze its administrative budgets .

as of june 30 , 2002 , only $678 million had been received as income , which led to an 11% decrease in planned programs .

the unhcr annual budget was cut in calendar year ( cy ) 2002 from just over $800 million to $710 million .

according to unhcr , these funding shortfalls have most seriously affected programs in africa , as well as in thailand , papua new guinea , and the caucasus .

while unhcr continues to encourage contributions from additional governments , the small number of donors , in addition to earmarking contributions for particular refugee situations or programs , has led to problems funding refugee emergencies .

the unpredictability of global conflicts also contribute to unhcr's financial difficulties .

unhcr cannot fully anticipate the extent and costs of new refugee emergencies .

during cy2002 , unhcr had to make a supplemental appeal to fund new emergency needs in afghanistan , macedonia , east timor , liberia , angola , and zambia , as well as the new programs to protect u.n. personnel .

for cy2003 , unhcr has made another supplemental appeal .

unhcr has introduced new mechanisms to improve its funding flows , including the creation of an operational reserve to cover some emergencies and other unexpected costs .

recent debate in congress over the refugee budget has included both the funding issues facing all the programs in the foreign aid account and the policy differences that arise both between the administration and the congress and within congress over u.s. refugee policy .

the number of refugees admitted to the united states for resettlement is set every year in consultation between the administration and congress .

this is a requirement of the refugee act of 1980 , as amended .

the initial costs of resettling refugees in the united states are financed through the mra .

the number of refugees admitted dropped during the clinton administration from 113,000 admitted in fy1994 to 70,000 in fy1997 .

the clinton administration expected to continue these reductions based on fewer admissions from the former soviet union and southeast asia .

refugees located in camps throughout southeast asia that the united states pledged to accept under the comprehensive plan of action ( cpa , a 1989 international agreement to address the refugee crisis in southeast asia ) , have mostly been admitted .

most of the amerasians and former political prisoners have also been admitted to the united states .

the number of soviet jews and evangelicals admitted also continues to fall .

some members of congress do not support this reduction in refugee admissions .

the fy1998 resettlement ceiling was raised to 83,000 largely at the urging of congress .

the actual number admitted in fy1998 was 77,080 .

 ( the fy1999 ceiling was raised in mid year to 91,000 to include kosovars who were added on an emergency basis and the fy2000 admission level of 90,000 continued to reflect that resettlement need. ) .

actual figures show the fy1999 total as 85,525 ; fy2000 admissions came to 73,147 .

for fy2001 , 69,304 refugees were admitted ( with a ceiling of 80,000 ) and by contrast , following the terrorist events of september 11 , 2001 and greater security concerns , in fy2002 only 27,113 were admitted .

the ceiling established for fy2003 is 70,000 .

the cost of responding to refugee and humanitarian emergencies has risen .

pressure on the foreign affairs budget , the 150 account , caused by rising emergency costs , has led to concerns about the bilateral development assistance programs .

in the last few years , many of the private voluntary agencies working in the development field , as well as u.n. and u.s. development specialists have expressed concern that the rising costs of emergency assistance are reducing the amount of money available for development assistance .

several approaches have been used to address the growing need for refugee assistance and the anticipated growth in refugee repatriation needs without further draining the development aid accounts .

for example , in response to the need to help kurdish refugees displaced after the persian gulf war in 1991 , congress transferred interest on money from the persian gulf regional defense fund and defense cooperation account , two funds established to channel contributions from other countries to counterbalance u.s. iraqi war expenses .

a supplemental appropriation in fy1994 provided assistance for the rwanda emergencies .

supplemental legislation enacted in the spring of 1999 ( p.l .

106-31 ) reimbursed the agencies and provided new funding for aid both in central america and the caribbean , for natural disaster response , and to pay for humanitarian assistance to kosovo .

the administration requested an fy2000 supplemental to meet the continuing needs in kosovo and most recently in the fy2002 supplemental request for afghanistan .

meeting the growing need for humanitarian assistance to refugees in other countries within a constrained budget can also be helped by improving the effectiveness and efficiency of international refugee organizations .

the clinton administration emphasized the need for efficiency in the u.n. refugee agencies .

consolidation of humanitarian assistance programs , which partly address refugee issues , was one of the department of state's suggestions for u.n. reform .

in the united nations , ocha now issues consolidated appeals for major humanitarian emergencies .

these appeals simplify donations and eliminate overlap and competition among the agencies included such as unhcr , unicef , world food program ( wfp ) , and who .

