on january 23 , 2004 , president bush signed into law the consolidated appropriations act,2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) within which congress authorized the creation of the millennium challengeaccount and appropriated $994 million for fy2004 .

the mca legislation , included in division dof the omnibus spending bill , resolved several key issues on which the house and senate differed .

the measure creates a new millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , headed by a ceo whoreports to the board of mcc directions , instead of the secretary of state ( senate ) or the president ( house ) .

the board includes the secretary of state ( chairman ) , the secretary of the treasury , theu.s .

trade representative , the usaid administrator , the mcc ceo , and four others from listssubmitted by congressional leaders and nominated by the president .

low - middle income countriesmay participate in mca programs beginning in fy2006 , as proposed , but may not receive more than25% of mca appropriations .

the legislation creates a roughly 90-day period during which thecorporation will name the list of countries that will compete for mca selection in the first year ( "candidate countries" ) , publish the methodology that will be used for identifying best performingcountries , seek public comment on the initiative , and consult with congress .

following this reviewperiod , countries will be selected ( "eligible countries" ) and invited to submit program proposals forfunding .

this could take place as early as may 2004 .

in a speech on march 14 , 2002 , at the inter - american development bank , president bushoutlined a proposal for the united states to increase foreign economic assistance beginning infy2004 so that by fy2006 american aid would be $5 billion higher than three years earlier .

hefurther pledged to maintain economic aid amounts at least at this level into the future .

the fundswould be placed in a new millennium challenge account ( mca ) and be available on a competitivebasis to a few countries that have demonstrated a commitment to sound development policies andwhere u.s. support will have the best opportunities for achieving the intended results .

these"best - performers" will be selected based on their records in three areas: ruling justly - - promoting good governance , fighting corruption , respecting human rights , and adhering to the rule of law .

investing in people - - providing adequate health care , education , and other opportunities that sustain an educated and healthy population .

pursuing sound economic policies that stimulate enterprise and entrepreneurship - - promoting open markets , sustainable budgets , and opportunities for economicgrowth .

if fully implemented , the initiative would represent one of the largest increases in foreign aid spending in half a century , outpaced only by the marshall plan following world war ii and the latinamerica - focused alliance for progress in the early 1960s .

administration officials characterize themca as representing the most comprehensive policy change ever in how the united states designs,implements , and monitors development assistance to low and lower - middle income nations .

inparticular , executive officials emphasize the "results - based" aspect of the initiative in whichcountries will be selected based on past and current performance , and programs will be evaluatedon and required to show measurable achievements that impact favorably on economic growth andpoverty reduction .

conditioning assistance on policy performance and accountability by recipient nations is not a new element of u.s. aid programs .

since the late 1980s at least , portions of americandevelopment assistance have been allocated by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to some degree on a performance - based system .

what is significantly different about themca is that the entire $5 billion money pool - - which is nearly twice the size of the fy2003usaid "core" development aid budget - - will be tied to performance and results .

moreover,program proposals will be based on national development strategies developed by the countriesthemselves , with a u.s. role limited to providing technical assistance in project design .

further , inanother major departure from past policy , the mca is intended to focus exclusively on developmentgoals without being influenced by other u.s. foreign policy and geo - strategic objectives that oftenstrongly influence u.s. aid decision making .

nevertheless , while new details regarding countryeligibility , selection criteria , and organizational structure were announced in december 2003 , manyissues have not yet been decided and remain under review by the executive branch .

congress plays a key role in the approval of the initiative by way of considering authorization and funding legislation , and in confirming the head , or ceo , of the millennium challengecorporation that manages the mca under the president's plan .

congress will also maintaincontinuing oversight of the program as it is implemented and additional funding is sought insubsequent years .

among numerous policy issues for congress raised by the mca proposal were: country eligibility : should the mca target both low and lower - middle income countries , as proposed by the administration , or should it focus exclusively on the poorestnations where the needs are the greatest and where access to other financial resources is limited ? .

and , if both , how should funds be allocated between the two groups ? .

performance indicators and selection process : will the indicators and the methodology proposed by the administration identify the "best performers" ? .

implications for other u.s. development aid programs : how will the mca affect global and country aid programs not part of the new initiative ? .

u.s. organizational structures: is the proposed millennium challenge corporation , with a staff of 100 , the most appropriate structural model for managing the mca ? .

what are the implications for the u.s. agency for international development , the primarygovernment bilateral aid agency ? .

program development and selection: what types of activities should the mca fund and how will these programs be designed ? .

legislative and funding matters: what should be the relationship between mca authorizing legislation and current foreign aid laws and legislative practice ? .

what are thebudgetary implications on the mca ? .

as congress considered mca authorizing legislation and funding recommendations in 2003,and will later debate the confirmation of the mcc chief officer , followed by continuing oversightof program implementation , several key elements of the initiative have been , and will continue tobe closely examined .

these will include matters that have already been decided within the executivebranch , as well as issues that remain under discussion .

throughout this report , congressional recommendations to alter key elements of the president's mca initiativeare discussed .

the table belowsummarizes these changes .

a .

the status of the senate bill is based on s. 925 , the foreign affairs act , fiscal year 2004 , as amended during debate on july 9 and 10 .

s. 925 remains pending in the senate .

previously , the senate foreign relations committee had approvedlegislation authorizing themillennium challenge account in s. 1160 .

a modified text of s. 1160 was subsequently incorporatedinto s. 925 as division c on july 9 .

the house bill , h.r .

1950 , is also a combined foreign policy authorization measureto which earlier mcaauthorizing text was added .

the house international relations committee had reported h.r .

2441 , whichwas incorporated , withmodifications , to h.r .

1950 , and passed by the house on july 16 .

for many years , the united states has been criticized by other nations andinternational development organizations for not contributing enough to fight globalpoverty and promote economic growth .

although the united states was the largestprovider of official development assistance ( oda ) ( 38 ) until the early 1990s and wassecond to japan in most years since until 2001 , its contribution has been at or nearthe bottom of the list of international donors when measured as a proportion ofnational wealth .

figure 1 .

oda performance 2002 the united states defends its record as a development aid provider , arguing that contributions to global poverty reduction should not be measured simply in terms ofaid transfers as a percent of gnp .

 ( 39 ) u.s. officialsnote that in dollar terms , americanoda has remained substantial , and is programmed on more favorable terms than thatof other donors .

the united states , they emphasize , was a leading voice over thepast several years in the heavily indebted poor country ( hipc ) debt initiative , beingthe first government to advocate 100% cancellation of bilateral debt owed by theworld's poorest nations .

american charitable organizations and businesses providea significant proportion of annual aid transfers and private investment to thedeveloping world .

given the large amount spent by the united states on defense andthe security it provides to allies and friends around the world , american contributionsto global stability and a stable environment in which economic development can takeshape is much larger than oda expenditures suggest , they contend .

in the coming years , if congress continues to appropriate funds for the mca initiative that are in addition to other oda resources , the dollar value of u.s. odawill increase - - perhaps significantly - - especially if other new foreign aid programs,like the global hiv / aids initiative , proceed as planned .

the administration saysthat the mca would add 50% to u.s. oda contributions , and while that figure maynot be reached by fy2006 , it is likely to be in the 25-40% range .

but on the otherpoint of measurement - - oda as a percent of gdp - - the impact will not be sodramatic , largely because mca appropriations are likely to be very small relative tothe size of the u.s. economy and because of projected gdp growth estimates overthe next several years .

according to current projections , assistance would rise fromthe 2002 level of 0.12% of gdp to 0.15% .

ida - eligible , per capita income $1,415 and below mca eligible fy2004 and beyond * gross national income , dollars per capita , 2002 .

world bank annual report , 2003 .

** precise data unavailable .

per capita income $1,415 and below mca eligible fy2005 and beyond per capita income $1,416 - $2,935 mca eligible fy2006 and beyond * gross national income , dollars per capita , 2002 .

world bank annual report , 2003 .

