the v - 22 osprey is a tilt - rotor aircraft that takes off and lands vertically like a helicopter and flies forward like an airplane .

department of defense ( dod ) plans call for procuring a total of 458 v - 22s — 360 mv - 22s for the marine corps ; 50 cv - 22 special operations variants for u.s. special operations command , or ussocom ( funded jointly by the air force and ussocom ) ; and 48 hv - 22s for the navy .

the proposed fy2012 budget requested funding for the procurement of 30 mv - 22s and 7 cv - 22s , with one cv - 22 to be paid for from overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding .

the budget requested about $2.5 billion in procurement and advance procurement funding for procurement of mv - 22s , and about $499.9 million in procurement and advance procurement funding for procurement of cv - 22s .

for fy2012 , the v - 22 program poses a number of potential oversight issues for congress , including the aircraft's readiness rates , reliability and maintainability , operational suitability , and whether to approve a follow - on multiyear procurement contract .

h.r .

1540 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 as passed by the house , cut overseas contingency operations funding by $70 million for one cv - 22 and $15 million for v - 22 modifications .

the house cited the funds as having been provided earlier , in h.r .

1473 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 .

the senate armed services committee report on the fy2012 defense authorization act ( s.rept .

112-26 accompanying s. 1253 ) cut overseas contingency operations funding by $70 million for one cv - 22 and $15 million for v - 22 modifications .

the conference report accompanying h.r .

1540 , h.rept .

112-329 , authorized $2.2 billion in aircraft procurement , navy , for the v - 22 .

compared to the request , the report cut $15 million for "support funding carryover" and $10.5 million to "reduce eco" ( engineering change orders. ) .

the request for $84.0 million in advance procurement was reduced by $20.24 million for "advance procurement equipment cost growth. .

the request for $60.3 million in support equipment was reduced by $2.5 million for "deficiencies modifications other support growth" and $2.0 million for "reliability modifications other support growth. .

the request for $30 million in overseas contingency operations funding was also reduced by $2.5 million for "deficiencies modifications other support growth" and $2.0 million for "reliability modifications other support growth. .

overseas contingency operations funding was also cut by $15 million for v - 22 modifications .

air force v - 22 r&d was cut by $7.5 million for "contract delay. .

the house appropriations committee report ( h.rept .

112-110 , accompanying h.r .

2219 ) stated: v - 22 osprey - fiscal year 2012 marks the final year of the successful v – 22 multiyear procurement effort conducted by the navy and air force .

multiyear procurements are advantageous in that they provide savings and program stability to platforms when compared to annual procurements .

the drawback is that they reduce available budgetary flexibility .

the committee believes that if a platform meets the established criteria for a multiyear procurement and there is a high probability that the platform will be purchased for the period of the multiyear procurement , a multiyear procurement provides the best value for the taxpayer .

the committee believes that the performance of the v – 22 osprey aircraft has laid to rest all doubts about its operational effectiveness .

the aircraft has been successfully deployed to forward operating areas since 2007 and most recently was instrumental in the recovery of a downed air force pilot during the libya conflict .

in view of the continuing need for sustained procurement of the v – 22 , the committee urges the department of defense to consider a request for authority for a new multiyear procurement contract in the fiscal year 2013 budget .

in its report accompanying h.r .

2219 ( s.rept .

112-77 , accompanying h.r .

2219 ) , the senate appropriations committee added $2.8 million in navy v - 22 procurement funds for "voice recorders and navy - identified shortfall," cut navy procurement $10.5 million for engineering change orders and $4.5 million for "deficiencies modifications other support growth" and "reliability modifications other support growth," and cut $10 million from air force v - 22 r&d .

the senate appropriations committee report stated: v - 22 osprey - the committee understands the department of defense is considering a fiscal year 2012 follow - on multi - year procurement contract for the v - 22 program .

the multi - year procurement contract covering fiscal years 2008 through 2012 provided stability to the program and savings to the taxpayer of over $420,000,000 compared to single - year contracts .

given the continuing need for additional v - 22 platforms , the committee urges the department of defense to consider requesting authority to award a new multi - year procurement contract in the fiscal year 2013 president's budget .

engineering change orders [eco] growth - the committee notes a number of navy aircraft programs requested substantial amounts of engineering change order funding .

these aircraft programs enjoy either stable production or are maturing to stable production levels .

in most cases , these programs have excess unexecuted prior year funds and have been used as sources for higher priority navy requirements .

the committee recommendation reduces engineering change order funding to reflect actual prior year levels .

the joint explanatory statement of the committee of conference on h.r .

2055 detailed the $2.2 billion appropriated for v - 22 procurement as follows: in aircraft procurement , navy , reductions of $15 million for "support funding carryover" and $10.5 million to "reduce eco" ( engineering change orders ) .

$2.8 million was added for "v - 22 voice recorder - navy identified shortfall. .

the request for $84.0 million in advance procurement was reduced by $20.24 million for "advance procurement equipment cost growth. .

the request for $60.3 million in support equipment was reduced by $2.5 million for "deficiencies modifications other support growth" and $2.0 million for "reliability modifications other support growth. .

air force v - 22 r&d was cut by $7.5 million for "slow execution / contract delay. .

appendix a. v - 22 program history this appendix provides additional discussion of the history of the v - 22 program .

may 2009 gao report a may 2009 gao report provided the following summary of the history of the v - 22 program: the osprey program was started in december 1981 to satisfy mission needs for the army , navy , and air force .

originally spearheaded by the army , the program was transferred to the navy in 1982 when the army withdrew from the program citing affordability issues .

the program was approved for full - scale development in 1986 , and the first aircraft was flown in 1989 .

a month after the first flight , the secretary of defense stopped requesting funds for the program due to affordability concerns .

in december 1989 , dod directed the navy to terminate all v - 22 contracts because , according to dod , the v - 22 was not affordable when compared to helicopter alternatives , and production ceased .

congress disagreed with this decision , however , and continued to fund the project .

following a crash in 1991 and a fatal crash in 1992 that resulted in seven deaths , in october of 1992 the navy ordered development to continue and awarded a contract to a bell helicopter textron and boeing helicopters joint venture ( bell - boeing ) to begin producing production - representative aircraft .

in 1994 , the navy chartered a medium lift replacement coea , which reaffirmed the decision to proceed with the v - 22 .

it also provided an analytical basis for kpps to be proposed for the system .

this analysis defined the primary mission of a medium - lift replacement aircraft to be the transport of combat troops during sea - based assault operations and during combat operations ashore .

secondary missions included transporting supplies and equipment during assault and other combat operations as well as supporting marine expeditionary unit ( meu ) special operation forces , casualty and noncombatant evacuation operations , tactical recovery of aircraft and personnel operations , combat search and rescue operations , and mobile forward area refueling and re - arming operations .

these original mission descriptions and aircraft employment were reaffirmed by the marine corps in 2003 and again in 2007 .

the existing medium - lift aircraft fleet needed to be replaced due to inventory shortfalls and reduced aircraft reliability , availability , and maintainability — needs accentuated by the increasing age and limited capabilities of its current fleet of helicopters .

the analysis concluded that the v - 22 should be the marine corps' choice .

the analysis considered a number of helicopter candidates — including the ch - 46e and ch - 53d — and the v - 22 tiltrotor — judging each candidate based on their performance characteristics and expected contribution to tactics and operations .

a sensitivity analysis was conducted which measured candidate aircraft against specific performance parameters — including kpps .

the analysis used models to assess research and development , production or procurement , and operations and support cost and concluded that for non - assault missions , such as medical evacuation missions , the v - 22 was the most effective option because of its greater speed , increased range , and ability to deploy in one - third the time of the alternative candidates .

for assault missions , the analysis concluded the v - 22 would build combat power in the form of troops and equipment most quickly , was more survivable , would maximize the arrival of forces and minimize casualties , and would halve helicopter losses .

in terms of affordability , the analysis concluded that , holding v - 22 and helicopter force sizes equal , the v - 22 would be the most effective but at a higher cost .

the analysis further noted that while the major factor in favor of the v - 22 was its speed , at short distances greater speed offers little advantage .

subsequently , low - rate initial production ( lrip ) began with five aircraft in 1997 , increasing to seven each year in 1998 and 1999 .

in 2000 , the program undertook operational evaluation testing , the results of which led the navy's operational testers to conclude that the mv - 22 was operationally suitable for land - based operations and was operationally effective .

later evaluations resulted in testers concluding that the mv - 22 would be operationally suitable on ships as well .

based on the same tests , dod's independent operational testers concluded that the mv - 22 was operationally effective but not operationally suitable , due in part to reliability concerns .

despite the mixed test conclusions , a program decision meeting was scheduled for december 2000 to determine whether the v - 22 should progress beyond lrip production and into full - rate production .

following two fatal crashes that occurred in 2000 and resulted in 23 deaths , the last one occurring just before the full - rate production decision , the v - 22 was grounded and , rather than proceeding to full - rate production , the program was directed to continue research and development at a minimum sustaining production rate of 11 aircraft per year .

before the v - 22 resumed flight tests , modifications were made to requirements and design changes were made to the aircraft to correct safety concerns and problems .

the aircraft nacelles were redesigned to preclude line chafing ; a robust software qualification facility was built ; and vortex ring state , a dangerous aerodynamic phenomenon that all rotor wing aircraft are subject to and was reported to have contributed to one of the fatal v - 22 crashes in 2000 , was further investigated .

requirements for landings in helicopter mode in which engine power had failed ( "autorotation" ) and nuclear , chemical and biological weapons protection among others were eliminated , and some kpps were modified , prior to conducting a second round of operational testing with modified aircraft in june 2005 .

testers then recommended that the aircraft be declared operationally effective and suitable for military use .

the defense acquisition board approved it for military use as well as full - rate production in september 2005 .

dod is procuring the v - 22 in blocks .

block a is a training configuration , while later blocks are being procured and fielded as the operational configurations .

tables 1 and 2 provide a summary of the upgrades to be incorporated in each block configuration .

additional discussion early development the first of six mv - 22 prototypes was flown in the helicopter mode on march 19 , 1989 , and as a fixed - wing airplane on september 14 , 1989 .

prototype aircraft numbers three and four successfully completed the osprey's first sea trials on the uss wasp ( lhd - 1 ) in december 1990 .

the fifth prototype crashed on june 11 , 1991 , on its first flight , because of incorrect wiring in a flight - control system ; the fourth prototype crashed on july 20 , 1992 , while landing at quantico marine corps air station , va , killing seven people and destroying the aircraft .

this accident was caused by a fire resulting from hydraulic component failures and design problems in the engine nacelles .

flight tests were resumed in august 1993 after changes were incorporated in the prototypes .

flight testing of four full - scale development v - 22s began in early 1997 when the first pre - production v - 22 was delivered to the naval air warfare test center in patuxent river , md .

the first engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) flight took place on february 5 , 1997 .

the first of four low - rate initial production ( lrip ) aircraft , ordered on april 28 , 1997 , was delivered on may 27 , 1999 .

osprey number 10 completed the program's second sea trials , this time from the uss saipan ( lha - 2 ) , in january 1999 .

operational evaluation ( opeval ) testing of the mv - 22 began in october 1999 and concluded in august 2000 .

on october 13 , 2000 , the department of the navy announced that the mv - 22 had been judged operationally effective and suitable for land - based operations .

on november 15 , 2000 , the marine corps announced that the osprey had successfully completed sea trials and had been deemed operationally effective and suitable for both land and sea - based operations .

successfully completing opeval should have cleared the way for full rate production .

this decision was to have been made in december 2000 , but was postponed indefinitely , because of a mixed report from dod's director of operational test and evaluation , and two fatal accidents .

on april 8 , 2000 , another osprey crashed near tucson , az , during an exercise simulating a noncombatant evacuation operation .

all four crew members and 15 passengers died in the crash .

an investigation of the accident found that the pilot was descending in excess of the recommended flight envelope , which may have caused the aircraft to experience an environmental condition known as "power settling" or "vortex ring state. .

according to lieutenant general fred mccorkle , the pilot was descending more than 1,000 feet per minute .

the recommended descent rate is 800 feet per minute .

following a two - month suspension of flight testing , the osprey recommenced opeval in june 2000 , with pilots flying a slightly tighter flight envelope .

a july 27 , 2000 , report by the marine corps judge advocate general ( jag ) ( which had access to all non - privileged information from the safety investigation ) confirmed that a combination of "human factors" caused the crash .

this mishap appears not to be the result of any design , material or maintenance factor specific to tilt ... rotors .

its primary cause , that of an mv - 22 entering a vortex ring state ( power settling ) and / or blade stall condition is not peculiar to tilt rotors .

the contributing factors to the mishap , a steep approach with a high rate of descent and slow airspeed , poor aircrew coordination and diminished situational awareness are also not particular to tilt rotors .

a dod inspector general study concluded that the v - 22 would not successfully demonstrate 23 major operational effectiveness and suitability requirements prior to the december 2000 opeval milestone iii decision to enter full rate production in june 2001 .

the marine corps agreed with dod's assessment of the deficiencies , but said that they had been aware of these deficiencies before the beginning of opeval .

furthermore , the marine corps said that they had an approved plan designed to resolve the deficiencies prior to the milestone iii decision .

on november 17 , 2000 , dod's director of operational test and evaluation issued a mixed report on the osprey ; saying although "operationally effective" the v - 22 was not "operationally suitable , primarily because of reliability , maintainability , availability , human factors and interoperability issues. .

the report recommended that more research should be conducted into the v - 22's susceptibility to the vortex ring state blamed for the april 8 , 2000 , crash .

on december 11 , 2000 , an mv - 22 osprey crashed near jacksonville , nc , killing all four marines on board .

this was the fourth osprey crash since 1991 and the third lethal accident .

the aircraft's pilot , lieutenant colonel keith m. sweeney was the program's most experienced pilot and was in line to command the first squadron of ospreys .

the aircraft's copilot , major michael murphy was second only to sweeney in flying time on the osprey .

the marine corps grounded the osprey fleet pending a mishap board investigation .

on april 5 , 2001 , the marine corps reported that the crash was caused by a burst hydraulic line in one of the osprey's two engine casings , and a software malfunction that caused the aircraft to accelerate and decelerate unpredictably and violently when the pilots tried to compensate for the hydraulic failure .

the marine corps report called for a redesign of both the hydraulics and software systems involved .

maintenance and parts falsifications in december 2000 , an anonymous letter was mailed to the media by someone claiming to be a mechanic in the osprey program .

the letter claimed that v - 22 maintenance records had been falsified for two years , at the explicit direction of the squadron commander .

enclosed in the letter was an audio tape that the letter's author claimed was a surreptitious recording of the squadron commander directing maintenance personnel to lie about the aircraft until the v - 22 lrip decision was made .

on january 20 , 2001 , it was reported that the v - 22 squadron commander admitted to falsifying maintenance records .

the marine corps subsequently relieved him of command and reassigned him to a different position .

at a may 1 , 2001 , hearing , members of the senate armed services committee expressed their concern that false data might impede dod's ability to accurately evaluate the v - 22 program and identify problem areas and potential improvements .

the department of defense's inspector general ( ig ) conducted an investigation .

on september 15 , 2001 , it was reported that three marines were found guilty of misconduct and two were reprimanded for their actions .

in june 2005 , a u.s. grand jury indicted a company that had supplied titanium tubing for the v - 22 program .

the indictment charged the company with falsely certifying the quality of the tubes .

the v - 22 test program was halted for 11 days in 2003 because of faulty tubes .

replacing deficient tubes cost the v - 22 program $4 million .

navy officials do not believe that these deficient tubes caused fatal mishaps .

reviews and restructuring on april 19 , 2001 , a blue ribbon panel formed by then - secretary of defense william cohen to review all aspects of the v - 22 program , reported its findings and recommendations .

these findings and recommendations were also discussed during congressional testimony on may 1 , 2001 .

the panel recommended that the program continue , albeit in a restructured format .

the panel concluded that there were numerous problems with the v - 22 program — including safety , training , and reliability problems — but nothing inherently flawed in basic tilt - rotor technology .

because of numerous safety , training , and reliability problems , the v - 22 was not maintainable , or ready for operational use .

the panel recommended cutting production to the "bare minimum" while an array of tests were carried out to fix a long list of problems they identified with hardware , software , and performance .

cutting near - term production was hoped to free up funds to pay for fixes and modifications .

once the changes had been made and the aircraft was ready for operational use , the panel suggested that v - 22 out - year purchases could be made in large lots using multi - year contracts to lower acquisition costs .

program officials estimated that the minimal sustainable production rate is 12 aircraft per year , which would be less than half the ospreys once planned for fy2002 .

in p.l .

107-107 section 123 , congressional authorizers codified the blue ribbon panel's recommendation to produce v - 22s at the minimum sustainable rate until the secretary of defense can certify that the osprey is safe , reliable , maintainable , and operationally effective .

dod appeared to take managerial and budgetary steps to incorporate the blue ribbon panel's recommendations .

for example , dod's fy2001 supplemental funding request asked for a reduction of $475 million in procurement and an increase of $80 million in r&d funds .

the additional r&d funding was to be used to support initial redesign and testing efforts to address deficiencies , logistics , flight test , and flight test support for v - 22 aircraft .

the reduction in procurement funding reflected the need to reduce production to the minimum rate while the aircraft design changes are being developed and tested .

secretary of defense rumsfeld's fy2002 budget amendment , unveiled june 27 , 2001 , included a request for the procurement of 12 ospreys .

dod comptroller dov zakheim and marine corps commandant general james jones both stated that the procurement of 12 aircraft in fy2002 would allow them to sustain the v - 22 subcontractor base while simultaneously addressing the osprey program's needs .

v - 22s were procured at a rate of 11 per year from fy2002 to fy2006 .

following the blue ribbon panel's recommendations , former dod under secretary for acquisition edward "pete" aldridge assumed acquisition authority for the v - 22 program .

under secretary aldridge changed the v - 22 program's status from an acat 1c program — which gives the department of the navy the highest required authority for production decisions — to an acat 1d program .

under the latter category , the defense acquisition board ( dab ) would decide if and when the program is ready to enter full rate production .

a nasa - led review of the v - 22 program , released november 6 , 2001 , concluded that there were no known aero - mechanical phenomena that would stop the tilt - rotor aircraft's development and deployment .

the study focused on several aero - mechanics issues , including vortex ring state , power problems , auto - rotation , and hover performance .

in a december 21 , 2001 , memo to the secretaries of the air force and the navy , and the commander , special operations command , under secretary of defense aldridge gave his authorization for the v - 22 to resume flight testing in the april 2002 time frame .

secretary aldridge expressed support for range , speed , and survivability goals of the v - 22 .

he noted , however that the program still had numerous technical challenges to overcome , and emphasized that the v - 22 must demonstrate that "1 ) it can meet the needs of the warfighter better than any other alternative , 2 ) it can be made to be reliable , safe , and operationally suitable , and 3 ) it is worth its costs in contributing to the combat capability of u.s .

forces. .

secretary aldridge approved the flight test program under the condition that the production rate be slowed to the minimum sustaining level , that it be comprehensive and rigorous , and that the restructured program is fully funded in accordance with current estimates .

under secretary aldridge estimated that the v - 22 would require at least two years of flight testing before dod could conclude that the aircraft is safe , effective , and "worth the cost. .

mechanical adjustments slowed the v - 22 test schedule , and the mv - 22 took its first test flight on may 29 , 2002 .

the air force cv - 22 resumed flight tests on september 11 , 2002 .

flight tests were designed to explore both technical and operational concerns .

technical concerns include flight control software and the reliability and robustness of hydraulic lines .

operational concerns explored included whether the osprey is too prone to vortex ring state to make it a safe or effective aircraft , whether this potential problem is further exacerbated by multiple osprey's flying in formation , and how well the v - 22 handles at sea .

the principal differences between the aircraft that were grounded in 2000 and the aircraft that began testing 17 months later ( called "block a" aircraft ) are re - routed hydraulic lines and an improved caution and warning system .

technical glitches were experienced during tests .

hydraulic failures , for example , continued during the reinstated flight test program , once on august 4 , 2003 , ( due to a mis - installed clamp ) and again on september 5 , 2003 .

in june 2004 a v - 22 was forced twice to make an emergency landing .

during one landing , the aircraft suffered a "class b" mishap ( one causing between $200,000 and $1 million in damage ) .

an investigation revealed that the v - 22 suffered from widespread problems with an engine component that required replacement every 100 flight hours .

in conjunction with resuming flight testing , the navy department modified certain v - 22 requirements .

for instance , the v - 22 is no longer required to land in helicopter mode without power ( also known as "autorotation" ) , and protection from nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons has been eliminated .

the v - 22 is no longer required to have an "air combat maneuvering" capability ; instead it must demonstrate "defensive maneuvering. .

also , the requirement that troops be able to use a rope or rope ladder to exit the cabin at low altitudes has been eliminated .

also concurrent with the resumption of v - 22 flight testing , dod began an in - depth study of alternatives to pursue in case the aircraft does not pass muster .

options reportedly include purchasing the s - 92 , or upgrading ch - 53 , or eh101 helicopters .

after one calendar year and 466 hours of flight testing , dod reviewed the osprey's progress .

on may 15 , 2003 , thomas christie , dod's director of operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) , graded bell - boeing's improvements to the osprey's hydraulics as "reasonable and appropriate" and "effective. .

christie also at that time approved of the testing that had been completed and was satisfied with what had been learned about the v - 22's susceptibility to vortex ring state .

on may 20 , 2003 , the defense acquisition board also reviewed the program and approved of the flight test program's progress .

marine corps officials recommended increasing the production rate in fy2006 from the minimum sustainable rate of 11 to 20 aircraft .

however , in an august 8 , 2003 , memorandum , under secretary of defense for acquisition michael wynne announced that this acceleration "presents more risk than i am willing to accept. .

instead , wynne restructured the planned procurement , reducing the fy2006 purchase to 11 aircraft .

"for subsequent years' procurement planning , production rates should increase by about 50% per year for a total of 152 aircraft through fy09," according to the august 8 memo .

wynne directed that the savings resulting from the reduced procurement ( estimated at $231 million ) be invested in improving the v - 22's interoperability , by funding the joint tactical radio system , link 16 and variable message format communication .

wynne also directed that a multi - year procurement ( myp ) of the v - 22 be accelerated .

while some suggest that this restructuring will more quickly deliver high - quality aircraft to the marines and special operations forces , others fear that slowing procurement will inevitably raise the platform's cost .

in december 2004 the v - 22 budget and schedule were restructured again .

program budget decision 753 ( pbd - 753 ) cut 22 aircraft from the v - 22's production schedule and $1.3 billion from the budget between fy2006 and fy2009 .

on june 18 , 2005 , the mv - 22 program completed its second round of operational evaluation ( opeval ) flight .

the test program was marked by two emergency landings , a class b mishap , a small fire in an engine compartment , and problems with the prop - rotor gear box .

however , navy testers recommended that dod declare the v - 22 operationally suitable , and effective for military use .

this recommendation was based , in part , on observations that the mv - 22 had complied with the objectives of p.l .

107-107 section 123: hydraulic components and flight control software performed satisfactorily , the aircraft was reliable and maintainable , the mv - 22 operated effectively when employed with other aircraft , and the aircraft's downwash did not inhibit ground operations .

on september 28 , 2005 , the v - 22 program passed a major milestone when the defense acquisition board approved it for military use and full rate production .

the mv - 22 continues testing to assess survivability and to develop tactics .

the cv - 22 is in developmental test and evaluation .

the program continues to experience technical and operational challenges , and mishaps .

for example , an inadvertent takeoff in march 2006 caused wing and engine damage in excess of $1 million .

an engine component has been replaced because its failure in flight has caused seven unexpected flight terminations .

in october 2005 , a v - 22 experienced engine damage during flight due to icing .

an engine compressor failure during the v - 22's first overseas deployment ( july 2006 ) forced the aircraft to make a precautionary landing before reaching its destination .

an engine fire on december 7 , 2006 , caused more than $1 million to repair , and the marine corps grounded all of its v - 22s in february 2007 after it was found that a faulty computer chip could cause the aircraft to lose control during flight .

appendix b. june 23 , 2009 , hearing on v - 22 program the hearing was originally scheduled for may 21 , 2009 , but the hearing was adjourned after a few minutes and later rescheduled for june 23 , 2009 .

the chairman of the committee , representative edolphus towns , stated the following at the opening of the may 21 hearing: good morning .

thank you all for being here .

we had hoped to conduct today a thorough examination of the defense department's v - 22 osprey , an aircraft with a controversial past , a troubled present , and an uncertain future .

however , the defense department has evidently decided to stonewall our investigation .

on may 5 , 2009 , i wrote to secretary of defense gates to request information on the osprey , including copies of two reports on the performance of the osprey in iraq , called "lessons and observations. .

i also requested a list of all v - 22 ospreys acquired by the defense department , including their current locations and flight status .

however , to this date , the defense department has failed to provide this information , despite repeated reminders from the committee .

this is simply unacceptable .

general trautman , i want you to carry this message back to the pentagon: we will pursue this investigation even harder than we have so far .

we will not be slow - rolled .

we will not be ignored .

i intend to conduct a full investigation of the osprey , not just an investigation of the information that you want me to see .

we hope you will provide it voluntarily , but if you do not , we will compel your compliance .

to ensure a thorough investigation and to allow the defense department additional time to provide us with these records , we will continue this hearing in two weeks and i am asking the witnesses to return to present their testimony at that time .

this hearing is now adjourned , to be resumed in two weeks at the call of the chair .

thank you .

on may 22 , 2009 , it was reported that: the pentagon is denying the house oversight and government reform committee's accusations that it is stonewalling lawmakers' requests for information about the v - 22 osprey .

"the department of defense coordination process is highly complex," pentagon spokeswoman cheryl irwin told insidedefense.com .

"we are diligently working to fulfill this request and will have it to the proper officials in order that the hearing process can continue. .

house oversight committee chairman edolphus towns ( d - ny ) yesterday accused the pentagon of stonewalling his request for v - 22 documents and vented his displeasure by abruptly ending a hearing after mere minutes , telling a three - star marine corps general to return in two weeks .

towns said the panel had hoped to conduct a "thorough examination" of the v - 22 program , which he said has "a controversial past , a troubled present , and an uncertain future. .

but the defense department has "evidently decided to stonewall our investigation," he complained .

the panel's ranking republican , rep. darrell issa ( ca ) , also complained about dod's failure to provide the documents , stressing the committee needs such information well in advance of any hearing .

in a statement released later , he faulted a "bureaucratic failure of the office of the secretary of defense," not the marine corps .

after about three minutes , towns ended the hearing .

he said it would be continued in two weeks to give dod additional time to provide the records .

the witnesses were not invited to speak during the brief hearing nor did they attempt to do so .

after the hearing , lt. gen. george trautman , the marine corps' top aviation official and one of a handful of witnesses who had been scheduled to testify , declined to speak to reporters .

later that day , marine corps spokesman maj. eric dent told insidedefense.com the service understands towns' decision to postpone the hearing .

but the marine corps was disappointed "that we did not get the opportunity to discuss with the committee the osprey's remarkable performance in iraq over the past 19 months," he added .

the v - 22 program has nothing to hide , according to dent .

"as we were today , we remain prepared to discuss every aspect of the osprey program with congress," he said .

"we are fully committed to openness and transparency ; in fact , we've been working hand - in - hand with the government accountability office for the past year in its own review of the osprey program.".. .

dent insisted the marine corps is making a good - faith effort to address the request .

"we forwarded , at the committee's request , more than 500 pages of maintenance records , after - action reports , and additional information on every mv - 22 we have," he said .

"essentially , this was an aircraft - by - aircraft daily record of location and maintenance discrepancies .

collecting this information was a monumental task .

although we cannot speak to why the committee did not receive the information the marine corps prepared , we must emphasize that we have a process by which information , including classified material that was asked for by the committee , must be vetted before being released. .

