internet privacy issues encompass several concerns .

one is the collection of personallyidentifiable information ( pii ) by website operators from visitors to government and commercialwebsites , or by software that is surreptitiously installed on a user's computer ( "spyware" ) andtransmits the information to someone else .

another is the monitoring of electronic mail and webusage by the government or law enforcement officials , employers , or e - mail service providers .

another issue , identity theft , is not an internet privacy issue per se , but is often debated in the contextof whether the internet makes identity theft more prevalent .

for example , internet - based practicescalled "phishing" and "pharming" may contribute to identity theft .

this report provides an overview of internet privacy - related issues and related laws passedin previous congresses , and discusses legislative activity in the first session of the 109th congress .

background information on internet privacy issues is available in an archived crs report rl30784 , internet privacy: an analysis of technology and policy issues , by marcia smith ( available from author ) ; and crs report rl31289 , the internet and the usa patriot act:potential implications for electronic privacy , security , commerce , and government , by marciasmith , et al .

one aspect of the internet ( "online" ) privacy debate focuses on whether industry selfregulation or legislation is the best route to assure consumer privacy protection .

in particular,consumers appear concerned about the extent to which website operators collect "personallyidentifiable information" ( pii ) and share that data with third parties without their knowledge .

although many in congress and the clinton administration preferred industry self regulation , the105th congress passed legislation ( coppa , see below ) to protect the privacy of children under 13as they use commercial websites .

many bills have been introduced since that time regardingprotection of those not covered by coppa , but the only legislation that has passed concerns federalgovernment , not commercial , websites .

under a may 1998 directive from president clinton and a june 1999 office of managementand budget ( omb ) memorandum , federal agencies must ensure that their information practicesadhere to the 1974 privacy act .

in june 2000 , however , the clinton white house revealed thatcontractors for the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) had been using "cookies" ( small text files placed on users' computers when they access a particular website ) to collectinformation about those using an ondcp site during an anti - drug campaign .

ondcp was directedto cease using cookies , and omb issued another memorandum reminding agencies to post andcomply with privacy policies , and detailing the limited circumstances under which agencies shouldcollect personal information .

a september 5 , 2000 letter from omb to the department ofcommerce further clarified that "persistent"cookies , which remain on a user's computer for varyinglengths of time ( from hours to years ) , are not allowed unless four specific conditions are met .

"session" cookies , which expire when the user exits the browser , are permitted .

at the time , congress was considering whether commercial websites should be required toabide by ftc's four fair information practices .

the incident sparked interest in whether federalwebsites should adhere to the same requirements .

in the fy2001 transportation appropriations act ( p.l .

106-346 ) , congress prohibited funds in the fy2001 treasury - postal appropriations act frombeing used to collect , review , or create aggregate lists that include pii about an individual's accessto or use of a federal website or enter into agreements with third parties to do so , with exceptions .

similar language has been included in subsequent appropriations bills .

for fy2006 , it is section832 of the transportation - treasury appropriations act ( p.l .

109-115 ) .

nonetheless , in december 2005 , the associated press ( ap ) reported that a privacy advocate,daniel brandt , had discovered that the national security agency ( nsa ) was using permanentcookies on its website .

 ( 7 ) the ap quoted an nsa spokesman as saying that it resulted from a recent software upgrade and theagency was not aware that permanent cookies were being set .

c|net news.com reported a weeklater that , based on its own investigation , "dozens" of agencies were setting permanent cookies or"web bugs. .

 ( 8 ) the articleidentified the white house , the air force , and the treasury department as examples , and reportedthat some of the agencies changed their practices after being contacted , and many seemed to haveno idea that their software was setting cookies .

section 646 of the fy2001 treasury - postal appropriations act ( p.l .

106-554 ) requiredinspectors general ( igs ) to report to congress on activities by those agencies or departments relatingto their own collection of pii , or entering into agreements with third parties to obtain pii about useof websites .

then - senator fred thompson released two reports in april and june 2001 based onthe findings of agency igs who discovered unauthorized persistent cookies and other violations ofgovernment privacy guidelines on several agency websites .

an april 2001 gao report ( gao - 01-424 ) concluded that most of the 65 sites it reviewed were following omb's guidance .

the e - government act ( p.l .

107-347 ) sets requirements on government agencies regardinghow they assure the privacy of personal information in government information systems andestablish guidelines for privacy policies for federal websites .

the law requires federal websites toinclude a privacy notice that addresses what information is to be collected , why , its intended use,what notice or opportunities for consent are available to individuals regarding what is collected andhow it is shared , how the information will be secured , and the rights of individuals under the 1974privacy act and other relevant laws .

it also requires federal agencies to translate their websiteprivacy policies into a standardized machine - readable format , enabling p3p to work ( see abovediscussion of p3p ) , for example .

spyware is discussed in more detail in crs report rl32706 , spyware: background andpolicy issues for congress , by marcia smith .

the term "spyware" is not well defined .

oneexample of spyware is software products that include , as part of the software itself , a method bywhich information is collected about the use of the computer on which the software is installed .

some products may collect personally identifiable information ( pii ) .

when the computer isconnected to the internet , the software periodically relays the information back to the softwaremanufacturer or a marketing company .

some software traces a user's web activity and causesadvertisements to suddenly appear on the user's monitor - - called "pop - up" ads - - in response .

suchsoftware is called "adware," and one aspect of the spyware debate is whether adware should beincluded in the definition of spyware .

software programs that include spyware can be sold orprovided for free , on a disk ( or other media ) or downloaded from the internet .

typically , users haveno knowledge that spyware is on their computers .

a central point of the debate is whether new laws are needed , or if industry self - regulation,coupled with enforcement actions under existing laws such as the federal trade commission act,is sufficient .

the lack of a precise definition for spyware is cited as a fundamental problem inattempting to write new laws .

ftc representatives and others caution that new legislation couldhave unintended consequences , barring current or future technologies that might , in fact , havebeneficial uses .

they further insist that , if legal action is necessary , existing laws provide sufficientauthority .

consumer concern about control of their computers being taken over by spyware leadsothers to conclude that legislative action is needed .

utah and california have passed spyware laws , but there is no specific federal law regardingspyware .

in the 108th congress , the house passed two bills ( h.r .

2929 and h.r .

4661 ) and the senate commerce committee reported s. 2145 .

therewas no further action .

two bills passed the house in the first session of the 109th congress : h.r .

29 ( bono ) and h.r .

744 ( goodlatte ) .

two bills specific to spyware were introduced in thesenate: s. 687 ( burns - wyden ) , and s. 1004 ( allen ) .

a senate commercecommittee hearing on s. 687 was held on may 11 , 2005 .

on november 17 , 2005 , thecommittee ordered reported s. 687 , and defeated s. 1004 , with committeechairman stevens reportedly saying that he hoped a compromise could be reached before the issuewas debated on the floor .

 ( 29 ) meanwhile , the ftc endorsed a different bill , s. 1608 , at a hearing before a senate commerce subcommittee on october 5 , 2005 .

that bill deals notonly with spyware , but with other internet - related fraud , including spam .

its focus is enhancing theftc's ability to investigate and prosecute perpetrators who are located abroad or who use foreignintermediaries .

for more information , see crs report rl32706 , spyware: background and policyissues for congress , by marcia smith .

identity theft is not an internet privacy issue , but the perception that the internet makesidentity theft easier means that it is often discussed in the internet privacy context .

the concern isthat the widespread use of computers for storing and transmitting information is contributing to therising rate of identity theft over the past several years , where one individual assumes the identity ofanother using personal information such as credit card and social security numbers ( ssns ) .

theftc has a toll free number ( 877-id - theft ) to help victims .

 ( 30 ) the extent to which the internet is responsible for the increase in cases is debatable .

someattribute the rise instead to carelessness by businesses in handling personally identifiableinformation , and by credit issuers that grant credit without proper checks .

more traditional methodsof acquiring someone's personal information - - from lost or stolen wallets , or "dumpster diving" - - also are used by identity thieves .

three high profile incidents that became public in early 2005where the security of consumer pii was compromised reinforced existing fears about identity theft .

the companies involved are choicepoint , bank of america , and lexisnexis .

these incidents aredescribed in crs report rs22082 , identity theft: the internet connection , by marcia smith .

the following table provides summary information on internet privacy - related legislationintroduced in the first session of the 109th congress .

it should be noted that although some bills havesimilar titles or intents , the details may vary .

for example , some bills seek to protect "personalinformation," while others protect "personally identifiable information" ( pii ) .

some concern "data,"while others concern "electronic data. .

definitions may vary , or , in some cases , the ftc is directedto determine a definition .

table 1 .

bills introduced in the 109th congress , 1stsession source: prepared by crs .

note: pii = personally identifiable information ; ssn = social security number .

* although h.r .

1069 , s. 115 , and s. 751 have the same title,each is different .

