the potential harm to public health and the environment from a large release of hazardous chemicals has long concerned the u.s. congress .

the sudden , accidental release in december 1984 of methyl isocyanate in an industrial incident at the union carbide plant in bhopal , india , and the attendant loss of thousands of lives and widespread injuries spurred legislative proposals to reduce the risk of chemical accidents in the united states .

for example , federal environmental laws were enacted in 1986 and 1990 to mitigate and reduce the risk of accidental releases of hazardous chemicals from manufacturing facilities , processing plants , and storage tanks .

 ( these laws are discussed below. ) .

the hazardous materials transportation act of 1975 was passed to protect the public and environment in the event of an accident during transportation of chemicals .

other federal laws coordinate preparedness planning and response to significant chemical spills ( eg , the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ) .

the threat of terrorism manifested on september 11 , 2001 , prompted renewed congressional attention to the potential risks to public health and the environment posed by facilities handling large quantities of hazardous chemicals .

congress addressed chemical facility security when it enacted legislation establishing the department of homeland security ( dhs ; p.l .

107-296 ) .

the law requires analysis of vulnerabilities and suggestions for security enhancements for "critical infrastructure. .

the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) and the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa , p.l .

107-295 ) require vulnerability assessments , security plans , and incident response plans for some chemical facilities which supply drinking water or are located in ports .

many other chemical facilities remain unregulated with respect to terrorism .

thus , the 109 th congress continued to discuss the risks and consequences of potential terrorist attacks on chemical facilities and possible actions the federal government might take to prevent or reduce them .

this report provides background information and summarizes issues relevant to existing and proposed requirements aimed at reducing risks to the general public of exposure to hazardous chemicals as a result of terrorist acts at u.s. facilities where chemicals are produced , processed , stored , or used .

it considers the likelihood and severity of harm that might result from terrorist attacks on chemical facilities , as well as from illicit use of such facilities to gain access to hazardous chemicals ( or to precursor chemicals that can be used to produce hazardous chemicals ) .

federal requirements for contingency planning and responding to chemical emergencies after they occur are not the focus of this report .

in addition , it does not consider hazardous materials transport ( or storage incidental to transport ) .

the report first describes the range of terrorist acts that might threaten chemical facilities and summarizes publicly available information relevant to risks: recent trends in terrorist activity , including chemical use by terrorists ; expert estimates of the harm that might be inflicted through chemical terrorism ; and assessments of the vulnerability of chemical facilities .

the next section of the report discusses existing federal mandates and incentives for reducing risks of accidental releases from chemical facilities .

the remainder of the report summarizes recent administration and private sector initiatives to improve chemical site security ; analyzes policy options and key issues ; and describes legislation in the 109 th congress .

two key federal laws require or encourage certain chemical facility operators to reduce risks to the general public associated with releases of hazardous chemicals: the emergency response and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) and the clean air act ( caa ) .

both focus on accidental releases of hazardous chemicals .

september 11 , 2001 prompted policy makers to reconsider federal policy options regarding potential terrorist threats to chemical facilities .

a range of possible strategies is summarized below .

additional information on this topic is provided by crs report rl33043 , legislative approaches to chemical facility security , by [author name scrubbed] .

policy makers choosing among policy options for reducing terrorist risks associated with chemical plants are faced with at least three fundamentally political issues: the effect of public disclosure ; the relative importance of diverse risks ( and associated costs and benefits of risk reduction ) , and who should be responsible ( and held accountable ) for achieving results .

although legislation to enhance the security of a broad range of chemical facilities was introduced in previous congresses ( the 107 th and 108 th ) , none was enacted .

a shift in committee structure in both the house and the senate may have affected the fate of legislation in the 109 th congress .

the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs took the lead in holding hearings and developing legislation in the senate .

however , senator inhofe , chairman of the senate committee on environment and public works , which held hearings during the previous congress , placed a hold on the bill because of concerns about its coverage of drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities ( which fall within the purview of his committee ) .

in the house , bills were referred to both the committee on energy and commerce , which held hearings during the 108 th congress , and to the now permanent committee on homeland security , which reported a bill very similar to the senate bill .

as the 109 th congress approached the end of the 2 nd session , the chairman of the committee on energy and commerce supported an amendment to the dhs fy2007 appropriations bill , h.r .

5441 , which was adopted and became law when the bill was enacted on october 4 , 2006 .

on december 5 , 2006 , the chairman introduced the same provisions as a stand - alone bill , h.r .

6348 .

p.l .

109-295 provides authority to dhs for three years to issue regulations for high - risk chemical facilities , other than drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities and facilities in ports .

the enacted provisions combine certain elements of h.r .

5695 , as reported by the house homeland security committee , and s. 2145 , as reported by the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the various legislative proposals , as well as the enacted provisions , are summarized below .

the threat of terrorism in the united states challenges the existing balance maintained in federal laws between the public's right to know about chemical hazards and the chemical industry's right to protect confidential business information .

at issue are risks to public health and safety , environmental protection , civil rights and duties , national security , and privacy .

some are advocating a strategy of relative risk analysis and analysis of risk management options to reveal the best course of action .

however , information appears to be inadequate for quantitative evaluation of the risks of chemical releases , whether deliberate or accidental , and the nature of terrorism makes prediction difficult .

moreover , there is no universally accepted level of tolerable risk , no obvious basis for a comparison of relative risks and benefits , and no established federal mechanism for ensuring responsible management of the risks of chemical terrorism .

a variety of federal policy options are available for enhancing chemical security .

in choosing among options , policy makers face three key issues: how to evaluate the risks versus the benefits of public disclosure ; how to determine and prioritize the relative importance of diverse risks ; and who to hold responsible for achieving results .

section 550 of p.l .

109-295 , the fy2007 dhs appropriation , resolved these issues temporarily by providing three years of regulatory authority for dhs .

the law requires vulnerability assessments for high - risk chemical facilities and implementation of security plans to address hazards revealed in such assessments .

other legislative proposals that were considered by the 109 th congress would have done the same , but also addressed issues such as how to facilitate congressional oversight of dhs implementation , the role of inherently safer technology , the criteria used to designate facilities as more or less "risky," and whether state and local right - to - know laws should be preempted by the federal provisions .

it remains to be seen whether congress will tackle such issues in the future .

crs report rl31547 , critical infrastructure information disclosure and homeland security , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31861 , high - threat chemical agents: characteristics , effects , and policy implications , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31542 , homeland security — reducing the vulnerability of public and private information infrastructures to terrorism: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33043 , legislative approaches to chemical facility security , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31294 , safeguarding the nation ' s drinking water: epa and congressional actions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32189 , terrorism and security issues facing the water infrastructure sector , by [author name scrubbed] .

