since the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 , policymakers have been attempting to decreasethe vulnerability of the united states to the terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction .

this reportdescribes the different types of high - threat chemical agents .

it also discusses their availability,treatment , and detection , and possible policy approaches to reducing the threat posed by them .

terrorist use of chemical agents is widely believed to be an event that has low probability , but potentially high consequences .

while there is still debate over whether terrorist groups have anincreased interest in chemical acquisition and use , the domestic vulnerability of the united statesto chemical attack remains high .

policy approaches to reducing chemical vulnerability havegenerally treated chemical agents as a group , rather than addressing specific agents .

additionally,military and civilian chemical agent detection have developed with little coordination , so thatcivilian toxic industrial chemical kits and military chemical weapons detectors having varyingsensitivities and detection capabilities .

treatments for chemical exposure vary as well , dependingon the type of chemical , and so must be addressed on a chemical by chemical basis .

becausecomparatively few individuals have been exposed to modern chemical weapons , practical experiencein treatment of chemical casualties is limited , especially among civilian health care providers .

whilenational efforts to reduce vulnerability to terrorist chemical agent use continue , it is not clear whetherspecific agents that pose the greatest danger are being adequately addressed as general vulnerabilitiesare being reduced .

high - threat chemical agents are , for the purpose of this report , chemicals posing exceptionallethality and danger to humans .

 ( 1 ) some may havebeen developed and used for commercial purposes .

others may have been used or developed by militaries as chemical weapons .

different chemical weapons cause different symptoms in and injuries to their victims .

because of this range of potential symptoms , it can be difficult to know what treatment will be most effectivefor a victim until the chemical or chemical type has been identified .

also , chemical weapons mayproduce their effects by different exposure routes , for example , by skin contact or by inhalation .

asa consequence , depending on what chemical is encountered , different protective equipment must beemployed ; for example , a gas mask alone is not sufficient protection against chemicals which candamage through skin contact .

military planners categorize such agents into four classes: nerve , blister , choking , and bloodagents .

 ( 2 ) this categorization groups chemicals bythe effects they cause to those exposed to them .

while the nerve and blister agents are predominantly only manufactured and used by militaries asweapons , both choking agents and blood agents include chemicals widely used in industrialprocesses .

protection against chemical agents is predominantly achieved through physical , rather thanmedicinal , means .

physical protections limit exposure by protecting the eyes , lungs , and / or skinfrom chemical contact .

chemical weapons detection has been predominantly an area of concern for military planners,although the manufacture of some of these agents for commercial use requires detection capabilitiesat manufacturing plants and by hazardous - materials first responders .

while some military unitshave equipment designated for chemical weapon detection , civilian first responders use a variety ofcommercial equipment to detect and identify a wide range of chemicals .

because of the wide spectrum of chemical agents , the development of a portable , integrated instrument which quickly detects all chemical agents remains an area of research and development .

the department of defense currently employs a series of technologies to detect and identifychemical agents , including personal sensors , automated atmospheric sampling , and field - adaptedlaboratory methods for battlefield use .

detection of chemical agents can serve many purposes .

one is to provide warning of a chemical attack , allowing additional time to react to a terror event .

another is to identify thechemical agent used in an attack .

this might provide for better treatment and more effectiveresponse .

finally , determining when an area is clear of chemical agents after a terror attack requiressensitive post - event detection .

there are techniques for detecting chemical agents that are based on sampling the local environment .

detection paper , tickets , and tubes are examples of such techniques .

detection paperis absorbent paper impregnated with special dyes .

when a drop of chemical agent is absorbed bythe paper , it dissolves one of the pigments , causing the paper to change color .

detection tickets areused in a manner similar to detection paper .

the ticket is waved in the air or used with a hand pumpto determine if chemical agents are present .

detection tubes use a similar technology , but rely ona hand pump to draw air samples through the tube , which discolors in the presence of an agent .

adisadvantage to these techniques is that other substances can also dissolve these pigments , causingfalse positives .

 ( 40 ) the pigments involved can bespecific to a type of agent , so an array of papers,tickets , or tubes may be required to identify the exact agent encountered .

handheld detectors , such as the chemical agent monitor ( cam ) , are able to detect some chemical agents , namely mustard agents and nerve agents , at levels that are below the lethalthreshold , but above the acceptable daily exposure limit for civilians .

 ( 41 ) automatic sampling devices,such as the automatic chemical agent detector / alarm ( acada ) , are also employed to provideautomated , constant atmospheric sampling .

 ( 42 ) these devices sometimes use a technique called ionmobility spectroscopy to detect the presence of chemical agents .

much of the above equipment is commercially available , and could be used by hazardous material response teams to assess potential terrorist activity .

typically , hazardous material responseteams are equipped with detection paper , tickets , or tubes , but these teams have differingrequirements regarding equipment standardization .

 ( 43 ) the president has requested fy2004 fundingfor the department of homeland security for research on standards for first responder detectionequipment .

 ( 44 ) to aid first responders in choosingthe best or most appropriate system for their use,the national institute of justice has provided guidelines to assess various types of detectors .

 ( 45 ) supplementing first responders is the metropolitan medical response system , a federal program toenhance local capabilities in the event of a terrorist incident .

 ( 46 ) ninety - seven metropolitan areas areinvolved in this system and maintain additional chemical detection , treatment , and decontaminationequipment .

 ( 47 ) .

many experts believe that it would be difficult for terrorist groups to use chemical agents asweapons of mass destruction .

even vx , the most lethal of nerve agents , would require tons , spreaduniformly and efficiently , to kill 50% of the people in a 100 km 2 area .

 ( 50 ) on the other hand , chemicalagents might be effectively used as weapons of terror in situations where limited or enclosed spacemight decrease the required amounts of chemical .

that is , the use of the weapon itself , even ifcasualties are few , could cause fear that would magnify the attack's effect beyond what would beexpected based solely on the number of casualties .

there have been few examples of successful chemical terror attacks .

in 1995 , aum shinrikyo , a japanese apocalyptic cult , used sarin on the tokyo subway .

the attack killed 12 people and sentmore than 5,000 to the hospital with some degree of injury .

 ( 51 ) this same cult reportedly carried outan attack in matsumoto as well , where 7 people were killed and over 200 injured .

 ( 52 ) both of theseattacks used g - series nerve agents , which are more toxic through inhalation than by contact .

v - series agents employed in a similar manner might have caused greater fatalities .

in comparison , blister agents would likely be less lethal , but more injurious , if used in a similar manner .

blister agents are dermally active , so inhalation of the agent would not be necessary tocause injury .

additionally , since mustard agent vapor penetrates most fabrics , victims near the pointof release might suffer grievously .

blister agents , while not likely to cause mass destruction , mightcause mass terror and injury .

choking agents are no longer considered to be useful military weapons , as chemical suits and masks provide high protection .

as a weapon of mass destruction used against civilians , thecomparatively low lethality of choking agents complicates their use as a weapon of mass destruction,since very large volumes would be needed .

 ( 53 ) onthe other hand , the industrial availability of somechoking agents provides opportunities for acquisition and subsequent use of potentially very largevolumes of such agents .

for example , the united states produces approximately 1 billion poundsof chlorine a year for use in water treatment facilities .

the potential vulnerability of chlorine - filledrail tank cars , by which chlorine is primarily transported , has been noted .

 ( 54 ) terrorist attack onindustrial stores at chemical or water treatment facilities or during shipment has been raised asanother potential source of concern .

 ( 55 ) blood agents may be difficult to employ as weapons of mass destruction for many of the same reasons as choking agents .

the quick dispersal of blood agents , combined with the large amountsnecessary to cause mass casualties , make such agents difficult to use on a mass scale .

even thoseblood agents which are industrially manufactured are often used on - site without being shipped .

however , terrorist groups seem to be increasingly interested in these agents , perhaps because ofcriminal use of them .

 ( 56 ) ramzi yousef , convicted of the 1993 world trade center bombing , stated he had intended to include sodium cyanide in that bomb , in order to create a cloud of cyanide gas .

 ( 57 ) while a smallamount of cyanide was found in the supplies of the bombers , there was no evidence that this hadbeen done .

in 1995 , following the sarin attack , members of aum shinrikyo attempted an attack intokyo by setting fire to a plastic bag of sodium cyanide positioned next to a bag of an acid .

asimilar combination of chemicals was discovered the following month in another station .

bothdevices were successfully disarmed .

 ( 58 ) in 2002,italian police arrested four moroccan men possessingpotassium ferrocyanide .

it was reported that the men arrested planned to poison the water supplyusing the potassium ferrocyanide .

it is questionable how effective this would have been , consideringthe volume of the water supply and the amount of potassium ferrocyanide found in their possession .

 ( 59 ) a group calling itself september 11 threatened the use of cyanide to disrupt the america's cup boatrace in new zealand .

 ( 60 ) it is believed that the al qaeda terrorist group has produced and developed plans for the employment of chemical weapons , including hydrogen cyanide .

osama bin laden has stated thatal qaeda has a chemical capability .

 ( 61 ) ahmedressam , convicted in a plot to bomb the los angelesairport , testified he had received training in the use of hydrogen cyanide in afghanistan at an alqaeda training camp .

 ( 62 ) the training describedincluded the production of hydrogen cyanide usingcyanide salts and acids , demonstrations of the effectiveness of the agent by exposing dogs to it , andintroducing the agent into building ventilation systems by placing a source near the air intakes .

 ( 63 ) cnn also located and retrieved videotapes from afghanistan which portray the results of testing ofunknown chemical agents on dogs .

it has been suggested that the chemical agent used in thosevideotapes was a blood agent , most likely hydrogen cyanide .

 ( 64 ) .

there are several areas where policymakers may wish to further address the danger posed byterrorist acquisition and use of high - threat chemical agents: the availability of such chemical agents ; the availability of chemical detectors , their sensitivity , and their use ; the ability of first respondersand diagnostic laboratories to detect , respond to , and resolve a chemical attack ; the development ofnew treatments and prophylaxis ; and determining whether an appropriate amount of funds andfederal attention is being given to this topic .

crs report rl31332 , weapons of mass destruction: the terrorist threat , by stevebowman .

crs report rl31831 , terrorist motivations for chemical and biological weapons use: placing the threat in context , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31669 , terrorism: background on chemical , biological , and toxin weapons and options for lessening their impact , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31475 , first responder initiative: policy issues and options , by ben canada .

crs report rl31853 , food safety issues in the 108th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31791 , emergency management funding for the department of homeland security: information and issues for fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] , coordinator , rob buschmann , ben canada,wayne morrissey , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31530 , chemical plant security , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30169 , export administration act of 1979 reauthorization , coordinated by ian f.fergusson .

crs issue brief ib94029 , chemical weapons convention: issues for congress , by steven r.bowman .

crs report rl31559 , proliferation control regimes: background and status , by sharon a.squassoni , coordinator , steven r. bowman , and , [author name scrubbed] .

