this report examines the federal laws and regulations relevant to entering into federal government employment from the private sector , with respect particularly to the potential conflicts of interest that may arise because of the past employment , affiliations , or financial interests or involvements of a nominee or new officer or employee in the executive branch of government .

the report is intended to provide those conducting congressional oversight with an outline of some of the issues , rules , regulations , and oversight tools that may be available regarding this subject .

concerns have been expressed about the impartiality , bias , or fairness of government regulators , administrators , and other executive branch decisionmakers who , shortly before entering government service , represented , owned , or were employed by the industries , firms , or other entities which they must now regulate and oversee , or about whom they now provide advice to the government .

several instances of alleged conflicts of interest , "appearances" of conflicts of interest or bias , or "cozy relationships" between the regulated entities and the government official who formerly worked for or represented that regulated entity , have been examined in the press over the last several years .

additionally , concerns have been raised with regard to large cash pay - outs or "rewards" to personnel of private entities who are about to enter government service .

the allegations and concerns in such instances are that loyalty to private economic and business interests , rather than fealty to the general public interest , is being served by such officials in their actions .

individuals entering federal service will bring with them existing financial investments , ownerships , properties , and other economic arrangements typical of anyone similarly placed in american society .

those entering federal service immediately from private industry will also enter with certain former affiliations , employment , or other financial , economic , or business associations with particular private interests .

federal conflict of interest law and regulation focuses primarily on current economic and financial interests of a government official and those closely associated with the official .

however , there are some limited conflict of interest regulations and ethics standards which look also to previous employment and past associations of those becoming federal officers and employees .

the term "conflict of interest" may have a broad meaning in general usage .

however , under federal law and regulation a "conflict of interest," for the most part , deals with a conflict between a federal employee's official , governmental duties and responsibilities on the one hand , and the personal , financial , or economic interests of the employee on the other .

when the official duties of a government employee may impact upon the outside , private business or economic interests of that employee , or the economic interests of those closely associated with the employee , a conflict of interest situation presents itself .

the overall scheme of the conflict of interest laws adopted by congress generally embodies the principle "that a public servant owes undivided loyalty to the government," and that advice and recommendations given to the government by its employees and officials be made in the public interest and not be tainted , even unintentionally , with influence from private or personal financial interests .

the house judiciary committee , reporting out major conflict of interest revisions made to federal law in the 1960s , found , the proper operation of a democratic government requires that officials be independent and impartial ; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure ; ... and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government .

the attainment of one or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists , or appears to exist an actual or potential conflict between the private interests of a government employee and his duties as an official .

the concern in such regulation "is not only the possibility or appearance of private gain from public office , but the risk that official decisions , whether consciously or otherwise , will be motivated by something other than the public's interest .

the ultimate concern is bad government ... " the conflict of interest laws are thus directed not only at conduct which is improper , but rather are often preventative in nature , directed at situations which merely have the potential to tempt or subtly influence an official in the performance of official public duties .

as explained by the supreme court with regard to a predecessor conflict of interest law requiring disqualification of officials from matters in which they have a personal financial interest: this broad proscription embodies a recognition of the fact that an impairment of impartial judgment can occur in even the most well - meaning men when their personal economic interests are affected by the business they transact on behalf of the government .

the application of federal conflict of interest laws and regulations , particularly the laws requiring an official's recusal or disqualification from certain matters , or regulations or procedures requiring the divestiture of certain assets , have traditionally been directed at current and existing financial interests and ties of that official , and those closely associated with the official .

the regulatory scheme regarding financial interests encompasses what has colloquially been called the "three - d" method of conflict of interest regulation , that is: disclosure , disqualification , and divestiture .

the standards of conduct regulations promulgated by the office of government ethics and derived from executive orders , provide generally that an employee in the executive branch must "act impartially and not give preferential treatment to any organization or individual. .

as to past associations , the office of government ethics has noted that "it has long been recognized that former employment with a private organization can raise impartiality concerns .

members of the public , the press , and even the congress sometimes have questioned whether a particular public official might be subject to continuing influence by a former employer. .

the "general principles" in the oge regulations regarding financial interests and connections , outside employment or activities , and "impartiality," are fleshed out and covered in the more specific regulations promulgated by oge .

although the basic impartiality language is fairly broad on its face , the "impartiality" actually required of a federal employee in a governmental matter by the specific conflict of interest and federal ethics standards , is a disinterestedness in the matter from the point of view of any financial impact that such a matter may have upon the employee personally , or upon certain entities , persons , or organizations which are closely associated with the employee , such that the financial interests of such entities or persons may be fairly "imputed" to the employee .

as noted by the office of government ethics , questions regarding impartiality necessarily arise when an employee's official duties impact upon the employee's own financial interests or those of certain other persons , such as the employee's spouse or minor child .

thus , while past employment or other past professional affiliations or connections to private entities may suggest conflict of interest concerns and trigger certain restrictions under regulations , the current ethical standards of conduct and conflict of interest rules do not necessarily imply a prohibited "favoritism" or "impartiality" by the mere fact of past employments or past professional associations or positions beyond those past employment connections that are specifically covered and dealt with in the regulatory disqualification restrictions .

that is , no matter how philosophically predisposed an administrative official may arguably seem towards an issue because of his or her professional or employment background , a specific "bias" or "partiality" in a decision cannot be gleaned , as a matter of federal law , merely by the past associations and / or past employment of a federal regulatory or administrative official beyond the specific regulatory restrictions .

in general , the "impartiality" required of a federal employee in a matter does not mean that every federal employee must be completely "neutral" on an issue or matter before him or her , in the sense that the employee has no opinion , view , position , or predilection on a matter based either on past associations , or based upon current noneconomic factors such as the ethical , religious , ideological , or political beliefs in the background or in the current affiliations of the employee .

in the specific regulations on "impartiality" and participation in outside organizations , in fact , the office of government ethics notes , "nothing in this section shall be construed to suggest that an employee should not participate in a matter because of his political , religious or moral views. .

as to the issue of "bias" or "impartiality" generally in decision making of federal officials , federal cases dealing with the alleged bias of a federal official have arisen on occasion in a "due process" context with respect to rule making of an agency .

in such cases there had been alleged a lack of due process or fairness in the agency proceeding because of some claimed "bias" of a federal agency official .

the courts have found , however , that when a federal official is not acting in an adjudicatory capacity , that is , in a similar position as a judge , then judicial standards of impartiality need not apply .

the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit has noted: "we must not impose judicial roles upon administrators when they perform functions very different from those of judges. .

the disqualification requirement for those who are part of formal adjudications was "never intended ... to apply in a rulemaking procedure," even a formal rulemaking procedure .

in an earlier case in the district of columbia circuit , the court had explained , agencies are required to consider in good faith , and to objectively evaluate , arguments presented to them ; agency officials , however , need not be subjectively impartial .

going beyond specific statutory or regulatory restrictions on employees' economic interests and attempting to judicially apply very broad bias or impartiality standards upon regulators and administrators beyond those standards , noted one court , "is to invite challenges to officials based not upon true conflicts of interest but upon their philosophical or ideological leanings.... " limiting "conflict of interest" regulation to current personal financial interests of employees — and the financial interests of those imputed to the employee — may also ameliorate some first amendment issues regarding attempts to regulate the outside , private associations , memberships , or organizational activities of public employees .

while there could be concerns raised about general notions of "bias" or partiality in a governmental function based on alleged associations , past or present , of particular employees involved in a particular matter , issues involving the ethics and conflict provisions in internal governmental standards of conduct regulations are generally not amenable to legal resolution by private litigants .

that is , those regulations do not raise an actionable standard for litigation by outside private parties , but rather are generally considered internal , discretionary or disciplinary matters within the agency .

