the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks prompted congressional action on many fronts,including passage of the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate toolsrequired to intercept and obstruct terrorism ( usa patriot ) act .

the act is broadlyscoped , ( 1 ) and some of itsprovisions may affect use of the internet , computer security , and critical infrastructure protection .

the legislation initially passed the senate ( 96-1 ) as s. 1510 on october 11,2001 .

the house passed h.r .

2975 ( 337-79 ) on october 12 .

a compromise bill , h.r .

3162 , passed the house ( under suspension ) on october 24 and the senate ( 98-1 ) on october 25 .

the president signed it into law on october 26 ( p.l .

107-56 ) .

the implementation of the act will be carefully scrutinized .

while law enforcement officialsheralded the passage of what they regard as necessary provisions for counteracting terrorists andother criminals , civil liberties groups urged caution in passing a new law in an emotionally chargedenvironment .

during debate , some representatives raised concerns about the process used to bringthe bills to the floor .

in the house , for example , the version of h.r .

2975 as reportedfrom the judiciary committee on october 11 ( h.rept .

107-236 , part 1 ) was replaced by the text ofa new bill , h.r .

3801 , for the purposes of debate .

 ( 2 ) h.r .

3801 wasvery similar , but not identical , to s. 1510 as it had passed the senate hours earlier .

hence , some representatives felt they had insufficient time to review the legislation they were beingasked to vote on .

among the changes in h.r .

3801 was an extension of the sunsetperiod on several of the electronic surveillance provisions from 2 years to 5 years .

some membershad argued for a short sunset period , maintaining that the changes in the law were being madehurriedly .

in light of this history , it appears that oversight of the act's implementation will be ofconsiderable interest to congress and a broad range of interest groups .

this report summarizes the potential effect of the act on electronic privacy , security,commerce , and government , and identifies issues that are arising .

every day , persons gain access ( or try to gain access ) to other people's computers withoutauthorization to read , copy , modify , or destroy the information contained within - - webpages aredefaced , unwanted messages and pictures are conveyed , information ( or money ) is stolen,communications are jammed and services denied .

the list of perpetrators includes juveniles,disgruntled ( ex ) employees , criminals , competitors , politically or socially motivated groups , andagents of foreign governments .

for the purposes of this report , people who engage in such activitieswill be called computer trespassers ( adopting a term which the usa patriot act defines , asexplained below ) .

the damage computer trespassers can inflict , either knowingly or unwittingly,often goes beyond merely being a nuisance and in most cases rises to the level of a federal crime ( pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

1030 ) .

it is also conceivable that under certain conditions such actions couldbe considered a terrorist act or rise to the level of endangering national security by threatening thefunctioning of the country's critical infrastructure .

for the most part , law enforcement agencies seem to have had adequate tools to investigate,prosecute and penalize these offenses .

one area where officials have sought improvement for sometime , however , is in streamlining their ability to track computer trespassers , both in real time or afterthe fact .

prior to passage of the usa patriot act , procedures required investigators to requestcourt orders , warrants , subpoenas , etc .

from a multitude of jurisdictions , since most computertrespassers will route their communications around the world .

while the usa patriot act isdirected primarily to improve the ability of the government to detect , prevent , and respond to thekinds of terrorist attacks experienced last september and october , a number of the provisions affectthe government's law enforcement surveillance and investigatory powers more generally .

those thatdirectly and indirectly affect the ability of the government to investigate , prosecute , and perhapsdeter computer trespassers , whatever their intent , are listed below .

the convergence of computer and telecommunications technologies has revolutionized howwe get , store , retrieve , and share information .

commercial transactions on the internet , whetherretail business - to - customer or business - to - business , are commonly called electronic commerce , or"e - commerce. .

since the mid - 1990s , commercial transactions on the internet have grownsubstantially .

 ( 12 ) ajanuary 2002 study by the pew internet and american life project found that overall , 29 millionamerican shoppers made purchases on - line during the fourth quarter of 2001 , spending an averageof $392 , up from $330 in the fourth quarter of 2000 .

a quarter of all internet users did someshopping on the internet last year , up from one - fifth of internet users in 2000 .

a significant component of many of the initiatives regarding the usa patriot actspecifically , and homeland security generally , involves the use of information technology to enhanceexisting government processes or create new ones .

some of these initiatives may contribute to thegrowing effort to implement e - government projects by both congress and the bush administrationthrough enhanced data sharing and greater confidence in the security and reliability of the networks .

other initiatives may inadvertently create obstacles by restricting access to information flows andreducing privacy protections .

until the september 11 , 2001 terrorist acts , the internet privacy debate focused on consumerprivacy issues sparked by the collection , use , and dissemination of personally identifiableinformation by commercial web site operators .

 ( 36 ) the practices of law enforcement agencies in monitoring theactivities of individuals as they use the internet for electronic mail ( e - mail ) or visiting web sites wasan important , but less visible , issue .

congress addressed it primarily in the context of ensuring thatthe federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) did not overstep its authority in using a software programcalled carnivore ( later renamed dcs 1000 ) .

 ( 37 ) with a court order , the fbi could install carnivore on theequipment of an internet service provider ( isp ) to monitor a suspect's internet activity , which raisedconcern about whether the software was sufficiently precise to avoid monitoring the activity of otherisp customers and hence impinging on their privacy .

while congress remains interested in overseeing the fbi's use of carnivore , the september11 terrorist attacks sharpened the debate over how to strike a balance between law enforcement'sneed to investigate criminals and protecting what most citizens believe to be their "right" toprivacy .

 ( 38 ) congressincluded provisions in the usa patriot act that make it easier for law enforcement to monitorinternet activities .

also , many isps that opposed law enforcement monitoring of their customers'internet activity reportedly have been quite willing to assist law enforcement in its search for e - mailand other internet evidence relating to the attacks .

 ( 39 ) .

title ii of the act , enhanced surveillance procedures , includes provisions that affectmonitoring of internet activities .

section 210 expands the scope of subpoenas for records of electroniccommunications to include records commonly associated with internet usage , such as session timesand duration .

section 211 clarifies that cable companies offering internet services are subjectto 18 u.s.c .

ch .

119 ( wire and electronics interception and interception of oral communications ) ,18 u.s.c .

ch .

121 ( stored wire and electronic communications and transactional records access ) ,and 18 u.s.c .

ch .

206 ( pen registers and trap and trace devices ) in their provision of thoseservices .

cable companies had sought , in particular , to clarify their obligations with regard to releaseof personally identifiable information about subscribers and whether they were required to notify thesubscriber that the information had been requested by a governmental entity as required under the1992 cable act .

under this section , no notification is required , but disclosure specifically does notinclude a subscriber's video programming choices .

section 212 allows isps to divulge records or other information ( but not thecontents of communications ) pertaining to a subscriber if they believe there is immediate danger ofdeath or serious physical injury or as otherwise authorized , and requires them to divulge suchrecords or information ( excluding contents of communications ) to a governmental entity undercertain conditions .

it also allows an isp to divulge the contents of communications to a lawenforcement agency if it reasonably believes that an emergency involving immediate danger of deathor serious physical injury requires disclosure of the information without delay .

 ( 40 ) section 216 adds routing and addressing information ( used in internetcommunications ) to dialing information , expanding what information a government agency maycapture , as authorized by a court order , using pen registers and trap and trace devices .

 ( 41 ) the content of any wireor electronic communications is excluded .

a court shall enter an ex parte order permittinginstallation and use of a pen register or trap and trace device if it finds that an attorney for thegovernment or a state law enforcement or investigative officer has certified that the informationlikely to be obtained is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation .

law enforcement officials mustkeep certain records when they use their own pen registers or trap and trace devices and providethose records to the court that issued the order within 30 days of expiration of the order .

to theextent that carnivore - like systems fall with the new definition of pen registers or trap and tracedevices provided in the act , that language would increase judicial oversight of the use of suchsystems .

section 217 allows a person acting under color of law to intercept the wire orelectronic communications of a computer trespasser transmitted to , through , or from a protectedcomputer under certain circumstances .

section 220 allows for nationwide search warrants for e - mail instead ofrequiring separate search warrants for each jurisdiction in which the e - mail may be located , such asat the isp's location rather than where a crime was committed .

section 224 establishes a 4-year sunset period ( until december 31 , 2005 ) formany of the title ii provisions , but among the sections excluded from the sunset are sections 210,211 , and 216 .

as noted , the challenge for policy makers is balancing the needs of law enforcement with thedesire by the public to maintain its privacy .

in the wake of the terrorist attacks , the public appearsmore willing to make sacrifices in the privacy arena to protect the country against further attacks andbring the perpetrators of the september 11 assault to justice .

criticism of the usa patriot actfrom a privacy standpoint has been relatively muted , possibly because of the perception that thepublic is willing to accept such measures at this time .

an october 2001 harris poll found that 63%of americans favored monitoring of internet discussions and chat rooms , and 54% favoredmonitoring cellphones and e - mail .

 ( 42 ) however , privacy advocates worry that , in this emotionally charged climate , congress ispassing legislation that it later will regret .

groups such as the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) , center for democracy and technology ( cdt ) , electronic privacy information center ( epic ) , and electronic frontier foundation ( eff ) urge caution , fearful that , in an attempt to trackdown and punish the terrorists who threaten american democracy , one of the fundamental tenets ofthat democracy - - privacy - - may itself be threatened .

the aclu issued a press release ( 43 ) on october 24 stating thatit was deeply disappointed with the house passage of h.r .

3162 , and , after the billcleared congress , vowed to monitor its implementation .

 ( 44 ) cdt's executive director said on october 25 that "this bill hasbeen called a compromise but the only thing compromised is our civil liberties. .

 ( 45 ) among cdt's concernsis that section 216 , which is not subject to the sunset provision , allows law enforcement officials tocollect information about internet usage without what cdt considers to be meaningful judicialreview .

 ( 46 ) there are other privacy issues , too .

peter swire , who served as privacy counselor at theoffice of management and budget during the clinton administration , worries that the act does notinclude sufficient provisions to deal with potential abuses by law enforcement of the new authoritiesgranted in the act .

 ( 47 ) federal trade commission ( ftc ) commissioner orson swindle has suggested that isps relook attheir privacy policy statements in the wake of passage of the act , particularly with regard to isps'new authority under section 212 to voluntarily disclose information .

 ( 48 ) the ftc oversees howbusinesses , including isps , adhere to their privacy policies .

mr. swindle also pointed out that it ishis understanding that the law does not cover web sites , only isps .

he wondered if an onlinebookseller received many requests for books on , for example , how to make bombs or fly an airplane,"and the name of the purchasers reflected one or another ethnic group , would that be alarming underconcern for terrorism ? .

.. .

it would seem to me that common sense would say that would be alarmingbut they're not covered by this. .

 ( 49 ) john kamp , an attorney with wiley , rein & fielding,commented that the definitions in the act were murky and web sites might be covered , but that "itis clear that this law wasn't designed to go there. .

 ( 50 ) the question of definitions is raised by others , including eff .

in particular , eff cites thelack of definitions of "content" of e - mails that cannot be retrieved without a warrant , and the term"without authority" in the definition of a computer trespasser .

 ( 51 ) packets of data thatcomprise e - mail messages may contain both content and non - content information ( such as routinginformation ) .

the act allows law enforcement officials access to non - content information , but notto content .

thus this definition could be quite important .

regarding computer trespassers , section217 defines a computer trespasser as a person who accesses a protected computer withoutauthorization , but it does not include a person with an existing contractual relationship with theowner or operator of the computer .

eff wants that term to mean only individuals who intentionallybreak into computers with which they have no relationship .

some isps express satisfaction that guidance issued by the justice department implementingthe usa patriot act clarifies that isps may use their own tools to obtain information requiredby law enforcement officials rather than rather than being required to allow the fbi to installsoftware such as dcs 1000 .

earthlink executive david baker called it a "silver lining in what manyotherwise describe as a cloud...." ( 52 ) like the aclu , most of the privacy advocate groups assert that they will closely monitorhow law enforcement officials implement the act and try to ensure that the law is not misused.congress may conduct oversight of the act's implementation , both from the standpoint of the valueof providing law enforcement officials with these additional tools to combat crime and terrorism,and in terms of any detrimental consequences that could arise .

