the world trade organization ( wto ) is the principal international organization governing world trade .

with the 2012 accessions of the russian federation and vanuatu , it has 157 member countries , representing over 95% of world trade flows .

it was established in 1995 as a successor institution to the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

the gatt was a post - world war ii institution intended to promote nondiscrimination in trade among countries , with the view that open trade was crucial for economic stability and peace .

decisions within the wto are made by member countries , not wto staff , and they are made by consensus , not formal vote .

high - level policy decisions are made by the ministerial conference , which is the body of political representatives ( trade ministers ) from each member country .

the ministerial conference must meet at least every two years .

operational decisions are made by the general council , which consists of a representative from each member country .

the general council meets monthly , and the chair rotates annually among national representatives .

the united states was an original signatory to the gatt and a leading proponent of the gatt's trade - liberalizing principles .

it continues to be among the countries urging further discussions on opening markets to trade .

although decisions in the wto are made by consensus , the united states has a highly influential role shaping decisions in the institution befitting its status as the largest trading nation in the world .

periodically , member countries agree to hold negotiations to revise existing rules or establish new ones .

these periodic negotiations are commonly called "rounds. .

the broader the negotiations , the greater the possible trade - offs , and thus theoretically the greater the potential economic benefits to countries .

the multilateral negotiations are especially important to developing countries , which might otherwise be left out of more selective agreements .

it must be remembered , however , that trade liberalization also results in job losses and other economic dislocations as well .

doha round talks are overseen by the trade negotiations committee ( tnc ) , whose chair is director - general pascal lamy .

the negotiations are being held in five working groups and in other , existing bodies in the wto .

selected topics under negotiation are discussed below in five groups: market access , development issues , wto rules , trade facilitation , and other issues .

although the executive branch conducts trade negotiations in the wto , the congress has constitutional responsibility for regulation of u.s. foreign commerce .

as part of this constitutional role , congress conducts oversight of the negotiations .

oversight might be in the forms of hearings or meetings with executive branch officials .

members often communicate their positions through public statements and letters .

in december 2008 , for example , the chairmen and ranking members of the senate finance and house ways and means committee wrote to then - president bush to urge him to resist a possible year - end wto ministerial , maintaining that "developed and advanced developing countries must commit to provide meaningful new market access opportunities if congress is to support a deal. .

trade promotion authority ( tpa ) expired on july 1 , 2007 .

in the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 210 ) , congress prescribed trade objectives for u.s. negotiators in the doha development agenda and in other trade negotiations .

these objectives gave direction to negotiators on u.s. priorities .

congress also outlined requirements that the executive branch must meet , as a condition for expedited procedures for legislation to implement trade agreements , including those reached in the doha development agenda .

among the conditions for expedited legislative procedures , the executive branch must consult with congress at various stages of the negotiations , notify congress before taking specified actions , and submit reports as outlined .

it is unclear whether the administration will ask for tpa in its second term , or whether the 113 th congress would be inclined to grant it .

