more than most countries , poland's relations today with the rest of the world are influencedby its past .

at the end of the 18th century , it was partitioned among russia , prussia and austria , andfor more than a century , poland as a state did not exist .

it was re - established after the first worldwar with u.s. backing , only to be divided again between the nazis and the soviets in 1939 , and thendominated by moscow after 1945 .

 ( 1 ) poland has long been viewed as a crucible for change in central and eastern europe and,ultimately , the soviet union .

historians are likely to attribute that in large part to the rise of tworemarkable men .

in 1978 , the archbishop of krakow , cardinal karol wojtyla , was elected popejohn paul ii .

the following year , he returned from rome to visit his homeland and said mass beforemore than one million celebrants , urging poles , "do not be afraid. .

 ( 2 ) john paul served as aninspiration for poles to confront their own government , and , by extension , the ussr .

in 1980 , afterthe government raised food prices , electrician lech walesa led his fellow shipyard workers ingdansk in a strike .

the confrontation led to the formation of solidarity , an independent trade union ; over the ensuing decade , it evolved into a political party that was instrumental in ending communistrule .

in 1983 , solidarity leader walesa was awarded the nobel peace prize .

in 1989 and 1990,solidarity candidates won poland's first democratically - contested parliamentary and presidentialelections .

in the 1990s , successive post - communist governments moved swiftly to consolidatedemocracy and establish a market economy .

their efforts were capped in 1999 by natomembership , and in 2004 by entry into the european union ( eu ) .

poland has conducted a proactiveforeign policy over the past 15 years .

it has aggressively pursued its national interests , and has notbeen reluctant to assert itself with major powers - - for example , with germany , its leading tradingpartner ; with the european union ; and with the united states .

warsaw has cooperated with its neighboring states to the north and south in such regionalformations as the baltic cooperation council and the visegrã¡d group .

but poland's main foreignpolicy initiatives in europe have been directed to the east and west .

it has actively promoted thedevelopment of democracy in the two countries to its immediate east: belarus and ukraine .

to itswest , poland has had a somewhat contentious experience integrating into the eu .

in terms of transatlantic relations , poland is perhaps the most emblematic of the countriestied to both the united states and the eu ; it does not wish to have to choose between the two , butoccasionally has had to take sides .

this was particularly true of the iraq conflict , in which polandchose to support u.s. policy both diplomatically and militarily .

however , several factors , includingthe march 11 , 2004 madrid terrorist bombings and revelations of prisoner abuse at abu ghraib,caused polish public opinion to turn resolutely against continued involvement in iraq .

thegovernment has responded with a phased withdrawal of its troops .

in addition , many poles believethat the united states has failed to show sufficient gratitude for poland's support .

poland will be holding parliamentary elections in september 2005 .

many observers believethat the current ruling party , the democratic left alliance ( sld ) , is likely to suffer defeat at thehands of the center - right civic platform ( po ) party .

if that does transpire , most observers believethat poland's foreign policy would not likely undergo abrupt and dramatic changes .

under the nextgovernment - - whichever party leads it - - warsaw may become somewhat less reflexivelypro - american .

although the poles may have lined up beside the united states on iraq , they alsoknow that their future economic prosperity depends on continued cooperation and integration withthe eu .

as noted above , part or all of poland was under russian domination throughout thenineteenth century and most of the 20th .

for poles , history is never far from the surface .

in lookingeastward , poland has therefore sought to encourage democratization of belarus and ukraine not onlyon principle , but also for the practical reason that doing so would improve poland's security byestablishing a buffer zone between itself and russia .

poland's policies toward its two immediateneighbors have been largely consistent with those of the united states - - somewhat confrontationaltoward the more repressive belarus , but seeking engagement with ukraine .

many have argued thathelping the two countries eventually acquire eu and nato membership should be a foreign policypriority for poland .

poland's involvement in ukraine's fall 2004 political crisis was particularly noteworthy .

president kwasniewski joined with eu foreign policy chief javier solana and lithuanian presidentvladas adamkus in helping negotiate a settlement over the disputed presidential vote .

poland's newstatus as a member of the eu is believed to have lent weight to its role in mediating the ukrainepolitical crisis .

poland pushed within the union to get brussels more actively involved in helpingsolve the crisis in kiev .

finally , poland subsequently joined with several of its neighboringcountries in endorsing ukraine's eventual eu membership .

a u.s. commentator noted that "[t]heukraine experience ... showed that the european union has grown more hospitable to democraticevangelists: polish president alexander kwasniewski ... provided europe's backbone in ukrainealong with ... javier solana. .

some observers believe that , flush with its success in ukraine , polandmight now set its sights on encouraging reforms in moldova .

 ( 3 ) perhaps the most important factor in poland's eastward perspective is its relationship torussia .

one polish academic has asserted that his countrymen "fear russia and exaggerate the threatit poses," and cautioned against allowing a "phobia" about russia to hamper the effectiveness ofpoland's foreign policy .

noting that the united states is a main source of poland's security , hepointed out that "for the us , russia is not a threat but an important , though difficult , partner in thewar against islamic terrorism. .

 ( 4 ) he argued that , to more effectively promote democracy in belarusand ukraine , poland must improve its relations with moscow .

in may 2004 , poland fulfilled a long - term foreign policy goal when it joined nine othercountries in becoming a member of the european union ( poland achieved nato membershipearlier , in 1999. ) .

eu membership had been a contentious issue , particularly for poles living in ruralareas who feared that they would be overwhelmed economically by more efficient , western europeanagricultural producers .

however , those fears have thus far been groundless , as poland began toexperience economic gains - - agricultural subsidies and a surge in farm exports - - almostimmediately after it joined .

poland was not reluctant to assert itself before joining the eu and will likely be even lesshesitant to do so now that it is a member .

on several issues , poland staked out positions intendedto advance its interests and values ; these stances have sometimes been opposed by major playerswithin the eu , such as france and germany .

for example , during the development of the euconstitution , poland , joined by several other mostly roman catholic countries , called for thepreamble to include language referring to europe's christian heritage ; the measure was not adopted,but pope john paul ii lauded poland for its efforts .

warsaw also has argued strongly that turkey isa democratic islamic state , and deserves to be admitted into the eu .

poland has argued for its rightto maintain relatively low corporate taxes , a practice criticized by some other countries as an unfairsubsidy meant to attract foreign investment .

finally , poland has supported the development of aneu military capability , but has stressed that this not be done at the cost of weakening nato .

poland supported the united states in iraq both politically and militarily .

it was one of asmall number of countries to provide troops in the combat phase of the conflict , and then deployeda large ( 2,500-strong ) contingent of peacekeeping troops .

poland took command of a multinationaldivision providing stability in the center of iraq .

but several factors - - chiefly the march 11 , 2004terrorist attacks in madrid and the revelations of prisoner abuses at abu ghraib - - contributed toincreased public pressure against continued military engagement in iraq .

in december 2004 , thepolish government declared that it would be withdrawing about one - third of its forces after the iraqielections ; further announcements on a phased withdrawal followed .

given the many daunting challenges and political risks , some question why poland joinedwith the united states in the iraq conflict in the first place .

observers attribute poland's participationto a variety of factors .

some stress that the poles were at least in part motivated by a sense ofgratitude for past u.s. support , including u.s. assistance during the cold war and the lead roleplayed by the united states in expanding nato to include poland , among other states .

poland mayalso have joined the iraq effort because it subscribes to the bush administration's belief in the needto thwart tyranny and spread democracy .

poles cite their role as a mediator in ukraine's politicalcrisis as another example of this conviction in action .

according to former polish foreign ministercimoszewicz , poland did not join the coalition because it believed that saddam hussein hadweapons of mass destruction , but rather because poland believed it was in its own security intereststo support the united states and thereby maintain a strong transatlantic security linkage .

 ( 5 ) there were practical benefits of joining the iraq operation .

polish defense officials speak ofthe invaluable experience and information that the iraq operation has provided the military , chieflythrough having command of a large , international expeditionary force .

another benefit waspsychological: at the outset of the conflict , the bush administration treated the poles as importantpartners in the international scene .

according to one analyst "bush gave poles and the polishpolitical class the feeling that they belong to the countries that really matter in the world. .

 ( 6 ) however , poland has experienced difficulties both at home and abroad as a result of itsparticipation .

along with other factors , the iraq deployment is listed as a reason for the sldgovernment's sharp decline in popularity .

in addition , some analysts believe that poland'spartnership with the united states may have contributed to strained relations with other eu states - - particularly france and germany , which opposed the iraq invasion ; in may 2003 , a germannewspaper referred to poland as america's "trojan donkey. .

some poles have faulted thepartnership for being unconditional ; a former polish defense minister has argued , for example , thatthe sld government erred in not bargaining with the americans for military assistance beforecommitting troops to iraq .

 ( 7 ) some poles also maintain that their country has begun to see itself as paying for u.s.mistakes in iraq , and that this might have an impact on bilateral relations .

in the past year , in fact,the poles have become less reluctant to criticize the united states openly .

for example , in aseptember 2004 interview , president kwasniewski urged the united states to be "flexible , open , andgracious. .

in a later press appearance , he recalled that "from the beginning i warned president bushagainst a policy of american dominance in iraq and in the whole world. .

and more pointedly,former president and solidarity leader lech walesa remarked that "america failed its exam as asuperpower .

... [it is] a military and economic superpower but not morally or politically anymore .

this is a tragedy for us. .

 ( 8 ) poles also have begun to ask themselves what they have received in return for their loyaltyto the united states ; in particular , poles had hoped for help in three areas: military assistance , iraqreconstruction contracts , and u.s. visa policy .

in recent months , some iraq reconstruction businesshas begun to flow toward polish firms , and president bush pledged to seek $100 million in militaryassistance for poland .

it is the visa waiver issue , however , that seems to resonate the most amongpoles , perhaps because it could be "fixed" without financial cost to the united states .

warsaw hashoped to join 27 other countries which have been granted a waiver of the u.s. governmentrequirement to obtain a visa for short - term travel to the united states .

according to one report,"[t]he political class were outraged at the us decision to treat poland differently from the eu - 15 byimposing visa regulations on polish nationals , as part of a general tightening of immigration controlsin the wake of [9 / 11.] .

in a radio interview that touched upon this issue , lech walesa maintainedthat americans "are making fun of us. .

 ( 9 ) u.s. analysts , however , argue that there are some factors militatingagainst waiving visas for poles .

first of all , poland's continued high unemployment rate ( close to20% in april ) might act as an incentive for poles to seek work outside of the country and overstaytheir visas .

secondly , if the united states were to make an exception for poland , even though it doesnot meet the objective requirements , many other countries would also seek to make their case forbeing exempted .

one observer has pointed out that , given continuing concerns over the threat ofterrorism , there is not much sentiment in congress to make it easier for people to enter the unitedstates .

finally , poland is said to be lobbying to be a future location for a u.s. military base amidu.s .

consideration of a global re - basing scheme .

poles claim that such a move would represent goodpayback for their participation in iraq ; u.s. military bases would benefit local economies , as wellas poland's desire for american investment .

lastly , having the u.s. military present on its soil , theyargue , would increase poland's sense of security .

more than many countries , poland has a habit of asserting its independence ; one unwaveringconstant in poland's foreign policy has been its efforts to protect its perceived national interests ina region that more than once has devoured it as a state .

poland has been a close ally of the unitedstates ; as a new member of the eu , it is now attempting to balance its transatlantic interests .

because it views the united states as the main guarantor of its security , poland will likelycontinue to support the united states within nato .

poland wants to modernize its armed forces,ensure alliance interoperability , and improve its own defense capabilities .

however , the poles pointout that their resources have been severely strained by the iraq mission , forcing them to sideline theirplans to update their military .

poles were more supportive than most europeans of the u.s. - led invasion of iraq and thesubsequent military occupation .

nevertheless , some observers maintain that participation in the iraqoperation was the most controversial foreign policy decision made by a polish government since thefall of communism .

many poles agreed with the government's decision to deploy troops with thecoalition , and were proud that poland was given a command role ; some asserted that iraqdemonstrated that poland's security interests are now global , no longer just regional .

several factors eventually increased polish public opposition to the war , and poland hasbecome less reluctant to criticize the united states openly , in part , some argue , because it has begunto see itself as paying for u.s. mistakes .

 ( 10 ) some poles assert that , in siding with the americans , they erredby putting all their security eggs in one basket , damaging their relations with other allies .

theysuggest that poland repair its intra - eu relations ; and believe that , given its size and growinginfluence , poland might eventually become a leading force within a larger , stronger eu .

many of poland's actions within the eu have been consistent with policies preferred by theunited states: poland and the bush administration both support the notion of taxing consumption,rather than investment .

on eu security policy , poland stresses the importance of maintaining thetransatlantic link .

like washington , warsaw supports the accession of turkey .

poland'ssponsorship of a reference to europe's christian heritage in the eu constitution shows that poles arenot reluctant to mix religion with governance , compared to many other european societies .

poland has demonstrated that it can be an independent actor within europe , often takingpositions in line with u.s. policy or interests .

for example , the decision to buy lockheed martinf - 16s rather than european - built fighter aircraft , regardless of technical rationale , might have hadpolitical repercussions - - poland was still queued up to join the eu at the time .

polish officials stressthat their government did not expect a quid pro quo for its decisions to join the iraq coalition andto purchase u.s. fighters .

nevertheless , there is a sense that the u.s. inaction on several issues ofintense interest to poles indicates an absence of gratitude ; it resulted in a "disappointment thatsupport for [the] usa didn't bring poland measurable benefits. .

 ( 11 ) poland's foreign policy outside the eu has also generally been in harmony with u.s.international goals .

for example , poland was instrumental in advancing the practice of democracyin ukraine ; warsaw played a lead role in resolving the fall 2004 election crisis .

president bushstated that president kwasniewski had "showed remarkable leadership and the people of the ukraineare better for it and the world appreciates it and i appreciate it. .

 ( 12 ) during the current decade,polish leaders have at times spoken of acting as a bridge between russia and the west .

throughmaintaining active ties with russia , poland also hopes to discourage non - democratic tendencies .

in answer to the question of where poland sees its future and interests , some observers seea division: the united states may be important to its security , but poland has a natural affinitytoward fellow eu countries in cultural and economic matters .

many believe it is inevitable thatpoland will draw closer to europe .

 ( 13 ) but what kind of eu member it will eventually become - - fromthe u.s. standpoint - - remains to be seen .

some believe that poland as an eu member will likelywind up being more like the united kingdom , a staunch u.s. ally , than like belgium , which has attimes taken positions contrary to u.s. policy .

some have speculated that poland , given its size , will be looked to as leader of the centraland eastern european region .

however , officials from neighboring countries say that , although theymay respect and admire poland , they hope that it does not come to regard itself as the chiefspokesperson for central europe .

some observers believe that polish politics is undergoing a transition period , featuring thefading of the old solidarity generation .

they assert that , although poland has traditionally had closerties to the united states than many other european countries have , members of the new generationentering politics are perhaps not so firmly rooted in the transatlantic relationship .

analysts thereforecaution that u.s. policymakers should not take polish friendship for granted .

in addition , for the pastten years the united states has had a close friend in poland in aleksander kwasniewski , but his timeas president is coming to an end .

in one view , [i]t is unlikely that any polish leader in the next fewyears ... will be as strongly pro - us as mr. kwasniewski .

.. .

it is important not to exaggerate theextent to which poland will move away from the us in the next few years , but warsaw will be lesswilling to set itself at odds with berlin and paris in order to accommodate washington - - especiallyas it believes its loyalty has been poorly rewarded .

 ( 14 ) poland's fall 2005 parliamentary elections , according to many observers , may well result ina center - right coalition .

the parties that would likely form the new government might not qualifyas "euroskeptics," but some of their members have admitted to feelings of ambivalence about theeu .

 ( 15 ) some analystsalso argue that communist successor parties , such as the sld , and politicians , such as kwasniewski,may have been overly cooperative toward the united states and western europe in an effort tocompensate for their past allegiances .

polish foreign policy since 1989 does not appear to have beensignificantly affected by whichever party is in power , but analysts suggest that a non - socialist - ledgovernment at this point could be expected to push poland's national interests more aggressively inits bilateral relations with the united states .

