american voters elect the president and vice president of the united states under a complex arrangement of constitutional provisions , federal and state laws , and political party practices known as the electoral college system .

despite occasional close elections , this system has delivered uncontested results in 47 of 51 elections since adoption of the 12 th amendment , effective in 1804 .

in three elections , the electoral college awarded the presidency to candidates who won fewer popular votes than their principal opponents , but a majority of electoral votes .

in a fourth , the house of representatives decided the contest by contingent election , in this case electing a candidate who won fewer popular and electoral votes than his principal opponent .

the most recent instance in which the popular vote runner up received a majority in the electoral college occurred in 2000 , when george w. bush was elected president over his opponent , al gore , jr. , despite having won fewer popular votes than gore nationwide .

extremely close and highly contested results in the pivotal state of florida led to a bitter and protracted struggle that continued for over a month following election day .

a supreme court decision ended further recounts , leading to certification of bush electors in florida , and the republican candidate's subsequent election .

following the 2000 presidential election , both the electoral college system and the shortcomings of election administration and voting technology , particularly in florida , were widely criticized .

while no substantive action was taken on electoral college proposals , congress addressed the latter issue with the enactment of the help america vote act , "hava" ( p.l .

107-252 , 116 stat .

1666 ) , in 2002 .

this act established national standards for voting systems and certain election procedures , and included a program of grants to assist state and local governments in meeting the act's goals .

the successful passage of hava contrasted with almost complete lack of legislative activity in recent congresses on proposed constitutional amendments that would eliminate or reform the electoral college system , and served to highlight the comparative difficulties faced by would - be electoral college reformers .

the fundamentals of the electoral college system were established by the constitution , and can only be altered by the much more difficult process of constitutional amendment , rather than by legislation .

moreover , hava's prospects for enactment were boosted by the fact that , while few would defend the failures in voting administration and technology that helped promote the act , the electoral college would arguably be enthusiastically supported in congress and the public forum by its various advocates and defenders .

notwithstanding these hurdles , however , amendments have been proposed to alter or eliminate the electoral college in almost every congress since 1789 .

this report examines and analyzes alternative proposals for change , presents pro and con arguments , and identifies and analyzes related proposals introduced in the 109 th congress .

a wide range of proposals to reform presidential election procedures have been introduced over time .

in recent decades , they have fallen into two categories: ( 1 ) those that seek to eliminate the electoral college system entirely , and replace it with direct popular election ; and ( 2 ) those that seek to repair perceived defects of the existing system .

although the volume of electoral college reform proposals introduced has remained generally steady over the past several congresses , two trends are noticeable to the long term observer .

first , the volume of proposed amendments that would reform the electoral college , as opposed to those that would eliminate the electoral college and substitute direct popular election , has declined almost to zero .

second , the scope of proposed direct popular election amendments is arguably evolving in the direction of greater complexity and detail .

it is unclear whether the first development reflects a decline in support for the electoral college ( either as it exists or reformed ) , a lack of organized interest in these reform proposals , or simply the absence of a sense of urgency on the part of members who might be inclined to support or defend the current system in some form .

it is arguable , indeed likely , that , if a direct election amendment gained broad congressional support and began to move through congress toward proposal to the states , members who support the current system in some form would coalesce in ad hoc groups to defend the electoral college .

alternatively , they might be spurred by the prospect of action to propose reform measures .

this was the case the last time a direct election amendment came to the floor ( in the senate ) , during the 95 th congress ( 1979-1980 ) .

another apparent trend is that more recent reform proposals go beyond the concept of simply substituting direct election for the electoral college .

in the past two to three congresses , these amendments have been more likely to include provisions that would enhance and extend the power of the federal government to regulate in such areas as residence standards , definition of citizenship , national voter registration , inclusion of u.s. territories and associated areas in the presidential election process , establishment of an election day holiday , ballot access standards for parties and candidates , etc .

this trend almost certainly reflects frustration on the part of many voters and their elected representatives over the uncertainties and inconsistencies in local election administration procedures that were revealed in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections .

if the amendments in which such proposals have been incorporated were proposed and ratified , they could be used to set broad national election standards ( provided such legislation were enacted ) which would supersede many current state practices and requirements .

this eventuality raises two possible issues .

the first is the question of whether such federal involvement in traditionally state and local practices would impose additional costs on state and local governments , and thus be regarded as an "unfunded mandate. .

one response by the state and local governments might be to call for federal funding to meet the increased expenses imposed on them by federal requirements .

precedent for this exists in the grant program incorporated in hava .

a second issue is related , and centers on perceptions as to whether such an amendment would be regarded as federal intrusion into state and local responsibilities .

for instance , a more far - reaching scenario might include the gradual assumption of the entire election administration structure by the federal government .

in this hypothetical case , questions could be raised as to: ( 1 ) the costs involved ; ( 2 ) whether a national election administration system could efficiently manage all the varying nuances of state and local conditions ; and ( 3 ) under these circumstances , what would be the long term implications for federalism ? .

conversely , it could be argued that a national election administration structure is appropriate for national elections , and that state or local concerns are counterbalanced by the urgent requirement that every citizen be enabled and encouraged to vote , and that every vote should be accurately counted .

some observers assumed that action of the electoral college in 2000 , in which george w. bush was elected with a slight majority of electoral votes , but fewer popular votes than al gore , jr. , would lead to serious consideration of proposals to reform or eliminate the electoral college .

notwithstanding these circumstances , however , none of the proposals introduced in either the 107 th through 109 th congresses received more than routine committee referral .

in the 107 th congress , attention focused on proposals for election administration reform , resulting in passage of the help america vote act ( p.l .

107-252 , 116 stat .

1666 ) in 2002 .

this legislation , as noted earlier in this report , substantially extended the role of the federal government in the field of voting systems and election technology through the establishment of national standards in these areas and the provision of aid to the states to improve their registration and voting procedures and systems .

other factors may also contribute to the endurance of the electoral college system .

perhaps foremost is the fact that the u.s. constitution is not easily amended .

stringent requirements for proposed amendments , including passage by a two - thirds vote in each chamber of congress , and approval by three - fourths of the states , generally within a seven - year time frame , have meant that successful amendments are usually the products of broad national consensus , a sense that a certain reform is urgently required , or active long - term support by congressional leadership .

in many cases , all the aforementioned factors contributed to the success of an amendment .

further , while the electoral college has always had critics , its supporters can note that it has ratified the people's choice in 47 of 51 presidential elections held since ratification of the 12 th amendment , a success rate of 92.2% .

in the final analysis , given the high hurdles — both constitutional and political — faced by any proposed amendment , the electoral college system seems likely to remain in place unless or until its alleged failings become so compelling that large concurrent majorities in congress , the states , and among the public , are disposed to undertake its reform or abolition .

