there is no official , government - wide definition of "peer review," even in the ombbulletins .

 ( 5 ) agency - specific definitions and descriptions of the term differ , but all of them contain the basicconcept of a review of scientific or technical merit by individuals with both sufficient technicalcompetence and no unresolved conflicts of interest .

in its final bulletin , omb states that peer review"typically evaluates the clarity of hypotheses , the validity of research design , the quality of the datacollection procedures , the robustness of the methods employed , the appropriateness of the methodsfor the hypotheses being tested , the extent to which the conclusions follow from the analysis , andthe strengths and limitations of the overall product. .

 ( 6 ) .

when it published its proposed peer review bulletin in the federal register in september2003 , omb noted in the preamble to the bulletin the importance of peer review and the sometimesinconsistent nature of its application .

for these reasons , the office proposed requiring peer reviewfor "the most important scientific and technical information relevant to regulatory policies that[agencies] disseminate to the public. .

 ( 29 ) omb said the new requirements would supplement , but notsupplant , both its own information quality guidelines and any agency - specific peer reviewrequirements for regulatory information .

although omb noted that its bulletins "are not laws orbinding regulations," as a practical matter , omb's instructions to the agencies carry substantialweight because of its authority to review agencies' budget proposals and most significant regulationsbefore they are published .

in essence , omb's bulletin proposed that each covered federal agency take three actions: ( 1 ) have all "significant regulatory information" that the agencies intend to disseminate peer reviewed ; ( 2 ) have "especially significant regulatory information" peer reviewed according to even higherstandards ; and ( 3 ) provide omb with information at least once each year about upcoming scientificstudies that might support significant regulatory disseminations , and the agencies' plans forconducting peer reviews of those studies .

the proposed bulletin also contained several other , relatedrequirements .

the bulletin defined "agency" broadly , including cabinet departments and agencies,independent agencies ( eg , epa ) , and independent regulatory agencies ( eg , the federalcommunications commission and the nuclear regulatory commission ) .

omb said that it received 187 comments on the proposed bulletin on peer review , and postedthose comments on its website .

 ( 32 ) in addition to this formal commenting process , omb and ostpsponsored an open workshop on the peer review requirements in november 2003 .

 ( 33 ) the workshop was hostedby the national academy of sciences ( nas ) , which subsequently endorsed the bulletin's objectivesbut expressed several concerns .

omb said the comments that it received varied substantially , withsome highly favorable and others suggesting that the bulletin be withdrawn and reconsidered .

ingeneral , supporters of the proposed bulletin reportedly indicated that peer review standards acrossthe government were inconsistent , and that more consistent use of peer review could increase thetechnical quality and credibility of regulatory science .

they also reportedly asserted that peer reviewcould protect science - based regulations from political criticism and litigation .

for example , the u.s.chamber of commerce said that omb had "provided a bulletin of high quality and soundjudgment," and strongly supported "omb's efforts to improve the quality , objectivity , utility , andintegrity of information disseminated by the federal government to the public. .

 ( 34 ) similarly , the nationalpetrochemical & refiners association strongly supported omb's proposed bulletin , saying that itwould "correct the current variability in federal agency implementation of peer reviews by providingthe needed guidance on process requirements. .

 ( 35 ) omb said that many critics of the proposed bulletin viewed it as an effort to inject politicalconsiderations into the world of science , and to use the uncertainty that inevitably surrounds scienceas an excuse to delay new rules that could be costly to regulated entities .

they also reportedly saidthat the bulletin appeared more concerned about peer reviewers' possible conflicts of interest withagencies than their potential conflicts with regulated industries .

in its summary of the public comments , omb identified a number of broad themes and notedhow it responded to those comments .

 ( 36 ) specifically , omb said the comments centered on such issuesas the need for the bulletin , its scope and applicability , the prescriptive nature of the review processfor "especially significant" information , and the costs of implementing the bulletin .

the comments that omb received on the proposed bulletin led the office to release what itdescribed as a "substantially revised" bulletin in april 2004 .

the changes were characterized in themedia as a "partial retreat" in omb's initiative .

 ( 47 ) omb said the revised bulletin provided a more extensivediscussion of why government - wide peer review guidance was needed , gave agencies morediscretion in determining the appropriate type of peer review for specific products , and more clearlyindicated that the guidance does not create any new rights for litigation .

also , the revised bulletinpermitted an agency ( under certain circumstances ) to use a scientist as a peer reviewer who had received research grants from the agency - - a practice that was discouraged in the proposed bulletin .

the table appended to this report provides a side - by - side comparison of the proposed and revisedbulletins .

the sections below discuss similarities and differences in the documents .

omb said that 57 individuals and organizations commented on the april 2004 revised peerreview bulletin .

 ( 57 ) about a dozen of the comments essentially asked omb to allow more time for public comments andinteragency review .

most of the substantive comments provided were supportive of at least someof the changes that omb made to the bulletin .

however , some commenters believed the changeshad weakened the bulletin to such an extent that they withdrew their initial support , while othersbelieved the changes had not gone far enough .

some of the individuals' and organizations'comments are summarized below .

as noted previously , on december 15 , 2004 , omb released its final bulletin on peer review .

omb said that it had made "minor revisions" to the april version of the bulletin that were"responsive to the public's comments. .

 ( 67 ) perhaps most notably , omb said that the final bulletin: requires that agencies disclose to the public the names of peer reviewers forboth "influential scientific information" and "highly influential scientific assessments. .

however,the bulletin does not require agencies to disclose which reviewers made whichcomments .

adds an annual reporting requirement to address concerns about the lack of anenforcement mechanism , thereby allowing omb to "track how agencies are using the bulletin,including provisions for waivers and exceptions. .

omb also said it expects the public to monitoragencies' actions under the bulletin .

requires agencies to designate at the time they plan a peer review whether itshould be considered "influential scientific information" or a "highly influential scientificassessment. .

provides additional criteria for what constitutes a "highly influential scientificassessment. .

specifically , the term now includes influential assessments that are "novel,controversial , or precedent setting or have significant interagency interest. .

omb also clarified thatthe $500 million impact test covers all impacts ( public or private sector ) that occur in any year .

broadened the applicability of the exemption for time - sensitive health or safetyinformation , noting that it is not restricted to medical data from clinical trials that were subject toadequate peer review before the start of the trial .

requires agencies to adopt or adapt the national academy of sciences policyfor committee selection with respect to evaluating conflicts of interests of peer reviewers who arenot federal employees .

omb also reportedly made a number of what appear to be less significant changes to the finalbulletin .

for example , omb said that the final version of the bulletin: retains a substantial degree of discretion for the agencies , but also clarifies theintent of its language concerning the "adequacy of prior peer review" and the use of deferrals andwaivers to address concerns that the revised draft was too discretionary .

encourages agencies to provide public participation opportunities for reviewsof "highly influential assessments," but avoids a strict mandate for public participation and addslanguage "to stress that agencies should avoid open - ended comment periods. .

"reinstate[s]" instructions that peer reviewers are to comment on scientific andtechnical questions , and not to provide opinions on the policy implications .

provides a "rare exception" to allow a premier government scientist from thedepartment or agency that prepared an assessment to participate in a peer review ( under certaincircumstances ) .

omb's peer review bulletin is likely to have a significant effect on federal rulemaking andother forms of information dissemination and public policy .

that effect is likely to be both direct ( through agencies' and omb's enforcement of the bulletin's requirements ) and indirect ( throughreferences to the bulletin by others ) .

for example , section 402 of the specialty cropscompetitiveness act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-465 , signed by the president on december 21 , 2004 ) indicated that a required peer review of the procedures and standards governing the considerationof certain import and export requests "shall be consistent with the guidance by the office ofmanagement and budget pertaining to peer review and information quality. .

some of the initial issues and concerns raised by commenters on the proposed peer reviewbulletin were clarified or otherwise addressed in the revised and final versions of the bulletin .

perhaps most notably , the bulletin now makes it clear that scientists are not prohibited from servingas peer reviewers if they receive research grants from the agency based on investigator - initiated,competitive , peer reviewed proposals .

the bulletin also provides exemptions from the peer reviewrequirements for time - sensitive medical , public health , and safety information , and other compellingcircumstances .

however , a number of other issues remain unclear , including ( 1 ) the amount ofdiscretion that agencies will actually have in carrying out the bulletin's requirements , ( 2 ) the degreeto which the bulletin will accomplish the stated goal of making federal peer review practices moreconsistent , and ( 3 ) the effects of the bulletin on agencies and the federal rulemaking process .

the final peer review bulletin appears to give federal agencies substantial discretion indetermining whether peer review is required for specific products and , if so , what type of peer reviewmechanism is appropriate and who should serve as peer reviewers .

for example , the bulletin saysagencies need not have peer review conducted on influential scientific information that had alreadybeen subject to "adequate" peer review .

to determine whether a prior review was "adequate,"agencies are directed to consider ( among other things ) whether the science is "novel" or "complex,"and whether it is "important" to decision making .

 ( notably , though , the final bulletin no longerindicates that an "adequate" peer review "need not comply with" all of the requirements of thebulletin. ) .

also , the final bulletin says that information should be considered "influential scientificinformation" if the agency "reasonably can determine" that it will have or does have a "clear andsubstantial" impact on "important" public policies or private sector decisions .

the bulletin says thatpeer reviewers should be selected to provide the necessary expertise , experience , and skills , and thegroup of reviewers should be "sufficiently" broad and diverse to "fairly" represent the "relevant"scientific perspectives and knowledge .

on the other hand , the final bulletin also gives omb substantial discretion in certain areas .

for example , the bulletin indicates that omb can require agencies to use the more exactingprocedures for "highly influential scientific assessments" if omb determines the information is a"scientific assessment" that "could" have a substantial impact on public policies or private sectordecisions with a "potential impact" of more than $500 million in any year , or is "novel , controversial,or precedent setting," or has "significant" interagency interest .

also , omb can unilaterally approveagencies' use of alternative peer review procedures .

the amount of discretion that agencies will actually have in carrying out their peer reviewprograms ( or , conversely , the amount of control that omb will retain ) will be apparent only throughthe bulletin's implementation .

the amount of agency discretion ( or omb control ) could varysubstantially from one administration to another .

omb indicated that stronger peer review policies were needed because of the importance ofthe issue and , citing a 1999 gao report , because of the "variability in both the definition andimplementation of peer review across agencies. .

omb went on to say that , prior to the developmentof the bulletin , "there were no government - wide standards concerning when peer review is requiredand , if required , what type of peer review processes are appropriate. .

therefore , omb said that thebulletin "establishes minimum standards for when peer review is required for scientific information,and the types of peer review that should be considered by agencies in different circumstances. .

however , the final bulletin may not provide the desired consistency in peer review definitionor implementation .

as indicated above , the bulletin leaves many key terms undefined or subject tointerpretation , and gives the agencies substantial discretion regarding when certain actions shouldbe taken ( eg , when previous peer reviews are "adequate" ) and which reviewers should be selected ( i.e. , those with the "necessary" expertise , experience , and skills ) .

to the extent that agencies areallowed to exercise discretion in these areas , consistency may be forfeited .

on the other hand , strictenforcement of uniform procedures established by omb carries with it a different set of concernsabout aggregation of power within the executive office of the president , and may be resisted byfederal agencies .

also , as noted previously , although gao reported that agencies' peer reviewpractices were inconsistent , it did not recommend greater consistency , and some view variation inthose practices as appropriate and desirable .

a number of commenters expressed concerns regarding the effect that adding new peerreview requirements would have on what is already viewed by some observers as a lengthy,"ossified" federal rulemaking process .

somewhat related concerns have been voiced regarding thecost of the requirements to federal agencies , with senators lieberman and durbin suggesting thatthe requirements "do not pass omb's own [cost - benefit] test of good rulemaking. .

in response,omb provided estimates in the preamble to the revised bulletin indicating that it did not believe thecosts would be prohibitive to the agencies .

as noted previously , though , in 1997 , omb indicatedthat peer review costs could be significant in terms of both time and agency resources .

 ( 68 ) little empirical data arecurrently available regarding the cost of peer reviews , how they affect the federal rulemakingprocess , or their effect on the quality of the information being reviewed .

it is even less clear howthe peer review requirements suggested by omb will affect those factors , and there appears to beno mechanism in place for collecting such data .

there are some indications , however , that therequirements could delay regulatory action .

 ( 69 ) the aei - brookings joint center for regulatory studies recommended that omb or someother entity build into the peer review program an evaluation to determine its effect on the qualityof regulatory analyses .

any such evaluation could , at least conceptually , include an examination ofthe cost of the new peer review requirements to federal agencies and its effect on the pace ofrulemaking .

to determine the effect of the peer review bulletin on these or other factors , baselineinformation regarding the current state of the art would need to be gathered before the bulletin'simplementation .

even if the data indicate that peer review adds time to the early stages of the rulemakingprocess , that time may be worth the investment if doing so reduces the likelihood of subsequentjudicial challenges to the rules .

peer review may also provide agencies with a preview of likelyobjections to a rule during the notice and comment phase , thereby allowing them to minimize anyweaknesses and respond quickly to adverse comments .

all of these factors would have to beconsidered in any evaluation of the effect of peer review on the regulatory process .

table 1 .

comparison of proposed , revised , and final peer review bulletin .

