in calling for a clear , strong , and long - term commitment to the military - dominatedgovernment of pakistan despite serious concerns about that country's nuclear proliferation activities , the final report of the 9 / 11 commission cast into sharp relief two long - standing dilemmasconcerning u.s. policy towards pakistan and south asia .

first , in an often strained securityrelationship spanning more than five decades , u.s. and pakistani national security objectives haveseldom been congruent .

pakistan has viewed the alliance primarily in the context of its rivalry withindia , whereas u.s. policymakers have tended to view it from the perspective of regional stabilityand u.s. global security interests .

mutual security agreements concluded with pakistan in 1954 and1959 , which remain in force , were part of the u.s. "containment" policy towards the sovietunion .

 ( 2 ) second , u.s.nuclear nonproliferation objectives towards pakistan ( and india ) repeatedly have been subordinatedto other important u.s. goals .

during the 1980s , pakistan exploited its key role as a conduit for aidto the anti - soviet afghan mujahidin to avoid u.s. nuclear nonproliferation sanctions and receiveannually some $600 million annually in u.s. military and economic aid .

underscoring pakistan'sdifferent agenda , some of the radical islamists favored by its military intelligence service laterformed the core of al qaeda and the taliban .

during the 1980s , pakistan successfully exploited its importance as a conduit for aid to theanti - soviet afghan mujahidin both to forestall the imposition of economic and military sanctionsotherwise required by u.s. nuclear nonproliferation laws and to gain some $600 million annuallyin u.s. military and economic aid .

ironically , not only did pakistan develop its nuclear weaponscapability during the 1980s while receiving major u.s. economic and military assistance , butbecause it was partially hostage to islamabad's own foreign policy objectives , the united statesunwittingly facilitated the rise of a radical anti - u.s. islamic terrorist movement .

 ( 3 ) the ranks of al qaeda andthe taliban include some of the very same radical islamists nurtured by pakistan's inter - servicesintelligence ( isi ) organization and supported and armed by the cia in the successful effort to drivethe soviet army out of afghanistan .

some observers view this unwanted legacy as cause for notlosing sight of u.s. nuclear nonproliferation and other interests when seeking to forge closerantiterrorism ties to a country that has been a major and recent source of the proliferation of nucleartechnology and materials , and which also faces some degree of risk of itself falling under the controlof radical islamists .

this report seeks , in part , to explore whether there may be ways for gainingmore leverage with pakistan on the proliferation issue without jeopardizing islamabad's cooperationon terrorism .

figure 1 .

country map of pakista .

the 9 / 11 commission report emphasizes the need for "hard choices"and "difficult long - termcommitments" to pakistan .

 ( 9 ) the report explicitly notes that the need for a pragmatic approachinevitably involves compromises with other important u.s. interests such as democracy and nuclearnon - proliferation .

the report does not address the issue of where the balance should be struckbetween supporting the musharraf government as a necessary means of fighting terrorism .

perhaps because of its relatively narrow mandate , the 9 / 11 commission focused more on the urgency of maintaining a stable and cooperative government in islamabad that would remain apartner in the war against terrorism and less on pakistan's role as a source of nuclear proliferation.in the view of the 9 / 11 commission , maintaining close cooperation with pakistan in the fight againstal qaeda and keeping pakistan's nuclear capabilities out of the hands of terrorists depends criticallyon supporting president pervez musharraf's vision of a moderate , modernizing islamic state .

the 9 / 11 commission addressed only in an oblique manner the issue of pakistan's pastnuclear proliferation activities and the risk of further proliferation emanating from pakistan .

thereport's section on pakistan acknowledges , but does not dwell on , pakistan's continuing potentialto be a source of technology and know - how for other states or terrorist groups intent on acquiringnuclear weapons .

it noted president musharraf's repeated assurances that "pakistan does not barterwith its nuclear technology," but also observed that "proliferation concerns have been long - standing. .

a section of the 9 / 11 commission report dealing more generally with the threat of nuclearproliferation takes note of khan's role in establishing illegal covert networks for global transfer ofnuclear technology and materials , but its recommendations are not pakistan - specific .

rather , thereport emphasizes multilateral solutions based on "an international legal regime with universaljurisdiction to enable the capture , interdiction , and prosecution of smugglers" by any state that findsthem operating covertly in its territory .

the report specifically calls for expanding the 2003proliferation security initiative ( psi ) and the 1991 "nunn - lugar" cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program .

the psi emphasizes international cooperation to interdict wmd and ballisticmissile shipments , while the ctr concentrates on securing nuclear weapons and other dangerousmaterials scattered throughout the territories of the former soviet union , which could fall into thehands of terrorists .

 ( 10 ) instead of hard choices , some observers judge that the bush administration and congresshave little choice but to provide substantial assistance to pakistan to bolster musharraf and to gainthe closest possible antiterrorist cooperation from islamabad , without regard to issues such asdemocracy and nuclear proliferation .

from this perspective , the issue may be less one of choicesthan following the logic of unpleasant realities .

the hardest choices may in fact be those faced bypresident musharraf , given the broad public antipathy in pakistan towards u.s. policy in the middleeast , including the war in iraq and support of israel , and the widely held misperception that the u.s.war on terrorism is in fact a war against islam .

the effort to reconcile u.s. nuclear proliferation objectives towards pakistan with moreimmediate american regional and global security concerns has a long and less than encouraginghistory .

references by the 9 / 11 report to pakistan's perception of the united states as an unreliableally relate directly to fundamental differences in u.s. and pakistani expectations of the alliance , andthe consequent unwillingness of several u.s .

administrations to support pakistan in its wars withindia in 1965 and 1971 .

 ( 12 ) .

pakistan has been involved in the covert acquisition of nuclear - related technologies since atleast the mid - 1970s .

khan , a german - educated metallurgist worked in the early 1970s for acontractor to a european nuclear consortium , urenco , located in the netherlands .

reportedly,after india's 1974 underground nuclear test , pakistan's then - prime minister zulfikar ali bhutto askedkhan to head up a pakistani uranium enrichment project .

khan returned to pakistan in 1976 withsecret plans for a dutch - designed uranium enrichment centrifuge assembly .

 ( 27 ) .

whether the musharraf government can be trusted to go forward with the united states asa security partner , let alone a major non - nato ally , while not putting the united states further atrisk from nuclear proliferation , depends in part on the degree of culpability of the pakistanigovernment and military in a.q .

khan's activities .

even if , as has been alleged by the pakistanigovernment , khan's aggressive marketing of nuclear materials and technology to north korea , iran,and libya was designed to further khan's outsized ego and financial interests , he could not havefunctioned without some level of cooperation by pakistani military personnel , who maintained tightsecurity around the key nuclear facilities , and possibly civilian officials as well .

this sectiondiscusses the available information on khan's role and assesses the credibility of pakistan's denialthat his activities were authorized or supported at the policy level in islamabad .

the critical importance of gaining cooperation against terrorism has been the bushadministration's main justification for largely setting aside u.s. nonproliferation concerns in the caseof pakistan .

not only does the united states need pakistani cooperation , but musharraf's survivalhas been seen by both the administration and the 9 / 11 commission as an essential requirement formaintaining and increasing pakistani cooperation .

given the troubled history of u.s. - pakistansecurity cooperation , the 9 / 11 commission report emphasizes , in particular , the necessity ofavoiding a repetition of the past cycle of engagement , disengagement , and reengagement withpakistan .

the following section addresses the stability of the musharraf government and theprospects for a continuation of current pakistani policy should president musharraf leave the scene,for whatever reason .

despite pakistani denials , considerable evidence suggests that pakistan continues to beinvolved in the illegal acquisition of nuclear materials and technology to modernize its existingnuclear forces , and , at a minimum , allows the activities of nuclear supply networks on its territory .

such networks may still be involved in supplying nuclear materials , technology , and know - how towould - be nuclear states or even terrorist networks .

in addition , pakistan's nuclear arsenal and fissilematerial may be vulnerable to seizure in the event of a coup by dissident military officers or theseizure of power by radical islamists with sympathy for terrorist groups .

moreover , if not carefullyhandled , u.s. policies aimed at strengthening pakistan militarily could unintentionally upset currentpositive trends in pakistan's relations with india that involve considerable political risk for bothgovernments .

resolving or deferring a final settlement of the thus far intractable kashmir disputewould greatly benefit both u.s. security counterterrorism and nonproliferation interests .

becausethis festering territorial dispute has led the countries to the brink of war on two occasions since bothdeployed nuclear weapons , any actions by the united states that would undermine the currentatmosphere between new delhi and islamabad could possibly increase the risk of a conflict thatwould have the potential of escalating to a nuclear exchange .

 ( 140 ) given that the reimposition of sanctions seems unlikely in the current situation , the bushadministration appears to be focusing on preventing the further spread of nuclear weaponscapabilities to "rogue" states and terrorist groups .

the administration has emphasized improvingthe global community's ability to interdict dangerous shipments through the proliferation securityinitiative ( psi ) , and in shrinking access worldwide to capabilities needed to produce fissile materialcrucial for nuclear weapons .

in a speech on february 11 , 2004 , president bush proposed a mix ofmeasures to respond to the threat of the nuclear black market .

in addition to expanding interdictionefforts ( under the psi ) to "shut down labs , to seize their materials , to freeze their assets," thepresident also proposed criminalizing proliferation , expanding cooperative threat reductionmeasures to states like libya ; banning enrichment and reprocessing capabilities beyond those statesthat already have them ; making the additional protocol ( to the npt ) a prerequisite fornuclear - related imports ; and creating a special committee at the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) to investigate compliance .

 ( 141 ) in june 2004 , president bush designated pakistan as a major non - nato ally ( mnna ) asprovided for by section 517 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended .

thailand , anotherimportant antiterrorism ally , was given the same status in 2003 .

the designation , long enjoyed byjapan , south korea , australia and other allies , makes pakistan eligible for expedited access toexcess defense articles and other privileges .

 ( 142 ) the designation also appears related to pakistan's decision topurchase several major weapons systems .

on november 16 , 2004 , the department of defensenotified congress of possible military sales to pakistan of six orion p - 3c maritime patrol aircraft,2,000 tow - 2a missiles , 14 tow fly - to - buy missiles , six phalanx close - in weapon systems ( ciws ) , and an upgrade of six earlier models of the phalanx shipboard anti - missile defense systems,along with associated equipment for all of the systems .

 ( 143 ) as if to underscore the possibility that u.s. arms sales to pakistan could be destabilizing,pakistan tested a shaheen nuclear - capable short - range ( 700 kilometers ) ballistic missile ondecember 8 , 2004 , on the same day that secretary of defense rumsfeld arrived in new delhi formeetings with indian leaders where he was expected to discuss u.s. arms sales and militarycooperation with india .

reportedly , one of the most important items on the indian agenda was toacquire the u.s. patriot ballistic missile defense systems ( pac - 2 and / or pac - 3 ) , and to explore thepossibility of obtaining approval to acquire israel's arrow battlefield missile defense system whichincludes u.s. - licensed components and technology .

india reportedly expressed strong objectionsto the sale of the p - 3c surveillance aircraft and the tow anti - tank missiles .

 ( 144 ) within the constraints imposed by dependence on antiterrorist cooperation from pakistan,u.s .

policymakers still may have several options for pursuing a stronger antiproliferation policywhile maintaining pakistan's status as a "front line" state in the war against terrorism .

possibleapproaches include .

section 2235 ( "extension of pakistan waivers" ) of s. 600 , "the foreignaffairs authorization act , fiscal years 2006 and 2007," reported to the senate may 26 , 2005 ( s.rept .

109-35 ) , includes a subsection ( b ) that would ( 1 ) renew the current authority of thepresident to waive for fy2006 the application in pakistan's case of current law providing forsanctions on "any country whose duly elected head of government was deposed by decree or militarycoup , if the president determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that suchwaiver - - ( a ) would facilitate the transition to democratic rule in pakistan ; and ( b ) is important tounited states efforts to respond to , deter , or prevent acts of international terrorism. .

subsection ( b ) would extend the current exemption of pakistan from the application of provisions of foreignassistance law regarding foreign country loan defaults .

section 2236 of s. 600 , "the foreign affairs authorization act , fiscalyears 2006 and 2007," would amend the foreign relations authorization act of fy2003 to modifyan existing reporting requirement added in 1992 to require a report to be submitted to congress nolater than april 1 , 2006 , as pursuant to section 620f of the foreign assistance act of 1961,amended , that "shall include a description of the efforts of the united states government to achievethe objectives described in subsections ( a ) and ( b ) , the progress made toward achieving suchobjectives , and the likelihood that such objectives will be achieved by september 30 , 2006. .

 ( 165 ) s. 12 , "targeting terrorists more effectively act of 2005," introduced onjanuary 24 , 2005 , and referred to the committee on foreign relations , would authorize a total of$797 in economic and military assistance to pakistan , subject to conditions .

section 232 ( d ) ofsubtitle d - - "strategy for the united states relationship with afghanistan , pakistan , and saudiarabia," would bar military and economic aid to pakistan "unless the president submits to congressfor such fiscal year a certification that no military or economic assistance provided by the unitedstates to the government of pakistan will be provided , either directly or indirectly , to a person thatis opposing or undermining the efforts of the united states government to halt the proliferation ofnuclear weapons. .

congress has not passed a foreign assistance authorization bill since 1985 , butproposed amendments to the faa contained in uncompleted authorization bills sometimes areincorporated into the annual appropriations bill for foreign operations .

h.r .

1553 , "the pakistan proliferation accountability act of 2005," introduced and referred to the house international relations committee on april 12 , 2005 , wouldprohibit military assistance , military sales , transfers or licenses , until the fulfillment of severalrequirements .

these include the requirements that the pakistani government provides unrestrictedaccess to a.q .

khan , complies fully with requests by the iaea for assistance in discovering the fullextent of khan's activities , and the u.s. government has "determined the nature and extent of theillegal international proliferation network's connection to al qaeda and osama bin laden," and inconjunction with the iaea has confirmed that complete dismantlement of khan's network .

