more than 100 years of international efforts to ban chemical weapons culminated january 13,1993 , in the signing of the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) .

the cwc bans the development,production , stockpiling , and use of chemical weapons ( cw ) by its states parties .

it also requires thedestruction of all chemical weapons and production facilities .

the convention provides the mostextensive and intrusive verification regime of any arms control treaty , extending its coverage to notonly governmental but also civilian facilities .

the verification package includesinstrument - monitoring , both routine and random onsite inspections , and challenge inspections forsites suspected of cw storage or production .

the convention also requires export controls andreporting requirements on chemicals that can be used as warfare agents and their precursors .

administratively , the convention established the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( opcw ) , located in the hague , netherlands , to oversee the convention's implementation .

it is a permanent international organization charged with ensuring compliance with the convention,and monitoring the chemical industry worldwide .

the opcw has three components: 1 ) theconference of states parties , comprising all signatories ; 2 ) the executive council , composed of 41signatories chosen in a rotation based upon geographic region and significance of commercialchemical production ; and 3 ) the technical secretariat , which will conduct day - to - day administrationof the convention .

each signatory also designates a national authority to be the liaison with theopcw , and administer the implementation of the cwc domestically .

on june 25 , 1999 , presidentclinton issued an executive order designating the state department as the national authority forthe implementation of the cwc , and establishing an interagency group http: / / www.cwc.gov / comprising the secretaries of state , defense , commerce , and energy , and the attorney - general tocoordinate the implementation .

declarations required from each state party by the cwc include: location and detailed inventory of all chemical weapons storage sites .

location and capacities of all chemical weapons production and researchfacilities .

all transfers of chemical weapons and cw production equipment since 1946.a detailed plan and schedule for the destruction of chemical weapons and cw production facilities.location and activities of any facilities using or producing controlledchemicals .

these declarations , and ensuing reports to the opcw are released only to other states parties to provide evidence of treaty compliance .

other information obtained by the opcw ( e.g .

throughinspections ) is neither published or otherwise released without the permission of the countriesconcerned .

destruction of chemical weapons agents , munitions , and production facilities is to be completed within 10 years of the convention's entry into force ( 1997 ) or a state party's ratification date,whichever is earlier .

in "extraordinary circumstances" , this deadline can be extended for up to fiveyears , with the approval of two - thirds of the states parties .

both the united states and russia haveapplied for and been granted extensions .

the convention establishes three lists ( schedules ) http: / / www.opcw.org / html / db / chemind_frameset.html of chemical warfare agents and theirprecursor chemicals arranged in order of their importance to cw production and range of legitimatepeaceful uses .

these chemical schedules are to be updated as needed by the opcw technicalsecretariat .

above certain quantitative thresholds , these chemicals' production , use , or transfer mustbe projected and subsequently reported annually to the opcw .

all facilities capable of producing,or that use scheduled chemicals must be registered .

in addition , all facilities that produce over 30metric tons of a discrete chemical containing phosphorous , sulphur , or fluorine must be registered .

for the chemicals included in the schedule 1 , there is a total ban on transfers to states not party to the convention .

there is also the obligation to notify the opcw of any transfer of the compounds to states parties , irrespectively of the quantity , and retransfer is prohibited .

in keeping with thecwc's provisions , there has been a ban on transfers of schedule 2 chemicals to non - state partiesplace since the 29th of april 2000 .

additionally , the state parties shall declare annually the totalquantities transferred among of them , by chemical and by country .

for the chemicals included inschedule 3 , the convention establishes the same obligation in terms of declaration of the total annualimports and exports per country and per chemical , and there is also the obligation to require anexport licence , called an end use certificate for exports to non - state parties .

it is currently beingdiscussed in the opcw whether other kinds of restrictions or a total ban of these transfers will beput in place in the future .

for the united states , the export controls are administered by thedepartment of commerce's bureau of industry and security http: / / www.bxa.doc.gov / , whichmaintains an informational website - - u.s. chemical weapons web http: / / www.cwc.gov / to assistu.s .

industry in compliance with these controls the opcw's facility inspection regimes vary , depending on the type of facility: declared cw production , storage , or destruction sites: systematic on - site inspection and continuous instrument monitoring .

declared non - cw chemical facilities: routine or random inspections,depending on the schedule and amounts of chemicals produced or used .

all other facilities: on - site challenge inspections upon request of a state party,and approval of the opcw executive committee .

the cwc raises a variety of issues for congressional consideration .

although the vast majorityof the world's nations have signed the cwc , some nations suspected of having chemical weaponshave not - - egypt , iraq , libya , north korea , syria .

what effect does this lack of universality haveupon the value of the convention ? .

the cwc's verification provisions are extensive , but they havenot stilled the debate over whether they are effective enough to deter violations .

and , if violationsare detected , are enforcement procedures and sanctions sufficiently stringent ? .

because the cwcextends its provisions to the civilian sector , the impact of inspections , reporting requirements , andexport controls on commercial enterprise raises concerns unique to arms control treaties .

thedestruction of the u.s. chemical weapon stockpile , though congressionally - mandated independentlyof the cwc , presents technical , environmental , and financial challenges .

issues deserving attentioncan be grouped in six general areas: 1 ) universality ; 2 ) verification ; 3 ) impact on u.s. industry ; 4 ) enforcement ; 5 ) technology transfer ; 6 ) destruction of chemical weapons here and in russia ; and 7 ) costs .

u.s. congress .

chemical weapons convention: a message from the president of the unitedstates .

treaty document 103-21 .

103 congress , 1st session .

u.s. congress .

chemical weapons convention .

hearings , senate committee on foreign relations,103rd congress , 2nd session , s.hrg .

103-869 .

u.s. congress .

iran missile proliferation sanctions act of 1997 .

report , house committee oninternational relations , 105 congress , 2nd session , h.rept .

105-375 .

u.s. congress .

military implications of the chemical weapons convention .

hearings , senate armed services committee .

103rd congress , 2nd session , s.hrg .

103-835 .

u.s. congress .

u.s .

capability to monitor compliance with the chemical weapons convention .

report , senate select committee on intelligence .

103rd congress , 2nd session , s.rept.103-390 .

u.s. congress .

convention on chemical weapons .

hearing , senate foreign relations committee,104th congress , 2nd session , s.hrg .

104-668 .

the following 153 countries have either signed and ratified or acceded to the chemical weapons convention: albania , algeria , andorra , argentina , armenia , australia , austria , azerbaijan , bahrain , bangladesh , belarus , belgium , benin , bolivia , bosnia - herzegovina , botswana , brazil , brunei , bulgaria , burkinafaso , burundi , cameroon , canada , chile , china , cook islands , costa rica , cote d'ivoire , croatia,cuba , cyprus , czech republic , denmark , dominica , ecuador , el salvador , equatorial guinea,eritrea , estonia , ethiopia , fiji , finland , former republic of yugoslavia , former yugoslav republicof macedonia , france , gabon , gambia , georgia , germany , ghana , greece , guatemala , guinea,guyana , holy see , hungary , iceland , india , indonesia , iran , ireland , italy , jamaica , japan , jordan,kazakhstan , kenya , kiribati , kuwait , laos , latvia , lesotho , lithuania , luxembourg , macedonia,malawi , malaysia , maldives , mali , malta , mauritania , mauritius , mexico , micronesia , moldova,monaco , mongolia , morocco , mozambique , namibia , nauru , nepal , netherlands , nicaragua , niger,nigeria , mauritania , new zealand , niger , norway , oman , pakistan , panama , papua new guinea,paraguay , peru , philippines , poland , portugal , qatar , romania , russian federation , samoa , sanmarino , santa lucia , saudi arabia , senegal , seychelles , singapore , slovak republic , slovenia,south korea , south africa , spain , sri lanka , st. vincent and the grenadines , sudan , suriname,swaziland , sweden , switzerland , tajikistan , tanzania , thailand , timor leste , togo , tonga,trinidad - tobago , tunisia , turkey , turkmenistan , uganda , ukraine , united arab emirates , theunited kingdom , the united states , uruguay , uzbekistan , venezuela , vietnam , yemen , zambia andzimbabw .

the following 25 countries have signed , but not ratified the chemical weapons convention: afghanistan , bahamas , bhutan , cambodia , cape verde , central african republic , chad , comoros , congo , democratic republic of congo , djibouti , dominican republic , grenada , guinea - bissau,haiti , honduras , israel , kyrgyzstan , liberia , madagascar , marshall islands , myanmar , rwanda,saint kitts and nevis , sierra leone .

angola , antigua and barbuda , barbados , belize , north korea , egypt , iraq , lebanon , libya , niue , sao tome and principe , solomon islands , somalia , syria , tuvalu , vanuatu .

