rising competition for energy in china , japan , and south korea are of interest to u.s. policymakers for three primary reasons .

first , the surge in china's energy needs has emerged as a major factor in influencing world oil prices .

second , the tightening global oil market could increase the bargaining power of oil exporting countries , possibly driving a wedge between the united states and our asian allies over important foreign policy issues .

third , competition in asia over access to energy supplies could significantly alter the geopolitics of the region , with important ramifications for u.s. foreign policy .

analysts alarmed at the developing trends are quick to mention that energy insecurity is often cited as the proximate cause of the japanese attack on pearl harbor in 1941 .

congress plays an important role in developing u.s. foreign policy and energy policy .

in addition to its ongoing oversight and legislative responsibilities , in 1975 , through the passage of the energy policy and conservation act ( p.l .

94-163 ) , congress authorized u.s. participation in the international energy agency ( iea ) , the creation of a strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) , and support for efforts to enhance energy efficiency and alternatives to petroleum .

these measures are among those proposed by many analysts to address current concerns about how china's demand will impact the global oil markets and national security .

congress also established the united states - china economic and security review commission in 2000 to review the national security implications of trade and economic ties between the united states and the people's republic of china , including an assessment of china's energy needs and strategies .

when the china national offshore oil corporation ( cnooc ) attempted to acquire the u.s. energy company unocal for $18.5 billion in cash in june 2005 , congressional opposition to the takeover played a key role in the eventual cnooc withdrawal of its bid in august 2005 .

congressional activity included hearings , statements , studies , letters to the secretary of treasury , and legislation aimed at the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) .

as china and japan scramble to meet their energy needs while reducing dependence on the middle east , the largely undeveloped resources of neighboring siberia have become a prize .

although the russian far east's promise is significant , many strategists have cast doubt on the commercial viability of tapping the far east's reserves .

this has not discouraged china and japan from engaging in a bidding war over russian projects to bolster their energy security .

boasting huge reserves of natural gas ( 1,680 trillion cubic feet of proven reserves , nearly twice that of iran ) and potentially rich oil fields , moscow has played tokyo and beijing off one another to maximize concessions for itself .

although china and japan have expressed frustration with russia's opaque policymaking , the proximity of siberian energy supplies remains attractive .

the long - term potential consequences of rising energy competition in east asia range from dire predictions of military conflict to scenarios for unprecedented regional cooperation .

this section will explore different arguments about outcomes , as well as consider the possible impact on u.s. foreign relations .

as the world's sole superpower , the united states has pursued an energy policy that , while protecting the american interest in securing energy suppliers , also generally assures access for other energy consuming states .

some analysts suggest that with china and other economies developing voracious appetites of their own , a policy of explicitly attempting to lock up energy resources for the united states alone is warranted .

such a policy , which might include more diversification from the middle east , may deny the "free - rider" option to other nations , including u.s. allies .

increased transparency and energy sector reform could alleviate many of the strains placed on the energy industry that threaten to spur conflict in east asia .

transparent pricing allows oil to be traded efficiently and visibly .

in general , the region's refining sector has moved toward deregulation , but many barriers remain to outside competition .

similar obstacles to open market competition exist in the power sectors in japan and south korea .

the united states could seek to reduce these barriers by encouraging its allies to create independent regulatory bodies .

some specialists suggest that u.s. officials could also work with the japanese and south korean governments in restoring public confidence in nuclear energy by sharing technology and expertise , as available , to assure safer operation of nuclear reactors .

some say that collaboration on energy research might also be beneficial in fostering a cooperative , market - based approach to energy security , in addition to offering the promise of technological breakthroughs that eventually reduce global dependency on oil .

the department of energy has taken modest steps to enhance energy efficiency cooperation with asian nations , including efforts to develop fuel cell technology research and development with the japanese government ; to cooperate with chinese officials in pursuing cleaner air , with a particular focus on the 2008 olympic games to be held in beijing ; and to promote the use of cleaner - burning fuels and reform in the energy sector in the philippines .

energy competition and security are among the many issues included in the debate over how the united states should deal with a rising china .

some policymakers and experts resist the idea of aiding china's increasing prosperity , viewing chinese growth as a serious security risk for the united states .

others see the potential for mutually - beneficial sino - american cooperation because of the shared interest in stability in oil - producing regions .

today china is labeled by many as a "free - rider," in that it reaps the rewards of the security that american power brings to the middle east and asia .

allowing china to continue to be a "free rider" could lessen the risk of conflict .

assertions of military strength or regional tension over access to oil supplies could cause price spikes in the global market , which would be harmful to u.s. interests as well .

positive bilateral relationships and overall regional stability might enhance the perception of oil as a global commodity .

as the consumption giant in the region , china likely could benefit from u.s. assistance in developing alternatives to oil , such as bio - fuels or coal - based fuels , hydrogen and natural gas .

japan could also be helpful to china in developing energy conservation strategies ; encouraging japan to include energy efficiency programs as part of its development assistance to china could also serve the u.s. interest .

in addition , some analysts suggest the united states or its allies could consider providing technical assistance to china in expanding its strategic stockpile of oil .

according to this view , the "cushion" of a strategic reserve would allow china to cope better with a short - term disruption to global oil supply without causing shocks to the market .

the campaign to pressure beijing to become a "responsible stakeholder" in the world encompasses energy cooperation with the united states and the international energy community .

enhanced funding and attention to energy cooperation programs ( see " u.s. - china bilateral energy cooperation " section above ) under the overall engagement of the strategic economic dialogue could support this approach .

if , as many analysts believe , further globalization of the energy market will reduce the potential for major power conflict and instability , strong leadership is essential to coordinate cooperation between actors .

many feel the united states should take the role of rule - setter and enforcer through economic organizations , military cooperation ( for safe transit of energy resources ) , technical expertise , approval of international development assistance , and the promotion of common standards and shared infrastructure .

in their view , expanded american engagement can help lead energy security to a more open , regulated mode instead of actors resorting to old - style "resource diplomacy. .

some energy specialists have suggested that inviting china to join the international energy agency ( iea ) could alleviate many of the concerns of managing china's surging demand .

the paris - based agency , made up of the 27 industrialized countries that comprise the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , including korea and japan , is committed to ensuring energy security through cooperative solutions and safeguards , such as national strategic stockpiles .

proponents assert that engaging china in the iea mechanism could help to maintain the stability of world oil prices as well as lessen beijing's sense of strategic vulnerability that could ultimately lead to military rivalry .

providing a multilateral safety net could discourage china from taking measures such as hoarding oil ( some observers claim that china hoarded up to 30 million barrels ahead of the invasion of iraq in 2003 ) that put pressure on the world market .

however , opponents may argue against admitting china into the agency because the current members are defined as being industrialized democracies , a category which does not include china because of its communist political system .

others have suggested that the iea could create a mechanism specifically for emerging markets that does not demand full membership in the agency but still provides a mechanism to mitigate the effects of supply disruptions , as well as inclusion in coordinating the release of reserves .

another approach might be for the iea to sponsor oil stockpiles in regions of concern .

another multilateral alternative for the u.s. could be one of forming a regional energy coordination body .

some analysts advocate the creation of an asian version of the iea in order to share information , transfer conservation technology , and coordinate regional strategic stockpiles to reduce the effects of supply disruptions .

a multinational framework could spur concerted efforts to make projects like gas pipelines feasible and beneficial for the region as a whole .

a possible coordinating institution is the asian pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum , which has called for cooperation in developing measures to ensure energy security for the region .

as energy cooperation between northeast asian countries improves , strategies to develop the russian far east might energize regional trade and spur economic growth .

a regional approach likely would require considerable u.s. and international leadership , such as the assistance of international financial institutions to develop shared infrastructure and consultation on establishing shared guidelines and enforcement mechanisms .

under the iran sanctions act ( p.l .

104-172 , originally known as the iran - libya sanctions act ) , non - u.s. companies that invest over $20 million annually in iran or libya are subject to sanctions .

however , ilsa has never been invoked to punish companies , and only one official waiver has been granted ( to russian , malaysian , and french companies to develop gas reserves in southern iran by president clinton in 1998 ) .

meanwhile , since the passage of the legislation , billions reportedly have been invested in iran's oil and gas sector without being sanctioned , mostly by european companies .

under ilsa , the united states has the option to impose sanctions on companies involved in such ongoing deals with iran , but most observers say that the bush administration is unlikely to take this step .

