historically , germany's experience with terrorism has been predominantly with domesticgroups .

since the 1970s , germany has demonstrated both the willingness and capability to combatdomestic sources of terrorism .

after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , however , it became apparentto many within and outside germany that its traditional approaches were ill - suited to dealing withthe new threat of transnational , radical islamic terrorism .

terrorists' use of german territory to hatchthe 9 / 11 plot served as a wake up call for many .

three of the hijackers lived and plotted in hamburgand other parts of germany for several years , ( 1 ) taking advantage of liberal asylum policies and the low levels ofsurveillance by authorities .

the german response to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks against the united states was immediateand unprecedented in scope for that country .

setting aside its post - world war ii prohibition againstdeploying forces outside of europe and overcoming pacifist leanings of some in the governingcoalition , germany quickly offered military and other assistance to the united states .

in his initialreaction to the attacks of 9 / 11 , chancellor gerhard schroeder declared germany's "unlimitedsolidarity" with the united states .

on september 12 , 2001 , the german government , along with otheru.s .

allies , invoked nato's article v , paving the way for military assistance to the united states.the chancellor gained approval from the german parliament to deploy troops to afghanistan witha call for a vote of confidence in his own government .

since then , german efforts in the fight against terrorism have expanded across a widespectrum .

germany has instituted significant policy , legislative , and organizational reforms .

bilateralcooperation with the united states has been extensive , despite differences stemming from thedistinct approaches and constraints in each country and frictions resulting from sharp disagreementover iraq policy .

the following sections examine the german domestic and international response to terrorismafter 9 / 11 and potential issues and problems regarding the german approach .

they assess theaccomplishments of u.s. - german cooperation , as well as problems and future prospects .

security cooperation between the united states and germany , which had been close evenbefore 9 / 11 , was greatly expanded after the attacks .

the bka now has two permanent liaisonofficers at the german embassy in washington , dc and a liaison officer from the office of thegerman federal prosecutor is working in the u.s. department of justice .

in germany , up to 15 u.s.liaison officers are participating in the investigations of the 9 / 11 terrorist cells that were based ingermany .

several other measures have been taken .

an agreement on bilateral cooperation for theprotection of computer systems and networks was reached in june 2003 .

this effort is aimed atdefending critical infrastructure such as power supplies , and transportation and telecommunicationsgrids in both the united states and germany .

steps are being taken to extend this cooperation to theprotection of nuclear facilities .

 ( 58 ) moreover , the united states and germany reached an agreementon increased legal cooperation in criminal matters in october 2003 .

bilateral cabinet - level meetingsare frequent .

germany plays an active role in the u.s. container security initiative ( csi ) .

officials inwashington , dc and berlin signed an agreement to improve bilateral cooperation on containersecurity with the aim of stopping terrorists from smuggling weapons of mass destruction in sea - cargocontainers .

u.s. customs agents are stationed in germany to monitor suspicious containers beforethey leave german harbors .

 ( 59 ) furthermore , germany is an active member of the 14-countrycore group of the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) .

this initiative is aimed at preventing thespread of materials that could be used to build weapons of mass destruction .

u.s. and germanintelligence cooperation led to seizure of a ship bound for libya in the mediterranean sea in october2003 .

illicit nuclear material aboard was confiscated .

 ( 60 ) some believe that bilateral cooperation is weaker in the field of information sharing for avariety of reasons .

the united states has security concerns about sharing sensitive information.german authorities in turn fear that the united states will use sensitive shared information in waysthat might conflict with germany's practices with regard to data protection and civil liberties .

 ( 61 ) also , german critics claimthat the u.s. expectation of information sharing by others is not matched by a u.s. willingness toshare with them .

a recent example of the problems created by inadequate information sharing concerned twotrials of suspects in the 9 / 11 attacks .

mounir el motassadeq and abdelghani mzoudi were eventuallyacquitted by a german federal court with the explanation that the united states had not madecrucial evidence available .

 ( 62 ) after the department of justice forwarded the evidence requestedby the german government , the motassadeq trial was reopened on august 10 , 2004 .

what effect theinformation might have on the outcome of the new trial is unclear .

u.s. - german cooperation in the area of information sharing mostly occurs on a case - by - casebasis and is not based on formal governmental agreements .

some question whether this is adequate .

given the way that transnational terrorist networks operate , some argue that it is necessary to targetthe entire terrorist infrastructure ( eg , recruitment , fund raising , logistics , and training ) .

 ( 63 ) a shared databasecontaining all available information regarding the most threatening persons might allow bothcountries to better track terrorist suspects , to harmonize surveillance activities , and to target travelby terrorists ( as was recommended by the u.s. 9 / 11 commission ) .

apparently the only databasesof such dangerous persons accessible to both governments are the lists of islamic terroristorganizations and persons maintained by the un and the eu .

 ( 64 ) sharply different perspectives on the death penalty have also hampered bilateral cooperationin some cases .

germany , like all eu member countries , has abolished the death penalty .

germanlaw does not allow extradition of a person wanted by another country if there is a possibility that theperson might be executed if found guilty .

in previous cases , germany extradited suspects only afterit had received assurances that the death penalty would not be imposed .

in 1998 , germany arrestedand extradited a key suspect in the 1998 u.s. embassy bombings in africa , after u.s. prosecutorsagreed to waive the death penalty .

germany has interpreted its laws to forbid even provision ofevidence relating to such a case , if that information might lead to the imposition of a death sentence .

this became an issue when the united states sought to obtain documents from germany related tothe case of zacarias moussaoui , the so - called 20th hijacker .

the information was eventually suppliedbased on the understanding that the united states would agree not to seek the death penalty solelybased on the evidence gained from germany .

 ( 65 ) still , the death penalty issue remains a potential impediment tocooperation in specific cases .

germany and the united states also differ on the question of the status of prisoners,particularly the al qaeda and taliban detainees in guantã¡namo bay .

germany's foreign ministerjoschka fischer and other politicians have argued that all detainees should be granted formal statusas prisoners of war .

germans , like other europeans , have also criticized u.s. plans to use militarytribunals to try at least some of the terrorist suspects .

such tribunals are seen as unnecessary andcounterproductive by german officials .

some question has been raised whether terrorist suspectswould be extradited by germany and other eu countries , if they were likely to face a militarytribunal .

 ( 66 ) in the german view , conduct of the fight against global terrorism requires multilateralcooperation , formally sanctioned by the relevant international organizations .

germans argue thatmost unilateral measures are illegitimate and ineffective .

in this context , german officials are hopingthat the second bush administration will place greater emphasis on multilateralism to strengtheninternational support for u.s. counterterrorism initiatives .

from germany's perspective , joint actionon counterterrorism is also tied closely to joint decision making .

 ( 67 ) the u.s. administration rejects any absolute commitment to multilateralism in terms ofwaiting for un approval for any military action .

such a policy would be seen in the united statesas a dangerous and unacceptable recipe for paralysis .

some criticize the german approach as toowedded to process over results , especially when dealing with "rogue" states and weapons of massdestruction .

while germany has declared wmd non - proliferation a core element of its nationalsecurity strategy , the german approach has been criticized by some for relying almost exclusivelyon positive engagement and avoiding conflict , an approach that might not be very successful ininfluencing certain regimes or potential terrorists .

some observers believe that the german stancereflects the reality that the country presently lacks the military means or the political will to confrontwmd states with anything other than "soft power" instruments ( such as diplomacy and economiclevers ) .

some see a complementarity in the differing u.s. and german approaches .

the u.s. hasextensive military capabilities to deal with threats of terrorism , while germany views its strengthsin conflict prevention and reconstruction .

this could mean , for instance , that germany might bebetter positioned to take on a greater role in long - term reconstruction efforts in countries likeafghanistan .

some argue that with a better understanding of the potential complementary roles thetwo countries can play based on the strengths and advantages of each , new opportunities forenhanced cooperation in the global war on terrorism might be found .

the final report of the u.s.9 / 11 commission suggests that long - term success in the war against terrorism demands the use ofall elements of national power , including "soft power" instruments such as diplomacy , intelligence,and foreign aid .

a key question is to what degree differences are likely to hamper u.s. - german cooperationagainst terrorism .

it could be argued that u.s. and german security in the near and mid - term arelikely to be affected far more by what germany does to cooperate with the united states in terms ofdomestic security and bilaterally than by germany's stance on other international issues .

lapses ingerman domestic surveillance or other shortcomings in german domestic policy could directlythreaten u.s. security .

for example , according to statements from the bnd , some dozen or soislamic militants capable of carrying out assaults may have left germany for iraq not too longago .

 ( 68 ) therefore , manyquestion whether the united states and germany can afford the risk of allowing international policydifferences to lead to declining cooperation within the crucial arena of domestic security .

the united states and germany may see security threats through different lenses , andresponses to those threats are shaped by different national interests , practices , and historicalexperiences .

 ( 69 ) ultimately , understanding and accepting these differences ( agreeing to disagree ) , in the minds ofsome observers , may be the best approach to enhancing future u.s. - german cooperation in theglobal war on terrorism .

close bilateral cooperation with the united states is important forgermany's own global interests .

for the united states , as well , german cooperation againstterrorism is likely to remain significant in light of germany's importance as a european and worldactor , as a key hub for the transnational flow of persons and goods especially to the united states,and as a country whose soil has been used by terrorist to target the united states .

at the information board data is shared regarding networks of arab mujaheden ( "jihadists" ) .

the federal security council is a committee of the federal cabinet .

its top - confidential sessions are convened and led by the chancellor .

association / organization law .

before 9 / 11 , religious associations were protectedfrom surveillance and investigation under german law .

the anti - terror laws passedin late 2001 have removed this legal protection , permitting state authorities to probeand investigate groups with suspected terrorist ties .

in the future , associations offoreigners that promote violent or terrorist activities will be prohibited .

penal code changes .

in the future terrorist activities are subject to prosecution ofgerman authorities even if they occur outside germany's borders and without directinvolvement of german citizens or organizations .

alien act .

people who present a danger to the democratic order in germany , andwho are engaged or encourage others to engage in terrorist organizations will bedenied entry or residence permits in germany regardless of whether the individualsare tourists , immigrants , or asylum seekers .

asylum procedure law .

all asylum applications will be required to include a voicerecording stating the exact country of origin of applicants .

fingerprints will also becollected with applications .

all records will be on file with the security authoritiesfor 10 years .

law on central foreigner registry .

information filed in the central alienregister ( for instance ) is now automated and more accessible for security authorities.moreover the collected data includes information about visa applications anddecisions and about people already living in germany .

security oversight law .

personnel working in areas of counterterrorism and othersensitive defense occupations will receive security screening .

air traffic law .

clarification of this law restricts the carrying and use of firearmsto air marshals .

additionally , security clearances are required for all airport and flightpersonnel , as well as others working in activities connected to airports or air traffic .

passport and personal i.d .

law .

changes in this law will provide for an improvedcomputer - supported identification system .

this will help prevent the use of bogusidentification documents .

encrypted biometric identification codes will be added tophotographs and signatures .

act on the protection of the constitution .

the federal bureau for the protectionof the constitution ( bfv ) is given authority to track any activities of extremist groupsthat seek to intensify ideological or religious differences .

the law calls for combiningseveral databases with civil information to make computerized searches moreeffective .

federal bureau for criminal investigation .

the bka now has the right to lead itsown investigations , replacing the former system which required formal requests bythe bfv .

federal border guard act .

armed officers of the federal border guard ( bgs ) arenow deployed aboard german airplanes .

moreover , the bgs has been tasked toconduct in - depth screening of border traffic .

