with an estimated population of 240.3 million , indonesia is the world's most populous muslim nation and is the world's fourth - most populated nation overall after china , india , and the united states .

its population is growing by approximately 3 million people a year .

it has extensive natural resources .

a large percentage of world trade transits the strategically important straits of malacca that link the indian ocean littoral to the south china sea and the larger pacific ocean basin .

indonesia is also perceived by many as the geopolitical center of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , which is a key actor in the geopolitical dynamics of the larger asia - pacific region .

indonesia continues to emerge from a period of authoritarian rule and is consolidating its status as one of the world's largest democracies .

some 86% of indonesians are muslim , and the overwhelming majority subscribe to a moderate form of the religion , giving indonesia the potential to act as a counterbalance to more extreme expressions of islam .

despite this , radical islamists and terrorist cells have operated in the country .

internal strife and social dislocation stemming from inter - communal discord , autonomous and secessionist movements , political machinations among elites , islamist extremism , government corruption , and economic uncertainty have all undermined stability in indonesia in the past .

more recently , indonesia has been conducting elections widely considered free and fair and building a more robust civil society .

while indonesia's economy suffered major setbacks during the asian financial crisis of 1997 / 98 , it has weathered the recent global economic downturn relatively well .

the key challenge for the united states and indonesia is now how to build on recent progress in the relationship and deliver demonstrable results in developing the comprehensive partnership between the two countries that can further shared interests .

specific areas of congressional interest include democracy promotion , security and counterterrorism cooperation , human rights , fostering liberal trade and investment policies , securing indonesian cooperation on regional issues and global ones such as climate change .

the military - to - military relationship has been a key test of enhanced bilateral cooperation .

in 2005 , the administration of president george bush moved to remove restrictions on international military and education and training ( imet ) , foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and foreign military sales ( fms ) programs for indonesia .

this was viewed by many as a first step toward normalizing the military - to - military relationship .

indonesia has been a key player in the war against terror in southeast asia and an increasingly important geopolitical actor in the asia - pacific region .

despite these developments , many continue to have concern over human rights abuses in indonesia .

other members of congress , however , have emphasized the progress indonesia has made in several areas .

an example of military cooperation with indonesia is the tri - border initiative that involves radar and maritime operations in the makassar strait to monitor possible terrorist or pirate activity .

other examples include u.s. assistance to indonesia's new defense university and u.s. assistance with the procurement of c - 130 hercules transport aircraft , which , according to defense minister juwono sudarsono , will take advantage of u.s. discount pricing and foreign military financing .

u.s. secretary of defense robert gates announced in jakarta in july 2010 that the united states would resume a "measured and gradual program of security cooperation" with kopassus forces .

during the cold war , the united states was primarily concerned about communist influence in indonesia .

after the cold war , congressional views on indonesia were more influenced by ongoing concerns over alleged human rights abuses by the indonesian national defense forces ( tni ) .

the events of 9 / 11 added the concern of how best to pursue the war against terror in southeast asia .

some members of congress remain dissatisfied with progress on bringing to justice indonesian military personnel and police responsible for past human rights abuses in east timor and west papua .

the january 2006 arrest of anthonius wamang , who is thought to have led an attack near the town of timika in papua that killed two americans , did much to resolve what had been an obstacle to developing the relationship .

as the united states moved from the post - cold war world to the war against terror , human rights concerns have increasingly been balanced against american security interests , and particularly the need to develop effective counterterror cooperation with indonesia to combat radical islamic groups .

over the same period , the human rights record of the tni is generally perceived to have improved .

there is also increasing appreciation of indonesia's geopolitical position within southeast asia and the larger east asia region among american decision - makers .

some analysts have argued that the need to obtain effective counterterror cooperation and to secure american strategic interests in the region necessitates a working relationship with indonesia and its key institutions , such as the military .

other observers take the view that the promotion of american values , such as human rights and religious freedom , should be preeminent in guiding u.s. relations with indonesia .

president obama's much anticipated november 2010 visit to indonesia was , in the view of most , a success .

the visit was postponed twice earlier in the year due to health care legislation and the environmental disaster in the gulf of mexico .

president obama's efforts build on those of his predecessor president george bush and have now positioned the bilateral relationship between indonesia and the united states to develop further .

this is of strategic interest to the united states as it seeks to shape the evolving geostrategic environment in asia relative to the rise of china .

the comprehensive partnership agreement signed during the visit is seen as facilitating a broadening of the relationship as well as continued collaboration with indonesia in the struggle against islamist extremists .

some analysts believe a strengthened relationship will likely help the u.s. engage the moderate muslim world .

president obama's initiative also offers the prospect of developing deeper trade and investment ties with indonesia .

modern indonesia has been shaped by the dynamic interaction of indigenous cultures with external influences — especially the succession of influences of hinduism , buddhism , islam , dutch colonial rule , and a powerful and nationalistic independence movement .

the geographic definition of modern indonesia began to take shape under dutch direct colonial rule , which began in 1799 .

the dutch east indies were occupied by japan during world war ii .

following the japanese surrender in 1945 , independence was declared by nationalist leader sukarno .

after a four - year anti - colonial insurrection , the republic of indonesia gained its independence from the dutch in 1949 .

the dutch retained control of the present - day territory of papua and west papua , collectively known to many as west papua , until the transition period 1963-1969 .

indonesian independence was followed by a period of parliamentary democracy , which was replaced in 1959 by president sukarno's "guided democracy" that lasted until 1965 .

in the late 1950s the united states provided clandestine assistance to military rebellions in outlying provinces of indonesia out of fear that the communist party of indonesia ( pki ) was gaining control of the country .

on september 30 , 1965 , the military , under general suharto , marginalized sukarno .

one interpretation of events is that the military stepped in to avert a communist coup .

another is that suharto and officers loyal to him engineered a crisis that allowed him to consolidate power over first the army and then the state .

in the aftermath , an estimated 500,000 or more indonesians lost their lives in riots and purges that were characterized as "anti - communist. .

president suharto ruled indonesia until 1998 .

during this 32-year period , his authoritarian "new order" regime provided the political stability thought necessary by his supporters for fast - paced economic growth .

indonesia's economy grew at an average annual rate of almost 7% from 1987 to 1997 .

suharto's death in january 2008 served as a point of reflection on his rule , during which economic development and political stability came at the price of corruption and repression .

a period of reform , or " reformasi , " followed suharto's fall .

suharto was succeeded by b.j .

habibie ( 1998-99 ) , abdurrahman wahid ( 1999-2001 ) , the daughter of former president sukarno , megawati sukarnoputri ( 2001-2004 ) , and susilo bambang yudhoyono ( 2004-present ) .

despite the political instability during this period , a number of key reforms designed to enhance good governance and expand democracy were implemented .

particularly important was a 1999 law that transferred enormous authority from the central government to provincial and district - level government .

however , by 2003 , the momentum for reform appeared to be faltering .

president yudhoyono is thought to have moved the reform agenda forward but only to a limited extent .

the source of legitimacy , or lack thereof , for government has changed for the indonesian people over time .

the dutch colonial administration was viewed as illegitimate .

the sukarno presidency sought to base its rule on moral concepts but it did not provide sufficient economic development .

this was subsequently provided by president suharto until 1997 , when the asian financial crisis undermined his ability to do so .

at that point , with economic growth declining , indonesians were no longer prepared to accept what was increasingly viewed as a corrupt and authoritarian regime .

this brought on the era of democratic reform whose energy , prior to 2004 , had appeared to be dissipating before fully completing its goal of instituting representative government .

many analysts believe indonesia's next challenge is to build government institutions that are effective and responsive , so as to consolidate the legitimacy of democratic government .

indonesia has made significant progress toward institutionalizing its democracy and more firmly establishing civil society .

since the suharto era , which ended abruptly amid mass protests in 1998 , civil society has expanded , and a vigorous and open media has emerged .

in addition to the direct election of the president , the military no longer has seats in parliament and the police have been separated from the military .

indonesia's parliamentary elections in april 2004 , and the presidential elections of july and september 2004 , were deemed by international observers to be free and fair , and they did much to instill confidence in indonesia's democratic process .

the parliamentary and presidential elections of 2009 further consolidated the democratic process in indonesia .

indonesia's national legislative structure consists of three separate bodies .

first is a house of representatives ( dpr ) of 550 members elected from party lists in multi - seat districts .

the dpr has the primary role in passing laws .

second is a 132-seat regional representative council ( dpd ) whose members are elected directly .

third is the people's consultative assembly ( mpr ) , which is composed of members of both the dpr and the dpd .

it is responsible for passing constitutional amendments and conducting presidential impeachments .

decentralization in recent years has placed increased importance on government at the local level .

although president yudhoyono came to his second term in office in 2009 with a strong mandate , that support has begun to erode .

despite strong economic indicators , yudhoyono's approval rating dropped from 85% after his reelection to 66% by october 2010 .

some have attributed this decline to controversy about a government bailout of bank century , a mid - sized indonesian bank , and the departure of reformist finance minister sri mulyani indrawati , which damaged sby's reformist credentials with voters .

observers believe that aburizal bakrie , a tycoon who heads golkar , a key coalition partner to sby's democratic party , benefits politically from indrawati's departure and enhances his chances to position himself for a possible presidential run in 2014 .

the indonesian national defense force ( tni ) is generally regarded as the strongest institution in indonesia .

its origins date to the struggle for independence .

the tni traditionally has been internally focused , playing a key role in indonesian politics and preserving the territorial integrity of the nation — largely from internal threats — rather than focusing on external security concerns .

its strong tradition of secular nationalism has acted to help integrate the nation .

the key elements of the military in indonesia are the army strategic reserve command , the army special forces command , other special forces , and the military regional commands .

there are also air force and naval commands .

while the military now has a less formal role in the politics of the nation than it had in the suharto era , it remains a key actor behind the scenes .

some observers are concerned about its indirect influence over politics .

the indonesian military has attracted negative attention through its past involvement with human rights abuses in east timor , aceh , papua , and maluku , although current problems appear largely limited to papua and west papua .

during the initial period of reform , the tni officially abandoned the doctrine of dwifungsi , or dual function , which gave it an official role in the politics of the nation .

appointed members to the legislative bodies from the military were removed , while the police were separated from the tni .

efforts were also begun to more firmly establish civilian control of the armed forces .

supporters of the reform agenda in indonesia would like to see additional measures taken , including reform of the army's territorial structure , a full withdrawal of the military from business activities , and improving the military's sensitivity to human rights .

the tni budget is thought to be to a large extent self - generated .

this part of the tni budget is largely outside governmental control .

the tni will likely continue to play a key role in the evolution of the indonesian polity in the years ahead .

it will also likely seek to preserve its prominent place in indonesian society .

while slowed , there are still signs that the reform process continues in indonesia .

deputy assistant secretary of defense robert scher has stated that the tni "continues to shift its mission away from internal security. .

there is increased focus on more traditional and professional roles for the military , such as guaranteeing sovereignty and external security , and relatively less focus on the political role of the tni within indonesia .

proponents of tni reform have called for developing military capability and developing responsibility of military actions .

admiral agus suhartono is the current head of the tni .

the indonesian parliament has called on the new tni chief to complete the process of internal reform of the tni , maintain the army's neutrality in politics and strengthen security in border areas .

tni commander suhartono has stated that he will carry on the effort to terminate the tni's role in business .

one proposal for how indonesia could address some of its military budget shortfall involves a continuation of the reform process .

some have put forward the idea that by dismantling the territorial command structure , which is a legacy of the former dwifungsi role of the new order military , indonesia could save money that could be redirected to the air force or navy which are focused on more conventional military roles and are arguably underfunded given the vast sea and air space encompassed by the indonesian archipelago .

center - periphery tensions between the dominant javanese culture and minority groups in outlying regions have been sources of political instability and strife for the indonesian state .

indonesia has in recent years adapted its approach to such strife and done much to alleviate autonomous or secessionist tensions .

this relatively more moderate approach has reached accommodation where other efforts to quell indonesia's centrifugal tendencies have failed .

the primary security threats to indonesia are generally thought to come from within .

the political center of the indonesian archipelago is located in jakarta on java , the densely populated island where 60% of indonesia's population lives .

traditionally , power has extended from java out to the outlying areas of indonesia .

this has been true both under dutch rule , when jakarta was known as batavia , and with the modern indonesian state .

throughout its history there has been resistance in peripheral areas to this centralized control .

this manifested itself in the predominantly catholic former indonesian province of east timor , which is now an independent state , as well as in the far west of indonesia , in aceh , and in the far eastern part of the nation , in papua and west papua .

each of these regions has strong ethnic , cultural , and / or religious identities very different from those of java .

such diversity has led to debate about whether indonesia is an organic state or an artificial creation of dutch colonial rule .

analysis of early indonesian history reveals a level of integration in terms of economics and trade , if not extensive political unity .

while early indigenous empires were precursors of the indonesian state , political unity is generally considered to have been a product of dutch colonial rule , including a series of lengthy wars to subdue outlying islands and independent political units .

it has been suggested that a key lesson of indonesian history is that "unifying the archipelago administratively can only be done by the use of force. .

forces of economic integration , or the creation of a national identity stemming from the nationalist movement which started in java in 1908 , could be viewed as other integrative forces .

while the vast majority of indonesians practice a moderate form of islam , a very small radical minority have sought to establish an islamic state .

some extremists are hostile to the christian minority and an even smaller group would use violence to establish an islamic khalifate throughout the muslim areas of southeast asia .

while they represent an extremely small percentage of the population , such groups have created much internal turmoil in indonesia .

a distinction can be drawn between groups such as the now disbanded lashkar jihad that focused on indonesian inter - communal conflict between muslims and christians in maluku , and factions of jemaah islamiya ( ji ) , which have used terrorist methods to promote an extreme islamist agenda with linkages to al qaeda .

there have also been allegations that lashkar jihad was a tool of hard - liners within the military that opposed the reform movement and who allowed , or possibly even assisted , lashkar jihad activities that destabilized the nation , thereby highlighting the need for a strong military that could impose order .

there has also been inter - group conflict elsewhere in indonesia such as between muslims and christians in sulawesi and the maluku , and between local dayaks and internal madurese migrants in kalimantan .

much attention has been focused on the potential rise of islamic sentiment in indonesia in recent years .

this was most notable in a political context with the rise of the islamist pks justice party in the 2004 election .

in that election , the pks increased its seats to 45 from 7 ( out of 550 ) following the 1999 parliamentary election .

many attributed the success of the pks in parliamentary elections in 2004 to its campaign platform of good governance and its party organization rather than to its islamist character .

the pks is not the largest muslim party and does not represent the large muslim mainstream groups .

some 90.4% of indonesians believe religious affairs should be within the framework of the state ideology of pancasila , which encompasses five key guiding principles for the state , and the constitution .

some 91.6% of indonesians believe that indonesia's state ideology is correctly based on pancasila .

the lack of further success by islamic political parties in the 2009 election allayed concerns that political islam would radicalize indonesia .

despite the success of the national - secular political parties , there have been challenges to the secular nature of the indonesian state over cultural and moral issues .

not only the strictly fundamentalist muslims but also more traditional muslims protest the influence of western cultural and moral values in indonesian society .

the challenge has four components .

first is the direct action by radical muslim groups against businesses and institutions which they accuse of representing western cultural and moral values .

the most widely publicized group is the islamic defenders front ( fpi ) .

the fpi targets such businesses for direct , violent action .

squads of fpi cadre have forcibly shut down gambling dens , discos , nightclubs and bars that serve alcoholic beverages , and brothels .

the fpi also has targeted christian churches .

attacks by the fpi and like - minded muslim groups have forced the closure of upwards of 100 christian churches since september 2004 , including more than 30 in west java alone .

the fpi is estimated to have supporters in the tens of thousands at most .

it and similar groups receive financial backing from saudi arabia .

its influence is felt widely partly because police and law enforcement authorities have adopted a permissive attitude toward its activities .

arrests of fpi members are few and infrequent despite the government's revisions of public assembly laws to make it easier to disband violence - prone groups .

despite some ongoing activity it appears that this type of militant action is less intense than in years past .

the second component is pressure by muslim groups on authorities to establish islamic sharia law .

this is felt primarily on the provincial and local levels .

the state department's human rights report for 2006 cited an estimate that more than 56 sharia - based local laws have been issued throughout indonesia .

these laws often require that women wear head scarves , require that officials read the koran in arabic , segregate men and women in public places , and prohibit alcohol and gambling .

so far , the central government have not challenged the constitutionality of such laws .

the third component is judicial action against non - muslims or indonesians who are accused of insulting muslim beliefs .

the fact that the indonesian government prosecuted the editor of playboy indonesia for breaching the country's indecency laws after mounting protest against the magazine by fundamentalist muslim groups is one example .

the fourth component is in education , particularly in the thousands of "pesantren" islamic boarding schools in indonesia .

observers warn that the instruction in these schools increasingly is of a fundamentalist nature that emphasizes intolerance of other religions and non - muslim , secular practices .

former indonesian president abdurrahman wahid warned in april 2007 that the teaching of fundamentalist islam in the pesantren schools is an acute problem and that the problem is spreading into indonesian universities .

there are other areas of inter - communal strife in indonesia .

two ethnic groups in east kalimantan , the bugis and the tidung who are the indigenous people of tarakan , have clashed over the years .

tensions appeared to be mounting between these two groups in the fall of 2010 as a inter - communal riot broke out between these two groups in september 2010 .

in 2000 , in what is known as the sampit incident of central kalimantan , over 500 were killed and 100,000 displaced as a result of such clashes .

elements of the air force special troops corps were deployed to quell the violence in tandung in 2010 .

indonesia has weathered the recent global economic downturn comparatively well .

while gnp growth dipped from 6% in 2008 to 4.5% in 2009 , it is expected to increase to 5.9% in 2010 and 6% in 2011 .

the dip was less of a downturn than was expected .

projected growth in 2010 and 2011 is thought to be driven largely by private consumption and investment .

indonesia's relative lack of exposure to export markets in the united states and europe have helped , as has its deep resource base and very favorable demographics .

indonesia benefited from inflows of capital in 2010 .

an estimated $9 billion flowed into the rupiah bond market and an additional $2.5 billion into local stocks while indonesia reportedly received $8 billion in foreign direct investment and further significant investment in infrastructure and real estate .

listed companies reportedly attained strong earnings growth of 36.9% year on year in august 2010 and the jakarta composite index rose 22% from january 1 to august 13 , 2010 .

the relatively good performance of the indonesian economy was thought to be at least partially responsible for the electorate's support for president sby and his democrat party in the 2009 elections .

poverty alleviation , social welfare , and jobs were central issues in those elections .

for this reason economic growth will likely continue to be a priority for the democrat party .

even as the economy is performing well and attracting investment , indonesia continues to struggle to lift masses out of poverty while developing its infrastructure .

the world bank country p artnership strategy ( 2009-12 ) : investing in indonesia' s institutions stated that in 2007 nearly half of indonesia's population was living below or just above the poverty line , that job creation was growing at a slower rate than the rate of population growth , that parts of eastern indonesia remained underdeveloped , and that indonesia received low marks in certain health and infrastructure indicators .

despite having long been a key oil exporter , indonesia has in recent years become a net oil importer .

indonesia's oil production peaked at 1.6 million barrels per day ( bpd ) in 1995 .

observers note that indonesia will need foreign investment to help it boost production in its aging oil fields .

it is , however , the world's second largest producer of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) .

indonesia is thought to have an estimated 8.6 billion barrels of oil and 182 trillion cubic feet of natural gas in reserves .

as the world's third largest contributor to rising greenhouse gasses , largely due to deforestation , indonesia has the potential to play a key role in mitigating climate change .

much of indonesia's logging is illegal .

president yudhoyono has pledged to cut indonesia's carbon emissions by 26% by 2020 .

as part of this agenda indonesia and norway have agreed to a $1 billion deal to preserve indonesian natural forests and peatlands .

this led yudhoyono to announce a two - year moratorium on the clearing of natural forests .

approximately 85% of indonesian emissions are from deforestation .

indonesian efforts to preserve its and the region's maritime environment can also play a positive role in promoting pacific tuna and other fish stocks .

president yudhoyono has raised indonesia's profile on environmental issues in recent years , and the united states and indonesia have begun to cooperate in the area .

in june 2010 , the u.s. and indonesia announced the establishment of a center to focus on linking science and policy including public - private partnerships in the area of climate change .

in 2009 president yudhoyono made a pledge to reduce indonesia's carbon emissions by up to 41% below business - as - usual levels by 2020 .

indonesia hosted the 13 th conference of the parties of the united nations framework convention on climate change in december 2007 and the world ocean conference in may 2009 .

deforestation is the main contributor to indonesia's carbon emissions , which are the third highest in the world after the united states and china when deforestation effects are taken into account .

indonesia has immense biological diversity in its tropical rainforests and in its archipelagic marine environment .

this is under threat from various pressures including , logging , climate change , and pollution .

the logging of indonesia's forests , both legal and illegal , is an issue of increasing concern to many .

indonesia has the world's third - largest tropical forests and the world's largest timber trade .

rain forests are thought to be an important sink for global atmospheric carbon and play a vital role in climate .

rain forests contain an estimated two - thirds of the planet's plant and animal species .

it is estimated that logging and other clearing of rain forests has reduced their extent from 14% of the earth's surface to 6% .

a special report by the economist estimated that about 2 million hectares of indonesian forest , an area the size of massachusetts , are logged each year .

in the 15 years leading up to 2006 , indonesia lost one quarter of its forests .

one 2006 estimate projected that at current rates of logging indonesia's forests would be logged out in 10 years .

the destruction of indonesia's forests would likely lead to widespread species extinction .

it is estimated that illegal logging deprives indonesia of some $3 billion annually .

burning of logged land to clear it for palm plantations and other uses in southeast asia led to widespread haze over the region in 1997 , which accounted for an estimated 8% of greenhouse gasses emitted worldwide in that year .

in the years since , indonesian fires have contributed to haze in the region , including 2010 when singapore and parts of malaysia were clocked in such pollutants .

from 1998 to 2010 it is estimated that about quarter of west papua's forests have disappeared due to logging and clearing .

the united states and indonesia moved to begin to address the problem of illegal logging in april 2006 .

bilateral talks were initiated to reach an agreement to deal with the problem of illegal logging in indonesia which is estimated to account for 80% of all logging in indonesia .

the united states and indonesia signed a bilateral agreement to combat illegal logging and associated trade in november 2006 .

the united states initially committed $1 million to fund remote sensing of illegal logging and to develop partnerships with non - governmental organizations and the private sector .

the agreement established a working group under the u.s. - indonesia trade and investment framework agreement .

indonesia has been working with norway to develop and implement a national reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation ( redd ) program .

norway has pledged 1 billion dollars for the purpose .

in october 2010 indonesia asked norway to postpone disbursement of funds under its climate partnership deal as indonesia had yet to complete preparatory steps to implement the project .

concerns remain that corruption in the forestry sector may thwart efforts to reduce carbon emissions in this area .

indonesia has the most threatened species of mammals in the world .

poaching , deforestation , and illegal logging continue to threaten the existence of orangutans , the sumatran tiger , and the javan rhino .

ninety percent of the orangutan's habitat has been destroyed as land is cleared with fire by illegal logging , plantation companies , and farmers .

it is thought that orangutans will disappear in the wild in indonesia if present deforestation trends continue .

the javanese tiger and the balinese tiger became extinct in the 1970s .

only about 400 sumatran tigers are thought to remain alive .

this is a dramatic decrease from an estimated 1,000 sumatran tigers in the 1970s .

their decrease is similarly attributed to a combination of deforestation , illegal logging , and poaching .

effective control of the illegal trade in wild animal parts is thought to be essential for the species survival .

the javanese rhino is similarly threatened with only 60 thought to remain in the wild .

indonesia hosted the world ocean conference in may 2009 where indonesia , malaysia , timor - leste , papua new guinea , the solomon islands , and the philippines met and adopted a 10-year action plan to address threats to the maritime environment , particularly with coral reefs , fish , and mangroves .

the agreement , the coral triangle initiative on coral reefs , fisheries and food security , is not legally binding but covers some 6 million square - kilometers of ocean .

climate change is particularly threatening to indonesia as sea level rise would adversely affect many of indonesia's low - lying coastal areas .

much attention in the united states has been focused on human rights in indonesia .

the state department's annual human rights report states that the indonesian government "generally respected the human rights of its citizens and upheld civil liberties. .

the report noted that problems remain , including "killings by security forces ; vigilantism ; harsh prison conditions ; impunity for prison authorities and some other officials ; corruption in the judicial system ; limitations on free speech ; societal abuse and discrimination against religious groups" among other concerns .

the report also noted that civilian control of the military was weakened by the partially self - financed nature of the tni and that indonesia continued to make progress in strengthening and consolidating its democracy .

the west papua advocacy team stated that the state department report "pulled its punches" when describing indonesian human rights violations and stated that security forces "remain largely unaccountable to a judicial system that is deeply corrupt and cowed by the power of the security forces. .

human rights watch observed in its 2009 world report that indonesia "saw little human rights progress. .

the report was critical of indonesia for a general lack of effort to "pursue accountability" for past abuses and observed that "endemic police torture also routinely goes unpunished. .

the report also criticized the government for bowing to pressure from islamic hard - line groups on the ahmadiyya and stated that "deeply rooted distrust of jakarta [in papua] is still a time bomb ; failure to address human rights — including security force abuse — is one important reason the distrust has not been dispelled. .

others have pointed to the candidacy of former general wiranto and general prabowo subianto , both of whom are suspected of suharto - era human rights abuses , as vice presidential candidates in the july 2009 presidential election as evidence of a lack of forward progress on human rights in indonesia .

indonesian foreign policy has been shaped largely by two men , presidents sukarno and suharto , although more recent presidents , particularly yudhoyono , have sought to increase the nation's presence on the world stage .

once a leading force in the non - aligned movement ( nam ) of the early cold war era , indonesia has traditionally sought to remain largely independent from great power conflict and entangling alliances .

sukarno's world view divided the world into new emerging forces and old established forces .

sukarno sought to fight the forces of neo - colonialism , colonialism , and imperialism , which brought his government closer to china in 1964-65 .

by contrast , suharto's new order lessened sukarno's anti - western rhetoric and focused on better relations with other southeast asian nations .

under suharto , indonesia was one of the founding members of the association of southeast asian states ( asean ) in 1967 and played a key leadership role in the organization .

indonesia's internal problems since 1998 have kept it largely internally focused .

as a result , it has not played as active a role in the organization as in past years .

indonesia exerts a moderate voice in the organization of islamic conference ( oic ) and is a member of asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) .

in recent years , indonesia has done more to project itself as a moderating force in the muslim world , positioning itself as a potential bridge between islam and the west .

democracy is increasingly a component of indonesia's engagement with its external environment .

indonesia launched the bali democracy forum in november 2008 with the aim of "promoting regional and international cooperation in the field of democracy. .

the bali forum is taking an inclusive approach that brings together democracies as well as those "aspiring to be more democratic. .

the forum is to act as a platform for countries to "exchange ideas and knowledge and share experience and best practices. .

indonesia also established the institute for peace and democracy at the university of udayana on bali to support the initiative .

indonesia has also supported the new asean charter , which is supportive of democratic development and human rights .

many observers believe the present offers a unique moment for a significant expansion and deepening of bilateral relations with indonesia that could have broader implications for the evolving correlates of power in asia as well as for u.s. engagement with asean and with muslim nations .

such observers often argue that indonesia has since 2004 made dramatic progress in developing its democracy and civil society even as some reform issues remain to be resolved .

others remain focused on human rights abuses by the indonesian military .

although most of these date back to 1999 or before , concern remains over indonesian security forces conduct in west papua .

in this way , decision makers' approaches to indonesia will likely involve a consideration of a mix of u.s. foreign and strategic policy interests with regard to indonesia .

these may include consideration of possible tradeoffs between a foreign policy approach that stresses the promotion of human rights and those that seeks to strengthen bilateral ties in order to assist in the struggle against violent islamist extremists and to promote u.s. geopolitical interests .

