in august 2005 , pakistan held two - phase municipal - level elections in 110 districts .

althoughthe exercise ostensibly was a non - party affair , officials from the opposition pakistan people's partycomplained in july that president musharraf was violating the code of conduct by urging voters tocast ballots for candidates favored by the ruling pakistan muslim league .

then , in a blow to thehopes of islamist sympathizers , the pakistan supreme court ruled that candidates with religiouseducation were ineligible to run in municipal elections unless they have studied english , pakistanstudies , and urdu .

islamist leaders criticized the ruling .

 ( 1 ) during the polling , tens of thousands of troops were deployed forsecurity purposes , yet scores of pakistanis were killed and as many as 1,000 were injured inpoll - related violence around the country .

claims of widespread vote - rigging and women beingbarred from polling stations in the frontier province spurred pakistan's major opposition parties - - both secular and islamist - - to issue a joint call for a national strike to protest president musharraf's"military takeover," "dictatorial behavior," and "blatant rigging. .

ensuing protests were onlymoderate in scale ( with quetta being an exception ) and information minister rashid called the strike"a total failure. .

 ( 2 ) candidates favored by pakistan's ruling party appear to have fared quite well in all fourprovinces , and muslim league gains were seen as a major boost for president musharraf , who mayhave to rely on the ruling party to win the presidency in 2007 .

musharraf expressed satisfaction with"a victory for the moderates" and "a defeat for the extremists. .

however , one pakistani analystopined that the outcome would be unlikely to yield political harmony and had only exacerbated thesense of bitterness and alienation felt among opposition parties .

others warn that apparentirregularities could in fact harm musharraf's image ; a former pakistani ambassador called the processa "typically vice - regal electoral exercise. .

still , many non - pakistani observers , especially those frominternational aid organizations such as the asian development bank , see the local governancesystem as a bright spot in otherwise faltering efforts at pakistani democratization .

 ( 3 ) in june 2005 , the u.s. state department's lead official for south asia , christina rocca,reiterated for the house international relations committee the important role pakistan continues toplay in assisting u.s. - led efforts to defeat terrorism , stabilize neighboring afghanistan , and end thetransfer of nuclear weapons material and technologies .

she noted that "pakistan's government hastaken steps necessary ... to set it on the path of becoming a modern , prosperous , and democraticstate," but conceded "there's still a way to go" toward that goal .

calling democratization a "centralfocus" and one of the "top priorities" in u.s. - pakistan relations , secretary rocca expressed a u.s.expectation that pakistan's 2005 local and 2007 general elections "be free and fair throughout theentire process .

... [w]e believe that democracy , freedom , and rule of law are the best counters tohatred , extremism , and terrorism" ( the state department did not comment on ensuing reports ofirregularities in the august 2005 elections ) .

some members in attendance expressed skepticismabout pakistan's democratization under musharraf , with one calling the country a "poster child forthe president's forward strategy of freedom. .

 ( 4 ) on the political front , pakistan's moderate , secular parties continued to face governmentalrepression .

in april , in an effort to block a rally planned to welcome the return to lahore of asifzardari , the husband of former prime minister benazir bhutto , police arrested thousands of activistsof the opposition pakistan people's party ( ppp ) and some senior party leaders , and blocked travelroutes around the city .

when zardari arrived in lahore , he was placed in "protective custody" byauthorities ( ppp members said he had been arrested ) .

new york - based human rights watch laterappealed to the pakistani government to release the "thousands" of opposition ppp supporters whohad been arrested in nation - wide sweeps .

 ( 5 ) meanwhile , the islamist political coalition saw thousands of their supporters arrested duringlarge street protests and strikes against the musharraf government ; tens of thousands rallied inkarachi and lahore in late march .

religious parties and others in pakistan also were disturbed bya may story in newsweek magazine report alleging that a copy of the koran had been desecrated atthe u.s. facility at guantanamo bay .

the islamabad government expressed "serious concern" tou.s .

officials about the allegations and the u.s. state department called any such desecration"deplorable and entirely inconsistent with american values of religious freedom and tolerance. .

pakistan's national assembly passed a resolution condemning the alleged desecration .

 ( 6 ) .

in february 2005 , the u.s. state department released its annual country reports on humanrights practices , which found that the pakistan government's human rights record in 2004 "remainedpoor. .

the discussion of pakistan , authored by state's bureau of democracy , human rights , andlabor , does not contain the words "democracy" or "democratic," and notes that the right of citizensto change their government "was restricted in practice. .

a march 2005 state department report onhuman rights and democracy claimed that pakistan's political parties "are generally weak,undemocratic institutions centered on personalities instead of policies .

the judiciary is corrupt,inefficient , and malleable to political pressure. .

in may 2005 , the u.s. commission on internationalreligious freedom released an annual report claiming that , "the response of the government ofpakistan to persistent and religiously motivated violence in pakistan continues to be inadequate" andagain recommending pakistan be designated a country of particular concern .

islamabad rejects u.s.criticism of its human rights record , saying that "no country is perfect" and insisting that efforts areunderway to improve the situation .

 ( 85 ) numerous independent observers identify major ongoing problems with pakistan's humanrights situation in general and lack of full democracy in particular .

in its freedom in the world 2005 report , and for the sixth consecutive year , the often - cited freedom house rated pakistan as "not free"in the areas of political rights and civil liberties .

human rights groups have issued reports criticalof the military - dominated musharraf government for its "violent repression" of opposition politicalrallies , for protecting its "grip" on the country's economic resources , especially land , and for usingpakistan's role in the "war on terrorism" to maintain an oppressive , nondemocratic hold on nationalpower .

a coalition of western human rights groups has chided the united states for providingmilitary aid to "states carrying out persistent human rights violations," including pakistan .

pakistan'sleading human rights organization holds the government responsible for increasing violations ofbasic human rights and for failing to maintain law and order in the country .

 ( 86 ) other developments in 2005 spurred pakistan's secular opposition parties and independenthuman rights groups to accuse the islamabad government of taking actions that contradict presidentmusharraf's stated policy of "enlightened moderation. .

for example , in march , ruling partyparliamentarians allied with islamists to reject legislation which sought to strengthen national lawsagainst "honor killings" ( the murder of women determined to have shamed themselves and their families ) .

prime minister aziz's cabinet later called for a restoration of a religious column onpakistani passports , thus reversing an earlier decision to remove the column ( islamist politicians hadlaunched a campaign to protest the government's decision to exclude the column ) .

 ( 87 ) in april , police in the eastern city of gujranwala clashed with islamist protestors opposedto women's participation in a foot race there .

some 900 islamist party supporters , reportedly busedinto the area from the north west frontier province , had attacked race participants with batons,molotov cocktails , and other weapons .

when a group of human rights activists later staged another"mixed marathon" including both men and women in lahore , police used force to disperse them , anda former chairwoman of the human rights commission of pakistan was among those "brutallydragged" into police vans and detained for several hours .

some pakistani observers saw in thegovernment's actions further evidence that the islamist parties are able to exert great influence onislamabad .

 ( 88 ) also inmay , police in islamabad and lahore used batons to break up gatherings of journalists markingworld press freedom day , injuring nine and detaining 30 more .

the arrests came hours afterpakistan's information minister told a seminar that the media were free in pakistan .

 ( 89 ) the treatment of women in pakistan has been scrutinized in 2005 .

during the house hearing,secretary rocca expressed dismay at travel restrictions placed on pakistani gang rape victimmukhtaran mai , a woman gang - raped at the order of a tribal council as punishment for relativelyminor alleged trespasses by her younger brother .

a state department spokesman later said , "theunited states expects pakistan's leaders to honor their pledge to protect the basic human rights oftheir citizens , including freedom to travel. .

president musharraf reportedly said he had imposedtravel restrictions on mai to protect pakistan's image from western nongovernmental organizationswhich are "as bad as the islamic extremists. .

a new york times editorial chided musharraf for hishandling of the case , which bbc news later called "a public relations disaster" and a leadingpakistani commentator called "a monumental blunder. .

 ( 90 ) facing criticism over this and other high - profile rape cases inhis country , musharraf came to the u.n. general assembly gathering in new york in september2005 with repairing pakistan's image as one of his stated goals .

however , his reported comment thatrape in pakistan was a "money - making concern" brought waves of criticism from both western andpakistani civil rights groups .

 ( 91 ) .

adding to u.s. concerns about pakistan's domestic political developments are signs of"islamization" and anti - american sentiment there .

pakistanis are a pious people , many or most ofwhom are unlikely to want separation between islam and governance: a 2004 survey found nearlytwo - thirds of citizens saying "religion should play a paramount role in politics" and only 6% seeingno role for religion in politics .

 ( 92 ) in june 2003 , the islamist coalition in the conservative northwest frontier province passed a shariat bill in the provincial assembly , and the government ofbaluchistan later established an islamist legal council .

in july 2005 , the nwfp assembly passed a"hasba" ( accountability ) bill that many fear will create a parallel islamic legal body and be harmfulto human rights .

these efforts may seek to replicate in pakistan the harsh enforcement of islamiclaw seen in afghanistan under the taliban .

such developments alarm pakistan's moderates andlikely elicited president musharraf's august 2003 vow to "finish off religious extremism" ( a vowrepeated in july 2005 ) .

 ( 93 ) in august 2005 , following a request from musharraf that it rejectthe "hasba" provisions , the pakistan supreme court ruled that the controversial bill containedseveral unconstitutional clauses and blocked its implementation .

pakistan's islamists routinely denounce pakistani military operations in western tribal areas,resist government attempts to reform religious schools that teach militancy , and harshly criticizeislamabad's cooperation with the u.s. government .

one senior mma leader went so far as tosuggest that western governments may have "engineered" the 7 / 7 london bombings .

 ( 94 ) most analysts contend thattwo december 2003 attempts to assassinate president musharraf were carried out by islamicmilitants angered by pakistan's post - september 2001 policy shift .

yet islamists' political influencein pakistan's two western provinces is viewed by many as contingent upon the mma's continuedbasic acceptance of the current political system .

this leads some to a conclusion that the islamists - - and fazlur rehman's jui - f , in particular - - will not push against the musharraf regime so far asto lose their own standing .

by emitting a consistent message with little regard for the potential tooffend pakistani government or foreign officials , the islamists' issues resonate with the conservative,anti - western sentiments of many pakistanis .

mma power at the polling booth , however , continuesto be limited .

 ( 95 ) anti - american sentiment among pakistani citizens is not limited to islamic groups: a july2005 pew center opinion poll found 51% of pakistanis expressing confidence in al qaeda founderosama bin laden to "do the right thing in world affairs. .

an earlier pew survey found only 6% ofpakistanis believing the united states was sincere in its efforts to combat terrorism ; about halfviewed the united states as seeking to "dominate the world. .

the pakistani army , which wassignificantly radicalized by gen. zia's policies in the 1980s , continues to be home to muslimhardliners at the middle and lower ranks .

in 2004 testimony before the senate foreign relationscommittee , one senior expert opined that "pakistan is probably the most anti - american country inthe world right now , ranging from the radical islamists on one side to the liberals and westernizedelites on the other side. .

support for this claim came from a june 2005 opinion poll which found23% of pakistanis expressing a favorable view of the united states , the lowest percentage for anycountry surveyed .

 ( 96 ) the leadership of the mma's two main constituents - - the jamaat - i - islami's ( ji ) qazi husseinahmed and the jamiat - ulema - islami ( jui ) - fazlur's maulana fazlur rehman - - are notable for theirsometimes virulent anti - american rhetoric ; they have at times called for "jihad" against what theyview as the existential threat to pakistani sovereignty that alliance with washington entails .

 ( 97 ) in addition to decryingand seeking to end president musharraf's cooperation with the united states , many clerics also areviewed as opposing the u.s. - supported kabul government .

despite their sometimes grating rhetoric,pakistan's islamists have benefitted greatly from musharraf's undermining of the country'smainstream parties , and today the mma can be considered a fairly cohesive political force thatcontinues to present a serious challenge to musharraf's policies of moderation .

 ( 98 ) musharraf repeatedly hascalled on pakistan's muslim clerics to assist in fighting extremism and improving pakistan's imageas a moderate and progressive state .

 ( 99 ) .

pakistan is among the world's top recipients of u.s. assistance , with more than $2.6 billionin u.s. aid allocated for fy2002-fy2005 , including about $1.1 billion for security - related programs .

in june 2003 , president bush hosted president musharraf at camp david , maryland , where hepledged to work with congress on establishing a five - year , $3 billion aid package for pakistan tocover fy2005-fy2009 .

general musharraf's extra - constitutional seizure of power in october 1999triggered penalties under section 508 of the annual foreign assistance appropriations act , which bansnon - humanitarian u.s. assistance "to any country whose duly elected head of government is deposedby military coup or decree. .

 ( 100 ) in october 2001 ( p.l .

107-57 ) , congress waived coup - relatedaid restrictions for fy2002 and granted the president waiver authority for fy2003 .

president bushexercised this in march 2003 .

a november 2003 emergency supplemental appropriations bill ( p.l.108-106 ) included a provision extending the president's waiver authority through fy2004 ; this wasexercised in march 2004 .

in december 2004 , congress extended the president's waiver authoritythrough fy2006 with the passage the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) .

 ( 101 ) pending legislation in the 109th congress ( the targeting terrorists more effectively act of 2005 , s. 12 ) includes pakistan - specific language regarding "a number of critical issues thatthreaten to disrupt" u.s. - pakistan relations .

government institutions , democracy , and rule of laware among these .

since august 2003 , pakistan and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) have been cooperating on a five - year grant program to support more participatory , representative,and accountable democracy in pakistan .

six "good governance" projects have been funded withmore than $32 million to date ; the total over five years is expected to roughly double that amount .

three programs - - strengthening national and provincial legislative governance in pakistan,support democratic local government and decentralization , and improve justice sector / legalframework - - account for the great majority of budgeted funds .

according to usaid , the projectsaim to support pakistan's progress toward more democratic , responsive , and transparent governanceby helping to strengthen legislative bodies , political parties , and civil society .

 ( 102 ) figure 1 .

u.s. assistance to pakistan , fy2001-fy2005 and 2006administration request sources : u.s. department of state and u.s. agency for international development .

notes: fy2005 amounts are estimates ; fy2006 amounts are requested .

fy2005 amounts includeemergency supplemental appropriations act , 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) allocations of $150 million inforeign military financing and $4 million in additional counternarcotics funding for pakistan .

an acute concern of many u.s. policymakers is the issue of political succession in pakistan,especially as it relates to potential domestic upheaval and control of that country's nucleararsenal .

 ( 103 ) theconstitutionally designated successor to the president is the chairman of the senate , currently pml - q member and musharraf loyalist muhammadmian soomro , an international banker from awell - known sindhi family .

it is the president's prerogative to appoint army chiefs .

the consensusview among analysts has the pakistani military maintaining its substantive administration of thecountry in the event of president musharraf's premature removal .

the nature of such a potentialremoval likely would influence the scope and intensity of military governance .

for example , ifmusharraf were removed through violent means , it is quite possible that the army would declaremartial law and rule directly for a period .

in any case , it is widely assumed that the hierarchicalsolidarity and historic professionalism of pakistan's military would result in its continuedeffectiveness as a stabilizing force , at least in the short - and perhaps middle - term .

despite theapparent sturdiness of the military's command structure , there remains widespread pessimism aboutthe ability of political institutions built by musharraf to survive his sudden removal , and so doubtsremain about the viability of political succession mechanisms .

moreover , it is not clear thatmusharraf's successor would carry on his strongly pro - u.s. policies: in march 2005 , defenseintelligence director jacoby told a senate armed services committee panel , "if musharraf wereassassinated or otherwise replaced , pakistan's leader would be less pro - u.s." ( 104 ) after his september 2001 policy shift , musharraf moved to purge pro - taliban islamists fromthe higher ranks of the military .

vice - chief of army staff ( coas ) gen. mohammed yusuf , amoderate , was seen as the most likely successor to the position of coas , although some observersidentified the chairman of the joints chiefs of staff committee , gen. mohammad aziz , as acontender .

while considered fully loyal to the army , of pakistan's 30 highest - ranking officers , gen.aziz may have been the only remaining officer with meaningful links to islamist groups .

 ( 105 ) both gen. yusuf andgen .

aziz retired in october 2004 .

president musharraf named two close allies to replace them: lt. gen. ahsan salim hayat , the karachi corps commander , is the new vice - coas and thesenior - most army officer after musharraf ; isi chief lt. gen. ehsan ul - haq , a moderate who oversawthe removal of pro - taliban officers from pakistan's intelligence service after september 2001 , wasappointed chairman of the joints chiefs of staff committee .

gen. hayat narrowly escapedassassination in a bloody june 2004 attack on his motorcade , an event that appeared to confirm hisstatus as an enemy of islamic extremists .

the newly promoted four - star general is believed to be oneof musharraf's closest allies in the military and his most likely successor as army chief .

 ( 106 ) .

outlook .

there continues to be few signs thatthe government of president musharraf and its supporters in parliament and the military will moveto relinquish power before scheduled 2007 general elections .

a continuing lack of unity amongopposition groups remains a serious constraint on their ability to pressure the musharraf - ledgovernment .

beyond obvious differences over the role religion should play in pakistan's governance,the mma and the ard find themselves with opposing views on such sensitive issues as proposedamendments to the controversial blasphemy law and hudood ordinances ( related to women's rights ) ,both of which are criticized as unjust and oppressive by human rights groups , but which areconsidered sacrosanct by the islamists .

some analysts identify less obvious factors behindopposition disunity , including an active campaign of "divide - and - rule" by the military , and previoushints of an accommodation between musharraf and the ard have not panned out .

there are,however , signs that a below - board accommodation between the pakistani military and the islamistparties is disintegrating .

 ( 107 ) pakistan's unstable and even deteriorating domestic security circumstances - - seen in stilltense relations with pashtun tribesmen in border regions near afghanistan , and continuing sectarianviolence and islamic militancy in urban centers - - can have the effect of improving the army'sstanding among some sectors of the pakistani public .

one u.s. scholar suggests that criticism ofpakistan's apparently slow movement toward democracy is arbitrary and ignores the potential costto u.s. policy interests that faster movement might entail .

such cost could include a moreconstrained pakistani military and political leaders in islamabad whose greater responsiveness topublic opinion might mean reduced cooperation with the united states .

 ( 108 ) however , and as notedabove , this view is disputed by numerous observers who insist that the strengthening of pakistan'sdemocratic institutions and civil society is itself a fundamental requirement for the creation of astable and prosperous pakistani state .

 ( 109 ) pakistan has come a long way since the 1990s , when "potential failed state" was not anunusual label for this important country .

during president musharraf's tenure , pakistan'smacroeconomic indicators are greatly improved and relations with india have warmed .

the country'sinternational standing is at least partially rehabilitated , especially with the government's status as akey member of the international anti - terrorism coalition .

even some of musharraf's most vocalcritics have acknowledged the concrete benefits of his leadership .

 ( 110 ) yet , despite thepotentially brightened prospects for future civilian governance in pakistan , military rule substantivelycontinues , and most analysts foresee little or no power being transferred to the country's civilianpolitical leaders in the near - and middle - term .

when , in may 2005 , musharraf declared his intention to seek to remain in office beyond2007 , many analysts saw him following a nondemocratic path similar to that taken by previouspakistani military rulers .

in the same month , a senior pakistani journalist and editor declared onbehalf of his staff , "we are tired of pious lectures on democracy and constitutionalism" from officialswho pursue neither with sincerity .

in addition , fewer and fewer independent onlookers findmusharraf's repeated pledges to defeat pakistani religious extremism as anything more than"rounding up the usual suspects. .

 ( 111 ) pakistan's foreign and defense ministers have issued separateassurances that president musharraf will contest 2007 elections as a civilian , but musharraf himselfhas not ruled out remaining in uniform beyond 2007 .

 ( 112 ) so long as the military continues to exert preeminent controlover pakistan's governance - - and islamist forces continue to succeed in blocking efforts to altercontroversial civil laws and reform religious schools - - there will be doubt cast on musharraf's claimsto be pursuing a policy of "enlightened moderation. .

policy options .

u.s. policy options regardingpakistan's governance system and civil society can be seen to fall into four broad categories: statusquo , increased pressure , increased incentives , and adjusting emphases of current aid programs .

some of the policies could be employed in tandem .

status quo: at present , the united states provides large - scale assistanceto pakistan under annual waivers of coup - related sanctions granted by congress and exercised bythe president .

the bush administration has not issued strong public criticisms of pakistan'sapparently halting process of democratization while still encouraging movement towardestablishment of full democracy .

no conditions have been placed on u.s. aid to pakistan .

acontinuation of this policy would seek to prod pakistan's power brokers in the military to createcircumstances in which fully free and fair national and provincial elections could take place in 2007,at which point the u.s. president might be in a position to determine that pakistani democracy hadbeen restored and section 508 aid restrictions could permanently be removed .

continuedmarginalization of pakistan's moderate opposition parties and controversy over reported irregularitiesin august 2005 municipal polls fuel skepticism that status quo policies areeffective .

increased pressure: the united states has several options that would seekto increase pressure on the pakistan government so as to spur more full and rapid movement ondemocratization in pakistan .

these include ending or reducing u.s. aid and / or placing conditionson continued u.s. aid , for instance by setting democracy - related benchmarks .

ending or reducingassistance to a major non - nato ally at a time when pakistan plays a key role in u.s. - ledanti - terrorism efforts is likely to be counterproductive in the context of broader u.s. interests , somesay , and sanctions in the recent past resulted in greatly reduced u.s. influence in islamabad and littlesuccess in attaining u.s. objectives .

there are those who argue , however , that without conditionalityon u.s. aid , the pakistani military will have little motivation to fully remove itself from pakistan'sgovernance .

increased incentives: another option for u.s. policy would involveoffering additional aid to pakistan linked to that country's progress with its domestic reform agenda ( and perhaps also with its cooperation in counterterrorism and nonproliferation ) .

such incentivescould be for the benefit of the country generally or for the military in particular ( many saw the march2005 decision by president bush to resume f - 16 sales to pakistan as a "reward" for the musharrafgovernment's cooperation on counterterrorism ) .

for example , the future sale of major u.s. weaponsplatforms to pakistan could be offered as a "bonus" that would follow successful implementation offull democracy in islamabad or , short of that , for certain substantive actions on the path to that goal ( eg , the return to pakistan of exiled opposition figures ) .

this form of positive reenforcement couldbe employed in tandem with a policy of negative conditionality noted above .

adjusting emphases of current aid programs: president bush's2005-2009 aid plan for pakistan calls for a 50-50 split of funds for economics and funds for militaryfinancing .

a policy of continuing current aid allocations while emphasizing economic aid overmilitary aid - - a policy recommended by a council on foreign relations and the asia societytaskforce ( 113 ) - - couldserve to more effectively bolster pakistan's social and economic development , and could quicken thepace of democratization and education reform there .

skeptics of this approach emphasize thatongoing security threats , especially as related to instability in neighboring afghanistan , requireensuring that pakistan's military feels secure and well - equipped .

given pakistan's strategic setting , large muslim population , experience with religiousextremism , weapons proliferation activities , and historical involvement in regional conflict , the levelof stability and quality of governance there are likely to remain of keen interest to most u.s.policymakers .

figure 2 .

map of pakista .

