the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant provides federal grants for a wide range of benefits and activities .

it is best known as the major source of funding for cash welfare for needy families with children .

however , federal law allows tanf funds to be used for other benefits and services that provide economic help to low - income families with children and to support the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting two - parent families .

the tanf block grant was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) .

at the federal level , tanf is administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

tanf programs operate in all 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , guam , and the virgin islands .

american samoa is eligible to operate a tanf program , but has not opted to do so .

the social security act designates all these jurisdictions as "states," and thus that term will be used for them in this report .

federally recognized indian tribes may also operate tanf programs .

tribal tanf programs are funded through allocations made from the tanf basic block grant to the state in which the tribe offers tanf benefits and services .

it is the states and the tribes that provide tanf benefits and services to families and individuals .

this report provides an overview of tanf financing and rules for state programs , describing federal tanf grants and state funds under a "maintenance - of - effort" ( moe ) requirement ; how federal tanf and state moe funds may be used to help achieve the purpose and goals of the tanf block grant ; rules that apply when tanf or moe funds are used to provide "assistance" to needy families with children ; rules that apply when tanf or moe funds are used for benefits and services o t her than assistance ; certain accountability requirements , including requirements that states submit plans and report data to the federal government ; and provisions of tanf law not directly related to grants to states , such as competitive grants for promoting healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood , and tribal tanf provisions .

for data and statistics on the tanf block grant , see crs report rl32760 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: responses to frequently asked questions .

for the legislative history of tanf , see crs report r44668 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a legislative history .

under tanf , there are three federal grants : the basic block , contingency ( recession - related ) funds , and competitively awarded healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood grants .

states are also required to spend a certain amount of their own funds on specified tanf - related activities for needy families with children .

this is known as the maintenance - of - effort or moe requirement .

congress decided that tanf was to be named a "block grant" program .

a block grant is a grant - in - aid given to states and local governments to address "broad purposes" and typically gives governmental entities discretion in both defining problems and expending funds to address them .

in a general sense , tanf meets this definition of a block grant , but it does attach some "strings" to a state's use of tanf funds ( discussed below ) .

as discussed above , tanf provides states with broad authority to spend federal and moe funds on a wide range of benefits and services .

though tanf is a block grant , there are some strings attached to states' use of funds , particularly with regard to families receiving "assistance. .

as discussed below , tanf funds used for benefits and services that are not considered assistance are generally free of most requirements .

as previously discussed , most tanf federal requirements relate to "assistance. .

however , tanf gives states permission to spend federal funds and count state spending toward the moe on a wide range of benefits and services other than assistance .

essentially , tanf and moe funds may be spent on benefits , services , or activities aimed to achieve any of the goals of tanf .

examples of such benefits and services include short - term , non - recurring aid , child care for families with working members , transportation aid for families with working members , refundable tax credits for working families with children , funding of individual development accounts ( idas ) , education and training for low - income parents , youth employment programs , and activities that seek to achieve the family formation goals ( goals three and four ) of tanf .

such benefits and services may be provided to families receiving assistance , but also might be provided to other families who have no connection to the cash welfare rolls .

federal law gives states broad flexibility in designing and implementing state programs operated with tanf and moe funds .

it also requires states to develop plans that outline their intended use of funds and report data on families receiving assistance .

tanf also provides funding for healthy marriage promotion , demonstration projects to test the effectiveness of indian tribal governments in coordination of child welfare services , and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

total annual funding of $150 million has been provided for healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

since fy2011 , the $150 million appropriation has been divided by $75 million for responsible fatherhood initiatives and $75 million for healthy marriage initiatives .

any funds allocated for tribal child welfare coordination demonstrations would equally reduce the $75 million allotted for healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

the healthy marriage promotion initiative funds ( 1 ) awards by hhs to public or private entities to conduct research and demonstration projects ; and ( 2 ) technical assistance to states , indian tribes and tribal organizations , and other entities .

the activities supported by these initiatives include programs to promote marriage in the general population , such as public advertising campaigns on the value of marriage and education in high schools on the value of marriage ; education in "social skills" ( eg , marriage education , marriage skills , conflict resolution , and relationship skills ) ; and programs that reduce the financial disincentives to marry , if combined with educational or other marriage promotion activities .

applicants for marriage promotion grants must ensure that participation in such activities is voluntary and that domestic violence concerns are addressed ( eg , through consultations with experts on domestic violence ) .

allowable activities under responsible fatherhood initiatives include those to promote marriage ; teach parenting skills through counseling ; mentoring , mediation , and dissemination of information ; employment and job training services ; media campaigns ; and development of a national clearinghouse focused on responsible fatherhood .

federally recognized indian tribes and certain alaskan native organizations have the option to operate their own tanf programs for needy families with children .

tribes are entitled to receive a grant equal to the amount of fy1994 federal expenditures in pre - tanf programs attributable to indian families residing in the area to be served by the tribal program .

this is financed by a reduction in the state's block grant amount .

states may , but are not required to , provide tribes with moe funds .

tribes seeking to operate tanf programs must submit plans to the secretary of hhs for approval .

the secretary of hhs — with the participation of the tribes — establishes work requirements and time limits for each tribe operating its own tanf program .

additionally , tribes that operated pre - tanf work and education programs are provided grants to operate tribal work programs that total $7.6 million per year .

the amount of each grant equals what the tribe received in fy1994 under pre - tanf programs .

