since 1993 , many states have enacted laws relating to breastfeeding .

currently , forty - three states and puerto rico have enacted some form of breastfeeding legislation , which most commonly addresses breastfeeding in the workplace and exempting nursing mothers from laws dealing with indecent exposure and / or criminal behavior .

additionally , some states have laws or rules that more directly bear on the obligation of breastfeeding mothers to serve on juries .

this regulation of jury service generally has taken one of three approaches: some states have enacted statutes that expressly excuse or defer jury service .

states with this type of law include california , idaho , illinois , iowa , kansas , minnesota , mississippi , nebraska , oklahoma , oregon , and virginia .

these laws are cited and summarized below .

additionally , wyoming is considering legislation to defer or excuse jury duty .

another state legislative development is the enactment of "family friendly" jury duty legislation that permits parents who care for a young child on a full time basis , or who are caretakers of an elderly or disabled relative , to have jury service deferred or excused upon their request .

usually , breastfeeding mothers fall with the coverage of these statutes , although the statutes vary , and may not be applicable under every circumstance .

currently , twelve states — alaska , colorado , florida , georgia , illinois , massachusetts , new jersey , south carolina , tennessee , texas , virginia , and wyoming have some form of "family friendly jury duty legislation. .

 ( the laws of colorado and massachusetts probably are not applicable to the excuse or deferral of breastfeeding mothers from jury duty. ) .

california has adopted a state - wide court rule which uniformly deals with breastfeeding and jury service .

in addition , many individual courts — federal and state — have adopted rules to deal with this situation .

even if a state has neither a specific statute dealing with jury service and breastfeeding , a "family friendly" statute , nor a statewide court rule , it does not necessarily mean that a nursing mother will be required to perform jury duty .

individual court rules or custom , community practice , or other circumstances may permit an excuse or a deferral from jury service for a nursing mother .

in the absence of a state law or court rule providing a specific exception for breastfeeding , the nursing mother may or may not be excused on the basis of a general "medical" needs exception .

on the other hand , research has not found any court that permits a mother serving on a jury to have her child present in the court room or the jury room , or to breastfeed during court proceedings or jury deliberations .

at the present time , eleven states have enacted laws which specifically allow a breastfeeding mother to either postpone or be excused from jury duty .

the laws vary significantly in their language and scope .

certain states permit the mother to be excused from jury duty and other states permit the mother to postpone jury duty .

the laws are cited to and are summarized below .

some state statutes excuse or postpone jury duty for family caregivers .

while they vary , some of these laws may apply to breastfeeding mothers .

they are cited and summarized below .

in addition to the laws which are discussed below , two other states — colorado and massachusetts — have "family friendly jury duty legislation" that do not appear to accommodate breastfeeding activities .

at the current time , one state's legislature is considering a bill which , if enacted , would impact breastfeeding mothers and their jury duty responsibilities .

the bill is cited and summarized below .

however , it should be considered , as it is early in the state legislative sessions , that additional bills may be subsequently introduced .

this section of the report deals only with state - wide court rules and federal district court rules for jury service relating to breastfeeding .

it does not deal with local , county , or municipal court rules which may provide 1 ) a specific excuse for breastfeeding mothers ; or 2 ) a general excuse under "family friendly" court rules .

the following chart compares the ways in which states currently deal with the issue of breastfeeding and jury duty .

some states have enacted legislation which provides a specific excuse or deferral from jury duty for a breastfeeding mother .

other states have enacted more general "family friendly" legislation that excuses a prospective juror from duty when faced with various family responsibilities .

depending upon the language of the statute and its implementation , such legislation may or may not excuse or defer breastfeeding mothers from jury duty .

legislation is currently pending in wyoming to legislatively respond to the issue of breastfeeding and jury duty .

california has a specific state - wide court rule which deals with the issue of breastfeeding mothers and jury duty .

it is likely that local and state courts — where there is no uniform rule — may have varied , and not necessarily implemented consistent policies in dealing with breastfeeding mothers and jury duty responsibilities .

