on october 7 , 2004 , the senate rejected , by a vote of 23-74 , a proposal by senator johnmccain to transfer jurisdiction over appropriations related to funding intelligence matters from thesenate appropriations committee to the senate select committee on intelligence .

 ( 1 ) on october 9 , 2004 , thesenate adopted s.res .

445 , which included a provision establishing a new subcommittee onintelligence within the senate committee on appropriations ( for more information on this approach,see "current legislation" below ) .

on july 22 , 2004 , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) issued its final report on the september 11 , 2001 , attacks onthe world trade center and the pentagon .

the report contained the commission's findings as wellas its recommendations for corrective measures that can be taken to improve the protection of theunited states against future terrorist attacks .

in its report , the commission stated that existingcongressional oversight of intelligence was "dysfunctional," due to the limitations of the existingcongressional intelligence authorizing committees .

 ( 2 ) the commission recommended two alternative proposals to changethe current intelligence committee structure: ( 1 ) replace the existing senate and house selectintelligence committees with a joint committee on intelligence ; or ( 2 ) consolidate intelligenceappropriation and authorization functions in the existing intelligence authorizing committees , therebyenhancing the power of the authorizing committees .

the commission explained: whichever of these two forms are chosen , thegoal should be a structure - - codified by resolution with powers expressly granted and carefullylimited - - allowing a relatively small group of [m]embers of congress , given time and reason tomaster the subject and the agencies , to conduct oversight of the intelligence establishment and beclearly accountable for their work .

the staff of this committee should be nonpartisan and work forthe entire committee and not for individual members .

 ( 3 ) this report focuses on the commission's second proposal , to consolidate appropriation andauthorization functions in the existing senate and house select intelligence committees .

the report ( 1 ) describes the proposal ; ( 2 ) compares it to the existing committee system ; ( 3 ) describes a 19thcentury precedent for consolidation ; ( 4 ) provides selected arguments in favor of consolidation as wellas against ; ( 5 ) discusses two alternatives to consolidating authorization and appropriation functions:a joint committee on intelligence and separate intelligence appropriations subcommittees in thesenate and house committees on appropriations ; and ( 6 ) describes current legislation .

for information on the proposed joint committee on intelligence , see crs report rl32525 , a joint committee on intelligence: proposals and options from the 9 / 11 commission and others ,by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl32538 ( pdf ) , 9 / 11 commission recommendations: jointcommittee on atomic energy - - a model for congressional oversight ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed],both available at http: / / www.crs.gov / .

congress is considering various alternatives to the 9 / 11 commission proposalto consolidate authorization and appropriation .

two are discussed below .

the firstis the 9 / 11 commission's other recommendation: a joint committee on intelligence .

the second is a proposal to establish an intelligence appropriations subcommitteein each of the senate and house appropriations committees .

consolidating responsibility for intelligenceappropriation and authorization in senate select committee onintelligence .

on october 7 , 2004 , the senate rejected , by a vote of23-74 , a proposal by senator john mccain , to transfer appropriations,rescissions , ( 40 ) and spending authority ( 41 ) related tofunding intelligence matters from the senate appropriations committee to the senateselect committee on intelligence .

the proposal was in the form of an amendment ( s.amdt .

3999 ) to the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( s.amdt .

3981 ) tos.res .

445 , the intelligence committee reorganization resolution .

separate senate intelligence appropriationssubcommittee .

on october 9 , 2004 , the senate adopted , by a voteof 79-6 , s.res .

445 , an intelligence committee reorganization resolution , whichestablishes a separate subcommittee on intelligence in the senate appropriationscommittee ( see â§402 ) .

s.res .

445 clarifies that the appropriations committee willidentify the intelligence activities to be transferred to the new subcommittee .

it also provides that as soon as possible after the 109th congress convenes , thesenate appropriations committee is responsible for reorganizing the appropriationssubcommittees to ensure that the existing number of subcommittees ( 13 ) remains ( see â§402 ) .

the original amendment in the nature of a substitute ( s.amdt .

3981 ) tothe resolution would have preserved the 13 subcommittees by merging the militaryconstruction and defense subcommittees .

this language was replaced with the finallanguage by an amendment ( s.amdt .

4015 ) proposed by the chair of the militaryconstruction subcommittee , senator kay bailey hutchison .

the amendment wasadopted by a vote of 44-41 on october 9 .

since the senate and house appropriationssubcommittees have customarily retained parallel jurisdictions , the house is expectedto respond to the senate's action .

requiring congressional action on 9 / 11commission's congressional oversight proposals in 108th congress .

on october 7 , 2004 , the house rejected , by a vote of 203-213 , a proposal that , amongother provisions , would have required the senate and house to establish in the 108thcongress either of the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations to establish ( 1 ) a jointcommittee on intelligence ; or ( 2 ) a single committee in each chamber withjurisdiction over both intelligence authorizing and appropriating authorities .

theproposal was in the form of an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

10,the 9 / 11 recommendations implementation act , and was proposed by representativerobert menendez .

