border and transportation security ( bts ) is a pivotal function in protecting the americanpeople from terrorists and their instruments of destruction .

while bts may be difficult to attain , thefederal government has put into place multiple programs and policies to achieve this goal .

the threereports in this series attempt to provide an understanding of the complex problems faced in seekingenhanced border and transportation security , suggest a framework to better understand existingprograms and policies , and explore some possible new directions and policy options .

as noted in the first report ( 1 ) in this series , homeland security efforts can be seen as a series ofconcentric circles or screens , with the outer screen being that of preventive efforts launched outside the country - - before terrorists or their weapons can reach the country .

the continuum of activitiesto provide homeland security then moves through progressively smaller circles starting from moredistant efforts to closer and more localized measures , ending with emergency preparedness andresponse .

thus , the process starts with prevention abroad and progresses through the other stagesas needed .

as the first report in this series observes , border management is a complex task and currentprograms and policies in place to strengthen the border and facilitate the flow of legitimate peopleand things can seem overwhelmingly complex and difficult to approach in a systematic way .

thisreport addresses the myriad programs and policies that make up the nation's current approach toattaining higher levels of bts .

before doing so , however , it is useful to review the development ofcongressional concern and policy approaches .

since the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the nation has made securing the homelandits primary objective .

border security has emerged as a critical stage in achieving this goal .

priorto the terrorist attacks , federal agencies involved in securing the homeland were fragmented andoften plagued by internal performance problems .

as discussed below , many federal agencies taskedwith securing the nation's borders did not communicate with one another .

moreover , technology wasinadequate for communications within many of these agencies as well as between agencies .

forexample , immigration systems and databases , which are critical when trying to determine theadmissibility of a foreign national and keep bad people out of the country were not ( and to someextent still are not ) integrated .

in an effort to address some of these issues , congress passed thehomeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

 ( 7 ) the homeland security act of 2002 consolidated many of the federal agencies responsiblefor border and transportation security into a single department .

within the department of homelandsecurity ( dhs ) is a directorate of bts , which is charged with securing: the borders ; territorialwaters ; terminals ; waterways ; and air , land and sea transportation systems of the united states .

btshouses the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the transportation security agency ( tsa ) and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

within cbp are the inspections serviceof the former immigration and naturalization services ( ins ) , the u.s. border patrol , the inspectionsservice of the u.s. customs service , and the border - related inspection programs of the animal andplant health inspection service ( aphis ) .

in addition to the border security - related functions of theformer ins and u.s. customs service being transferred to cbp , the following agencies were alsotransferred to dhs: ( 1 ) u.s. coast guard ; ( 2 ) tsa ; and ( 3 ) immigration investigations , intelligence,interior enforcement and detention and removal functions of the former ins and u.s. customsinvestigations and interior enforcement .

the coast guard was transferred to dhs as a stand - aloneagency and tsa was maintained in dhs' bts as a distinct entity .

 ( 8 ) this section focuses on current border security activities of cbp , ( 9 ) the coast guard and the airlinesecurity component of the tsa .

the activities discussed in this section are divided into categoriesof how they provide bts and further divided into people and goods security - related programs .

the u.s. government has employed a number of strategies and programs to make the nation'sborders more secure .

the following actions are set in a framework that suggests types of possiblepolicy actions: pushing the border outwards to intercept unwanted people or goods before theyreach the united states ; hardening the border through the use of technology and the presence of moreagents at the border ; making the border more accessible for legitimate trade andtravel ; strengthening the border through more effective use of intelligence ; and multiplying effectiveness through the engagement of other actors in theenforcement effort ( including engaging canada , mexico , state and local law enforcement resources,and the private sector ) .

many contend that the best way to secure the border is by addressing issues before they reachthe border .

while this concept is not new , greater emphasis has been placed on "pushing the borderout" since the terrorist attacks .

 ( the following discussion is organized to highlight activities thattarget people and goods for inspection ) .

the u.s. northern and southwest borders extend over 6,000 miles , with vast areas of bothborders lacking direct surveillance by border patrol personnel .

while the northern border,historically , has posed less of a problem than its southwestern counterpart , the terrorist attacks havebrought attention to the vulnerabilities that both borders pose .

the southwest border , on the otherhand , has a longstanding history of illegal migrants attempting to gain entry into the united statesas well as individuals attempting to smuggle human beings and drugs into the country .

the borderpatrol has increased its manpower along portions of the border and various types of technology arealso being used such as video cameras , ground sensors , radiation detectors , geographic informationsystems , and physical barriers to provide surveillance at the border .

 ( 31 ) while critics of the current technological infrastructure contend that its weaknesses pose asecurity risk , efforts are underway to enhance border technology .

issues such as integrating datasystems , sharing intelligence among agencies and departments , having technology that can track thecomings and goings of foreign nationals and having technology that can read biometric identifiersare all important to border management .

additionally , agencies continue to invest in technology that will aid in detecting things thatmay cause harm , including technology that would detect explosives .

 ( 32 ) for example , inspectorsare increasingly using portal scanning devices on commercial vehicles to detect radiation .

theborder patrol has begun using unmanned aerial vehicles ( uav ) in its tucson border patrol sectoras part of its arizona border control ( abc ) initiative in an attempt to control the flow of illegalmigration between ports of entry .

 ( 33 ) the border patrol also uses other technology such as groundsensors and video cameras .

in addition , cbp has deployed an array of non - intrusive inspection ( nii ) technologies at portsof entry to assist inspectors with the examination of cargos and the identification of contraband .

large scale nii technologies include a number of x - ray and gamma ray systems .

the vehicle andcargo inspection system ( vacis ) uses gamma rays to produce an image of the contents of acontainer for review by the cbp inspector .

the vacis can be deployed in a stationary or mobileconfiguration depending on the needs of the port .

cbp has also deployed several rail vacissystems to screen railcars entering the country .

other large scale nii systems include truck x - raysystems , which like the vacis can be deployed in a either a stationary or mobile configuration ; themobile sea container examination system , and the pallet gamma ray system .

cbp also continuesto deploy nuclear and radiological detection equipment in the form of personal radiation detectors,radiation portal monitors , and radiation isotope detectors at ports of entry .

following are selectedexamples of either congressional mandates and / or administrative initiatives that are aimed athardening the border .

the facilitation of legitimate cross - border travel and commerce , while still providing foradequate border security , has long been a challenge for policy makers .

cbp inherited severalinitiatives aimed at using technology to help speed up the inspection processes for low - risk travelersand goods , which allows cbp inspectors to focus their attention on high - risk situations , as discussedbelow .

intelligence plays an essential role in the protection of u.s. national security , one elementof which is to contribute to the protection of u.s. borders .

as with traditional foreignintelligence , ( 47 ) theprimary role intelligence plays in the context of border security is to provide indications andwarnings to government personnel responsible for border protection - - primarily dhs personnel .

regardless of where the intelligence is collected - - domestically or internationally - - intelligencecontributes to the protection of u.s. borders by seeking to prevent certain goods and individualsfrom crossing u.s. borders .

however , as the tragic events of september 11 , 2001 , demonstrated,even when intelligence systems and mechanisms are in place to prevent individuals with inimicalintent from crossing u.s. borders , it only takes one failure of the intelligence process and / orindividuals involved in it , to contribute to a potential catastrophe .

 ( 48 ) traditional foreignintelligence as well as criminal intelligence contribute to enhancing border security .

at the most basic level , intelligence is designed to find where the danger lies .

with respectto protection of the u.s. borders , the primary goal is to collect , analyze and rapidly disseminateintelligence that can deny entry into the united states of terrorists or dangerous material that couldbe used as a weapon by terrorists .

with respect to terrorists , one of the most useful tools in thegovernment's counterterrorism arsenal for border protection is the terrorist screening database ( tsdb ) first compiled by the terrorist threat integration center .

 ( 49 ) as a testament to therobust role that traditional foreign intelligence entities are playing in the protection of bordersecurity , of the more than 20,000 records in the terrorist screening database in 2004 , the centralintelligence agency provided just over 42% of the entries , the state department provided almost42% , the national security agency provided 10% , the federal bureau of investigation almost 4%,and the defense intelligence agency just under 3% .

 ( 50 ) at the sensitive but unclassified ( sbu ) security level , the tsdbis then shared broadly across the u.s. government , to include agencies such as the dhs , the federalbureau of investigation ( and the fbi - led terrorist screening center ) , the department of justice - ledforeign terrorist tracking task force ( 51 ) ) , the department of defense , as well as the department of state,among others .

a "hit" on the tsdb will trigger certain protective actions by the law enforcement,intelligence or security personnel having interaction with the individual .

with respect to protection against illicit cargo coming into the united states and the potentialfor shipping to be used as a conveyance of weapons of mass destruction , one of the unique toolsbeing used by dhs's cbp is its automated targeting system .

with shipments into the unitedstates in the thousands of containers per day , it is not practically or financially feasible to inspecteach container .

building on years of experience in interdicting drugs being shipped into the unitedstates through cargo containers , dhs's cbp established the interagency - supported nationaltargeting center ( ntc ) as a tool to triage and effectively target cargo containers for inspection .

working with the intelligence community and law enforcement community personnel , the ntc'sautomated targeting system develops dynamic rules and algorithms which allow it to examine abroad scope of passenger and cargo factors to assign appropriate risk scores .

certain risk scores flaga shipment or container for human inspection .

in short , intelligence serves as a force multiplier in contributing to the protection of u.s.borders .

it serves the direct purpose of providing advance warnings to alert officials on the frontlines of u.s. borders .

however , its indirect use may be equally valuable .

that is why domesticintelligence officials , including those at the state and local levels , collect intelligence within theircommunities to put international terrorist activities into a local context .

it is also why experts believethere needs to be a wide access to information that may not seem to be relevant in a national context,yet may prove what's happening in sanaa , yemen , may be directly or indirectly relevant and valuableto state and local law enforcement and intelligence personnel on the ground .

while border security policies may not have received heightened attention until after theterrorists attacks , efforts to improve border management date back to 1995 .

for example , the unitedstates and canadian governments entered into a joint accord on february 24 , 1995 called ourshared border .

the 1995 accord brought together five agencies ( the former united states ins , theformer u.s. customs service , revenue canada , citizenship and immigration canada , and the royalcanadian mounted police ) to focus on joint border issues such as enhancing security through moreeffective inspection efforts that target specific problem areas ( eg , drugs , and smugglers ) , and thecontinued commitment to pool inspection and enforcement resources .

and in 1999 , the twocountries entered into a partnership , canada - u.s. partnership forum ( cusp ) .

cusp provided amechanism for the two governments , border communities and stakeholders to discuss issues ofborder management .

the guiding principles for u.s. - canada cooperation resulting from thesedialogues are as follows: streamline , harmonize and collaborate on border policies andmanagement ; expand cooperation to increase efficiencies in customs , immigration , lawenforcement , and environmental protection at and beyond the border ; and collaborate on common threats from outside the united states andcanada .

current bilateral efforts include a declaration signed on december 12 , 2001 , by the unitedstates and canadian governments establishing a "smart - border. .

the declaration included a 32-pointplan to secure the border and facilitate the flow of low - risk travelers and goods through thefollowing: coordinated law enforcement operations ( i.e. , ibets , see appendixa ) ; intelligence sharing ; infrastructure improvements ; the improvement of compatible immigration databases ; visa policy coordination ; common biometric identifiers in certain documentation ; prescreening of air passengers ; joint passenger analysis units ; and improved processing of refugee and asylum claims , among otherthings .

on december 3 , 2001 , the two countries signed a joint statement of cooperation on bordersecurity and migration that focused on detection and prosecution of security threats , the disruptionof illegal migration , and the efficient management of legitimate travel .

in march 2002 , the united states and mexico announced a partnership to create a new,technologically advanced "smart border" to assure tighter security while facilitating legitimate travel .

the u.s. - mexico border partnership action plan has 22 points that include greater cooperationbetween the two governments in order to better secure border infrastructure and facilitate the flowof people and goods between the countries .

the plan also calls for the development of integratedcomputer databases between the two countries and express lanes at high volume ports of entry forfrequent , pre - cleared low - risk travelers .

 ( 53 ) in addition to the bilateral agreements between the u.s. / canada and the u.s. / mexico , theunited states has begun working with the european union ( eu ) to facilitate cooperation on the csi,as discussed above .

on november 18 , 2003 , the united states and eu signed an agreement thatwould facilitate such cooperation by establishing an eu - wide container security policy .

 ( 54 ) .

balancing security with trade and travel may require a "layered approach" to attain bothgoals .

the next report in this series , border and transportation security: possible new directionsand policy options , examines the concept of layering and how it may fit into bts .

the currentprograms and policies in place , however , do reflect some layering .

for example , the framework setforth in this report highlights the purposeful overlapping of programs and policies in order to attainbts .

efforts to push the border outwards are aimed at preempting potential attacks and preventingindividuals who are trying to surreptitiously enter the united states .

the various preinspections andadvance passenger / cargo notice programs were developed with this in mind .

if someone , however,is able to penetrate the first layer of security then efforts to harden the border are put to the test .

theuse of biometric identifiers in travel documents and smart containers for the shipment of goods areboth examples of how technology is being used to harden the border .

in addition to efforts to hardenthe border , the use of intelligence and engaging other actors such as state and local law enforcementand our foreign neighbors are other cumulative measures that have been taken to attain better bts .

while the programs and policies highlighted in this report may reflect an attempt at layering,some contend that there are still gaps in the system .

 ( 55 ) the current programs and policies were either put into place asa result of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks or predated the attacks .

those programs and policies that wereput into place as a result of the attacks were done so with a sense of urgency - - to prevent anotherattack .

programs and policies already in existence prior to the attacks , however , were created witha different focus and not necessarily with the goal of keeping terrorists out of the country .

as willbe examined in the next report , current efforts to provide a layered approach to bts would meanapplying some measures of security effort to almost every point of vulnerability or opportunity .

as noted earlier , this report is one of a series of three crs reports that address the issue ofbts .

the first report in the series , crs report rl32839 , border and transportation security: thecomplexity of the challenge , analyzes the reasons why bts is so difficult to attain .

this report isthe second in the series .

the final report is crs report rl32841 , border and transportationsecurity: possible new directions and policy options .

carrier consultant program ( ccp ) .

sometimesreferred to as prescreening , the ccp was originally developed in the former ins .

working withofficials from the department of state , cbp deploys officers to work with air carriers to preemptattempts to use those carriers to gain illegal entry into the united states using fraudulent documents .

in doing so , ccp officials work towards eliminating the arrival of improperly documented aliens ata u.s. port of entry prior to their departure from the foreign port .

at domestic airports , ccp officialswork with airlines in identifying any illegal or suspect activity involving the carrier , primarily relatedto the use of fraudulent documents .

while the goal of ccp is to reduce illegal migration , theprogram has received heightened attention in this post 9 / 11 era .

i - 68 canadian border boat landing program / outlying areareporting station ( oars ) .

the i - 68 canadian border boat landing programpermits enrolled participants admission to the united states by small pleasure boats without aninspection .

the program requires applicants ( 56 ) to appear in person for an inspection and interview .

during theinspection / interview process , applicants names are checked against the ibis and biometrics arecollected .

upon approval , participants are issued a boating permit for the season that allows themto enter the united states from canada without submitting to an inspection .

oars allows travelers of small boats who are not in possession of a valid i - 68 form to enterthe united states via canada without presenting themselves for inspections .

travelers can use oneof the 33 oars videophone stations upon entry into the united states .

 ( 57 ) the stations are locatedat public marinas along the canadian border and provide automated inspections through a two - wayvisual and audio communication between the person and the remote inspector .

immigration security initiative ( isi ) .

like ccp,isi was originally developed in the former ins .

cbp is now piloting isi at several foreign airports .

isi relies on cbp inspectors positioned at foreign airports to intercept people who have beenidentified as national security threats from traveling to the united states isi has been compared tocbp's csi , discussed above , which targets high risk containers for inspections .

integrated border enforcement teams ( ibets ) .

ibets are bi - national , multi - agency law enforcement teams that target cross - border criminal activity .

although ibets were originally created in 1996 along the british columbia and washington stateborder to target cross - border crimes that usually involved illicit drug violations , the terrorist attackshave prompted officials in both countries to expand ibets role to include counterterrorismmeasures .

ins passenger accelerated service system ( inspass ) .

inspass is used at selected international airports .

 ( 58 ) it is a form ofpre - inspections for low - risk , frequent travelers .

 ( 59 ) inspass records a biometric geometry ( of the hand ) for eachenrollee that is verified when the traveler inserts his card .

upon arrival at an airport that hasinspass , enrollees proceed to an inspass kiosk where they access an automated hand geometryreader .

upon approval by the kiosk , the traveler receives a receipt of his inspection .

inspassapplicants must enter the united states on certain nonimmigrant visas ( 60 ) or under the visa waiverprogram .

 ( 61 ) integration of data systems .

cbp officials useseveral data systems and databases that assist them with identifying aliens who are potentiallyinadmissible under the immigration and nationality act or otherwise may pose a threat to thecountry .

cbp officials also utilize several data systems and databases with respect to identifyinghigh - risk commercial goods that warrant further inspection or review .

of concern are the numerousdata systems and databases that are not integrated or not readily accessible .

critical to the successof border security is the ability to process information in real time .

the legacy customs service and now cbp have been engaged in a long - term effort todevelop a new automated system to process and track the entry of all goods into the country .

theautomated commercial environment ( ace ) will utilize web - based electronic accounts to provideinformation regarding cargo inspections , status of clearance and other information to cbp andaccount users .

integrated surveillance intelligence system ( isis ) .

along the northern and southwest borders , the border patrol uses isis asa surveillance tool .

isis is comprised of remote video surveillance cameras that are mounted on topof towers , which are remotely monitored .

according to cbp , "one camera uses natural light andtakes traditional video images ; the other uses 'infrared' imaging for night vision. .

 ( 62 ) isis also consists ofsensors and an integrated computer assisted detection ( icad ) database .

known shipper programs .

the transportationsecurity administration uses a program that differentiates trusted shippers that are known to a freightforwarder or air carrier through prior business dealings , from unknown shippers .

under such aprogram , shipments from unknown sources are identified and placed under closer scrutiny .

 ( 63 ) laser visa ( mexican border crossing card ) .

mexican nationals applying for admission to the united states as visitors are required to obtain avisa or hold a mexican border crossing card , now referred to as the "laser visa. .

the laser visa isused by citizens of mexico to gain short - term entry ( up to six months ) for business or tourism intothe united states .

it may be used for multiple entries and is good for ten years .

under currentpractices , mexican nationals in possession of a laser visa will be exempt from the requirements ofthe u.s. - visit program , thus allowing for a speedy passage into the united states .

north american security perimeter .

as theunited states moves forward with implementing much of the security requirements in the patriotact and the border security act , many fear that the tighter security requirements will impede theflow of people across the border .

some critics are advocating for a more open border .

the ideal ofa north american perimeter security concept has been around for several years and the basicpremise of a north american perimeter security would move inspections and enforcement activitiesaway from the border .

such a concept would essentially eliminate barriers to the movement ofpeople ( and goods ) across the shared border .

p.l .

107-173 called for a study to examine thefeasibility of establishing a north american perimeter security program that would provide forincreased cooperation with foreign governments on questions related to border security .

the northamerican perimeter security , however , would require the harmonization of united states andcanadian immigration and refugee policies , among other things .

while such a harmonization ofpolicies may be problematic following the events of 9 / 11 , both countries have begun to harmonizeother policies at incremental levels that could be viewed as "pushing the border out" ( i.e.,preinspections and reverse inspections ) .

operation safe commerce ( osc ) .

osc is a pilotprogram that brings together private businesses , the maritime industry and the government to analyzesecurity procedures and practices for cargo entering the country and develop improved methods forsecuring the supply chain .

osc's goal is to protect the global supply chain while facilitating the flowof commerce by identifying potential supply chain security weaknesses .

unmanned aerial vehicles ( uav ) .

in 2004 dhslaunched an initiative , dubbed the arizona border control ( abc ) initiative that uses technologysuch as the uav to increase border surveillance along the arizona / mexico border .

currently , theborder patrol is piloting two uavs along the arizona and mexico border .

