the conventionally powered aircraft carrier john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) was decommissioned at mayport , fl , on march 23 , 2007 .

the ship will be towed to the navy's inactive ship facility at philadelphia , where it will be placed in preservation ( "mothball" ) status .

the navy had proposed retiring the kennedy and reducing the size of the carrier force from 12 ships to 11 as part of its proposed fy2006 and fy2007 budgets .

until mid - 2005 , the kennedy was homeported in mayport , fl .

prior to the proposal to retire the kennedy , the navy's plan was to maintain a 12-carrier force and keep the kennedy in operation until 2018 .

the issue for the 109 th congress was whether to approve , reject , or modify the navy's proposal in the fy2006 and fy2007 budget submissions to retire the kennedy and reduce the carrier force to 11 ships .

in acting on the proposed fy2006 defense budget , the 109 th congress passed a provision that amended 10 u.s.c .

5062 to require the navy to maintain a force of not less than 12 operational carriers .

in acting on the proposed fy2007 defense budget , the 109 th congress passed a provision ( section 1011 ) in the fy2007 defense authorization act ( h.r .

5122 / p.l .

109-364 of october 17 , 2006 ) that amended 10 u.s.c .

5062 to reduce the required size of the carrier force from 12 operational ships to 11 and to permit the retirement of the kennedy under certain conditions .

in light of section 1011 and the kennedy's retirement , one potential issue for the 110 th congress concerns the navy's future plans for the home port facility at mayport .

in light of section 1011 and the kennedy's retirement , one potential issue for the 110 th congress concerns the navy's future plans for the home port facility at mayport .

one potential option would be to qualify mayport for homeporting a nuclear - powered carrier — a process that could take a few years — and then transfer one of the navy's nuclear - powered carriers there .

another potential option would be to transfer one or more conventionally powered non - carrier ships , rather than a nuclear - powered carrier , to mayport — a step that could be taken in the near term .

a third potential option would combine the previous two by homeporting one or more additional conventionally powered ships at mayport until mayport is qualified for homeporting a nuclear - powered carrier and a nuclear - powered carrier takes their place .

potential questions for congress to consider include the following: how much time would be required to qualify mayport , fl as a nuclear - carrier home port ? .

how much could this schedule be accelerated , and what actions would be necessary to accelerate it ? .

how much would it cost to qualify mayport , fl as a nuclear - carrier home port , and how might this cost be affected by accelerating the schedule ? .

what would it cost to transfer a nuclear carrier from norfolk , va , to mayport ? .

on a steady - state basis , what would be the annual difference in cost between homeporting all atlantic fleet carriers at norfolk vs. homeporting one nuclear carrier at mayport and the rest at norfolk ? .

what are the relative operational advantages and disadvantages of homeporting all atlantic fleet carriers at norfolk versus homeporting one nuclear carrier at mayport and the rest at norfolk ? .

what are the relative vulnerabilities of norfolk and mayport to a potential one - time terrorist attack ? .

what kinds of navy ships other than a nuclear - powered carrier might be suitable for transferring to mayport ? .

what would be the relative operational advantages and disadvantages of transferring these ships to mayport ? .

how quickly could they be transferred ? .

what military construction work , if any , would be required at mayport to accommodate these ships , and what would be the cost of this work ? .

how would the local economic impact of homeporting these other ships at mayport compare to the economic impact of homeporting a nuclear - powered carrier there ? .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

109-452 of may 5 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5122 , stated: the committee is concerned by the chief of naval operation's plan to retire the uss john f. kennedy .

according to the navy's long range shipbuilding plan , if the navy retires the kennedy , then the aircraft carrier force will drop to 11 between now and 2012 , and then drop to 10 in 2013 and 2014 .

with the commissioning of cvn - 78 in 2015 , the aircraft carrier force increases to 11 and then back to 12 in 2019 and beyond .

the committee believes it is the objective of the chief of naval operations to maintain a force of 12 aircraft carriers since the long range shipbuilding plan shows a total of 12 aircraft carriers between 2019 and the far range of the plan in 2036 .

it is apparent to the committee that the decision to allow the force structure to fall to 10 in the near future is fiscally rather than operationally driven .

the committee believes that the navy should continue to maintain no less than 12 operational aircraft carriers in order to meet potential global commitments .

the committee believes that a reduction below 12 aircraft carriers puts the nation in a position of unacceptable risk .

 ( page 67 ) the report also stated: the committee notes that the department of defense's legislative proposal for fiscal year 2007 , included a section that would effectively allow retirement of the conventionally - powered aircraft carrier , uss john f. kennedy , thereby reducing the carrier force structure from 12 to 11 ships .

the committee believes that the navy's decision to reduce the number of carriers was not based on mission requirements analysis ; rather , the decision was based on fiscal constraints .

section 126 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( public law 109-163 ) amended section 5062 of title 10 , united states code , to set a minimum carrier force structure of not less than 12 operational aircraft carriers .

the committee believes the aircraft carrier force structure should be maintained at 12 ships in order to meet worldwide commitments .

however , the committee would like to explore options for maintaining the uss john f. kennedy in an operational status either within or outside the u.s. navy , to include the possibility of transferring operational control to the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of defense to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by march 1 , 2007 , that examines options for maintaining the uss john f. kennedy in an operational status both within and outside the u.s. navy .

in examining the nato option , the secretary shall coordinate an assessment with the nato secretary general .

the report shall include the cost and manning required , statutory restrictions that would preclude transfer of the uss john f. kennedy to organizations or entities outside the u.s. navy , and a classified annex on how the navy would meet global operational requirements with an aircraft carrier force structure of less than 12 ships .

 ( pages 369-370 ) the report also included additional views on the issue from representative jeff miller ( page 502 ) .

section 1011 of the senate version of the bill ( s. 2766 ) would repeal the requirement for the navy to include not less than 12 carriers that was enacted in p.l .

109-163 .

the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept .

109-254 of may 9 , 2006 ) on s. 2766 , stated: the 2006 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report determined that a naval force including 11 aircraft carriers meets the combat capability requirements of the national military strategy .

in testimony before the committee on armed services in march 2006 , the chief of naval operations ( cno ) emphasized that the decision by the qdr followed a rigorous evaluation of future force structure requirements by the navy , and that 11 aircraft carriers are sufficient to ensure the navy's ability to provide coverage in any foreseeable contingency with persistent combat power .

the committee is further aware that advances in ship systems , aircraft , and precision weapons , coupled with fundamental changes to fleet maintenance and deployment practices implemented by the navy , have provided today's aircraft carrier and associated air wings substantially greater strike capability and greater force availability than possessed by the fleet during previous quadrennial defense reviews .

the navy has reported on revisions to its method and frequency of deployments for vessels .

under the new concept , referred to as the ''fleet response plan,'' the navy has reduced forward presence requirements in order to increase surge capability in response to national security demands .

under this approach , with 12 aircraft carriers in the fleet , the navy proposed to have six carrier strike groups available for a crisis response within 30 days and two more carrier strike groups available in 90 days , referred to as "6 plus 2. .

at a force structure of 11 aircraft carriers , this becomes "6 plus 1" or "5 plus 2," which the navy determined supports the national military strategy with acceptable risk .

in certain cases , the success of the fleet response plan relies on the timeliness of the decision to surge - deploy the naval forces , and with smaller force levels and reduced forward presence , the fleet response plan approach may increase risk if we do not have the level of insight into the threat necessary for timely action .

further , the navy's long - term plan for aircraft carrier force structure declines to 10 carriers in 2013 , when the uss enterprise is scheduled to retire .

that carrier would be replaced by cvn - 21 in 2015 , which has yet to start construction .

the navy believes that they can manage this gap through a number of added measures , but if there are any delays in delivering cvn - 21 , this gap will increase .

the committee maintains its concern , expressed in the senate report accompanying s. 1042 ( s.rept .

109-69 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 , regarding the declining size of the naval force and the reduction to the number of aircraft carriers .

the committee agrees , however , with the navy's determination that it is not feasible to maintain 12 operational aircraft carriers by restoring the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) to a deployable , fully mission - capable platform .

the committee believes that it is vital to the national security of the united states that a fleet of at least 11 aircraft carriers be maintained to support the national military strategy , and has taken extraordinary action to support the cno's force structure plan by authorizing increased procurement for shipbuilding and , specific to aircraft carriers , by authorizing additional advance procurement and incremental funding for the construction of the first 3 cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers .

further , recognizing the increased need for timeliness of surge operations that today's smaller force structure places on the fleet response plan , the committee reaffirms the judgment that the chief of naval operations , admiral clark , provided in testimony before the committee on armed services in february 2005 , that the atlantic fleet should continue to be dispersed in two homeports .

 ( pages 379-380 ) the report also included additional views on the issue from senator bill nelson ( pages 528-529 ) .

the conference report ( h.rept .

109-702 of september 29 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5122 was signed into law as p.l .

109-364 on october 17 , 2006 .

section 1011 of the act amends 10 u.s.c .

5062 to reduce the required size of the carrier force from 12 operational ships to 11 .

the provision prevents the navy from retiring the kennedy until it has certified to congress that it has received formal notices from the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and nato that these organizations do not desire to maintain and operate the ship .

the provision requires , upon retirement of the ship , that while the ship is in the navy's custody and control , the navy maintain the ship in a condition that would allow for it to be reactivated in response to a national emergency .

the provision requires , as a condition for transferring custody and control of the ship to another party , that the transferee return the ship to the navy upon request of the secretary of defense in time of national emergency .

the provision does not appear to require the transferee , while it has custody and control of the ship , to maintain the ship in a condition that would allow for it to be reactivated by the navy in response to a national emergency .

section 1011 states: sec .

1011 .

aircraft carrier force structure .

 ( a ) reduction in minimum number of operational aircraft carriers required by law. — section 5062 ( b ) of title 10 , united states code , is amended by striking "12" and inserting "11" .

 ( b ) required certification before retirement of u.s.s .

john f. kennedy. — the secretary of the navy may not retire the u.s.s .

john f. kennedy ( cv — 67 ) from operational status unless the secretary of defense first submits to the committee on armed services of the senate and the committee on armed services of the house of representatives the secretary's certification that the secretary has received — ( 1 ) a formal notice from the secretary of homeland security that the department of homeland security does not desire to maintain and operate that vessel ; and ( 2 ) a formal notice from the north atlantic treaty organization that the north atlantic treaty organization does not desire to maintain and operate that vessel .

 ( c ) conditions on status of u.s.s .

john f. kennedy if retired. — upon the retirement from operational status of the u.s.s .

john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) , the secretary of the navy — ( 1 ) while the vessel is in the custody and control of the navy , shall maintain that vessel in a state of preservation ( including configuration control , dehumidification , cathodic protection , and maintenance of spares ) that would allow for reactivation of that vessel in the event that the vessel was needed in response to a national emergency ; and ( 2 ) if the vessel is transferred from the custody and control of the navy , shall require as a condition of such transfer that — ( a ) if the president declares a national emergency pursuant to the national emergencies act ( 50 u.s.c .

1601 et seq .

 ) , the transferee shall , upon request of the secretary of defense , return the vessel to the united states ; and ( b ) in such a case ( unless the transferee is otherwise notified by the secretary ) , title to the vessel shall revert immediately to the united states .

the report stated: the conferees understand that the 2006 quadrennial defense review report concluded that a naval force including 11 aircraft carriers meets the combat capability requirements of the national military strategy .

the conferees agree with the navy's determination that the cost of maintaining 12 operational aircraft carriers by restoring the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) to a deployable , fully mission - capable status would significantly impact the chief of naval operations' ( cno ) plan to build a future naval force of 313 ships .

the conferees also agree with the navy's proposal to inactivate the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) in fiscal year 2007 .

however , the conferees believe that it is important to retain the ability to reactivate the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) in the event that 12 aircraft carriers are required in response to a national emergency .

the conferees expect , therefore , in conjunction with decommissioning the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) , that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the supreme allied commander , europe and the secretary of homeland security , will evaluate the feasibility of maintaining the aircraft carrier in an operational status by transferring custody and control to the north atlantic treaty organization or the department of homeland security .

the secretary shall provide notification of the findings to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives prior to decommissioning the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) .

the conferees further expect that , upon decommissioning from the u.s. navy and completion of the ship's inactivation availability , the navy will maintain cv - 67 in a state of preservation ( dehumidification , cathodic protection , and configuration control ) pending determination of final disposition .

in the event it is determined that cv - 67 is to be retired from operational status , the secretary of the navy shall evaluate other alternatives for final disposition , to include maintenance in a reduced mobilization status , donation as a museum article , or striking from the naval vessel registry ; and report the findings with the secretary of the navy's recommendation to the congressional defense committees not later than october 1 , 2007 .

under all circumstances , the navy shall retain custody of cv - 67 at least until commissioning of cvn - 77 [which is scheduled for 2008] .

if the aircraft carrier is transferred from the custody and control of the navy , the secretary of the navy shall require as a condition of such transfer that the transferee , upon request of the secretary of defense , return the vessel to the united states .

in such a case , unless the transferee is otherwise notified by the secretary of the navy , the title to the vessel shall revert immediately to the united states .

the conferees agree with the cno statement in his letter dated august 14 , 2006 , to the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the senate , that "naval station mayport and the many resources of the jacksonville area remain vitally important to navy readiness," and support the cno commitment "to maintaining the infrastructure necessary to support the strategic dispersal of the atlantic fleet at this key east coast port. .

the conferees note that the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) has served proudly in defense of freedom around the world , in times of peace and in war in the course of her 38 years of service .

she has brought great honor to our nation , to her namesake , and to the tens of thousands of sailors who "stood the watch" on her decks these many years .

it is most fitting , therefore , that the navy plan the decommissioning of the uss john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) with ceremony befitting her distinguished history of service to our nation .

 ( pages 804-805 ) .

section 126 of the conference report ( h.rept .

109-360 of december 18 , 2006 ) on the fy2006 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

1815 ; p.l .

109-163 of january 6 , 2006 ) amended 10 u.s.c .

5062 to state that "the naval combat forces of the navy shall include not less than 12 operational aircraft carriers .

for purposes of this subsection , an operational aircraft carrier includes an aircraft carrier that is temporarily unavailable for worldwide deployment due to routine or scheduled maintenance or repair. .

the section also authorized $288 million for repair and maintenance to extend the life of the kennedy .

the conference report ( h.rept .

109-72 of may 3 , 2005 ) on the emergency supplemental appropriations act for fy2005 ( h.r .

1268 / p.l .

109-13 of may 11 , 2005 ) , contained a provision ( section 1025 ) stating: aircraft carriers of the navy sec .

1025 .

 ( a ) funding for repair and maintenance of u.s.s .

john f. kennedy - of the amount appropriated to the department of the navy in this act , necessary funding will be made available for such repair and maintenance of the u.s.s .

john f. kennedy as the navy considers appropriate to extend the life of u.s.s .

john f. kennedy .

 ( b ) limitation on reduction in number of active aircraft carriers - no funds appropriated or otherwise made available in this act may be obligated or expended to reduce the number of active aircraft carriers of the navy below 12 active aircraft carriers until after the date of the submittal to congress of the quadrennial defense review required in 2005 under section 118 of title 10 , united states code .

 ( c ) active aircraft carriers - for purposes of this section , an active aircraft carrier of the navy includes an aircraft carrier that is temporarily unavailable for worldwide deployment due to routing or scheduled maintenance .

 ( d ) pacific fleet authorities - none of the funds available to the department of the navy may be obligated to modify command and control relationships to give fleet forces command administrative and operational control of u.s. navy forces assigned to the pacific fleet: provided , that the command and control relationships which existed on october 1 , 2004 shall remain in force unless changes are specifically authorized in a subsequent act .

