in november 2000 , the nation faced the unusual circumstance of not knowing the winner of the election for president for several weeks .

the results in florida were contested , and the contest did not end until a decision by the u.s. supreme court .

the public scrutiny resulting from that experience exposed a wide range of weaknesses with the american system of elections .

among them were poorly designed and outdated voting technology ; inefficient and poorly administered registration systems ; insufficient professionalism in the election workforce , especially pollworkers ; problems with absentee voting ; a confusing array of administrative procedures across jurisdictions ; inadequate funding ; problems with the processes for conducting election audits and recounts ; and suspicions among many of alarming levels of voter fraud and intimidation .

although many jurisdictions suffered from few , if any , of these problems , they were sufficiently prevalent to cause widespread concern after the realization that they could , at least in some circumstances , have a significant impact on major elections .

many of the weaknesses had been known for years by election administrators , but they had been unsuccessful at drawing sufficient attention to them to effect the needed improvements .

the situation began changing when several commissions and studies examined what had happened in florida and made recommendations .

both the house and the senate held several hearings during the first session of the 107 th congress .

some states made plans or began to replace voting equipment and adopt other improvements .

in december 2001 , the house passed h.r .

3295 , the help america vote act .

in early 2002 , the senate debated and passed s. 565 , the martin luther king , jr .

equal protection of voting rights act , after adopting 40 amendments .

after conference negotiations , a compromise bill , the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava , p.l .

107 - 252 ) was enacted in october .

the act created a new federal agency with election administration responsibilities , set requirements for voting and voter - registration systems and certain other aspects of election administration , and provided federal funding ; but it did not supplant state and local control over election administration .

issues for the 108 th congress included funding , establishment of the new agency , and implementation by and impacts on the states .

issues for the 109 th congress included problems identified pursuant to the november 2004 presidential election , as well as implementation by states of hava requirements , response to hurricanes katrina and rita , and the security of voting systems .

in addition to funding , issues for the 110 th congress have included those that arose in the 2006 election , as well as voter - verified paper audit trail requirements for electronic voting machines , photo identification , poll worker training , and prohibiting deceptive practices .

despite considerable effort by congress to alleviate difficulties for military and overseas voters , there remain a number of hurdles to participation .

congress may consider several options for easing them .

other issues that might be considered in the 110 th or 111 th congress are associated with voting systems standards , remote voting ( absentee , early , and internet ) , election personnel , polling places , election security , and the electoral college .

this report discusses how hava addresses those and other issues , and their potential legislative implications .

hava established a new federal agency , the election assistance commission ( eac , http: / / www.eac.gov ) , to replace the office of election administration ( oea ) of the federal election commission ( fec ) and also to perform new functions .

the eac is an independent , bipartisan federal agency .

hava authorized funding for it only through fy2005 , but the agency has continued to be funded at or above authorized levels .

members are appointed to four - year terms and may be reappointed once .

the act also established two boards , with broad - based state and local membership , and a technical committee , to address aspects of voting system standards and certification .

the main duties of the eac include carrying out grant programs , providing for testing and certification of voting systems , studying election issues , and issuing voluntary guidelines for voting systems and the requirements in the act .

the commission does not have any new rule - making authority and does not enforce hava requirements .

the law provides for technical support and participation by the national institute of standards and technology ( nist , see http: / / vote.nist.gov ) in relevant commission activities , including the technical committee .

hava established several grant programs for various purposes .

payments to states authorized by hava included $650 million under title i to improve election administration and to replace punchcard and lever - machine voting systems and $3 billion over three years under title ii to meet requirements established by the act ( see below ) .

the first program was fully funded and all payments have been made .

the second was funded at close to the $2.4 billion authorized through fy2004 , but no additional funding was appropriated since then until fy2008 , when congress provided an additional $115 million .

other programs provide funding through the department of health and human services to make polling places accessible to persons with disabilities , and for state protection and advocacy systems to ensure electoral participation by persons with disabilities .

hava also provided $20 million in grants for research and $10 million for pilot programs to improve voting technology , although neither of those programs have been specifically funded .

three small programs to encourage student participation in the voting and election process were established by the act , and they have received some funding .

one of the innovations in hava is the establishment , for the first time , of federal requirements for several aspects of election administration: voting systems , provisional ballots , voter information , voter registration , and identification for certain voters .

most of those requirements went into effect in january 2006 .

however , four went into effect earlier: ( 1 ) any voter not listed as registered must be offered and permitted to cast a provisional ballot .

this is a separate ballot that is set aside along with relevant information about the voter so that election officials can determine whether the person is entitled to vote .

 ( 2 ) any ballots cast during a court - ordered extension of polling hours must be provisional .

 ( 3 ) a sample ballot and other voter information must be posted at the polling place on election day .

 ( 4 ) first - time voters who register by mail must provide specified identification either when submitting their registration or when voting .

also , the seven states that received title i payments to replace lever machines or punchcard voting systems and did not request a waiver were required to replace all those systems statewide in time for the november 2004 federal election .

beginning january 1 , 2006 , voting systems used in federal elections were required to provide for error correction by voters ( either directly or via voter education and instruction ) , manual auditing for the voting system , accessibility to disabled persons ( at least one fully accessible machine per polling place ) and alternative languages , and needed to meet federal machine error - rate standards .

systems were also required to maintain voter privacy and ballot confidentiality , and states were required to adopt uniform standards for what constitutes a vote on each system .

while hava does require a paper record that can be used for manual audit of a voting system , it does not require paper ballots .

also , states using voter registration needed to employ computerized , statewide voter registration systems that are accurately maintained .

the 23 states that received title i payments to replace lever machines and punchcard systems and that requested a waiver of the 2004 deadline were required to replace those systems statewide before the first election for federal office in 2006 .

finally , beginning in 2007 , all new voting systems purchased with title ii requirements payments were required to be fully accessible for persons with disabilities .

after the 2000 election , both the defense authorization act of 2002 and hava amended the uniformed and overseas citizens absentee voting act of 1986 ( uocava ) to improve the voting process for members of the military , their family members , and americans living overseas .

just before the november 2004 election , the president signed the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 ( p.l .

108 - 375 ) , which included provisions to ease the use of the federal write - in ballot , a substitute under certain conditions for the states' regular absentee ballots .

in addition to voting system requirements , hava required the eac to develop the voluntary voting system guidelines ( vvsg ) to replace the voluntary voting systems standards ( vss ) developed under the auspices of the fec and first issued in 1990 .

they apply to both computer hardware and software and have been adopted in whole or in part by most states .

an updated version of the vss was released in 2002 .

the eac released the first version of the vvsg in december 2005 .

developed in cooperation with nist , those guidelines are only a partial revision of the vss , with new or revised sections on security , human factors , conformance , and certain testing procedures .

they went into effect in december 2007 .

a more thorough revision is in progress .

a voluntary certification program for voting systems was also developed by the national association of state election directors ( nased ) to verify conformance with the vss .

hava gives responsibility for establishing testing and certification procedures to the eac , with nist playing an advisory role and developing a laboratory accreditation program .

the eac has accredited some laboratories for testing and certification of voting systems under the vvsg .

hava does not authorize specific funding for nist support activities , but congress has provided appropriations for those activities as part of the eac funding .

no federal standards exist with respect to absentee ballots , although the eac is required to conduct a study of absentee voting under hava .

voters in many states can request an absentee ballot only for specific reasons that would prevent the voter from casting a ballot in person .

but according to the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) , 26 states in 2004 allowed any voter to request such a ballot , sometimes called "no fault" absentee voting .

oregon conducts its elections entirely by mail — all registered voters receive their ballots through the postal service .

while the percentage of votes cast by absentee or mail ballot has been increasing in recent elections , some observers have expressed concerns that the method is more vulnerable to certain kinds of fraud and coercion of voters than is balloting at the polling place .

absentee ballots are perhaps the classic example of the legacy of state - by - state election administration .

eligibility , types of ballots used , deadlines for submission , and counting procedures and deadlines vary widely by state , and no uniform approach exists with any single element of absentee voting .

in some states , voters may cast a ballot in person before election day through an early voting program .

there are many approaches , and the number of states using early voting is growing .

according to the ncsl , 23 states had some form of it in 2004 , whereas 13 states offered early voting in 2000 .

in some states , a voter can cast a ballot at multiple locations in the jurisdiction before election day , while in other states , the voter must visit the election official's office to do so .

the days and hours for voting vary as well .

a defense department program to allow those in the military and their family members abroad to vote over the internet was cancelled for 2004 after a report that noted it could be prone to tampering that might affect the election outcome .

the 2004 program was to be an expanded version of a pilot program in 2000 in which 84 voters cast ballots over the internet .

as many as 100,000 voters might have cast ballots under the program in 2004 .

arizona's democratic party conducted a primary in 2000 in which approximately 40% of voters cast ballots over the internet , although computer problems and access issues emerged after the voting .

while little progress has been made in the development of internet voting for public elections in the united states , other countries have begun implementing this method .

the most prominent example is switzerland , which has used internet voting experimentally for several years .

different cantons use different approaches , with neuchâtel using an "end - to - end" system that provides true voter verifiability , which is not possible with paper ballot systems .

there are roughly 10,000 election jurisdictions in the united states , ranging in size from small rural jurisdictions with fewer than a thousand voters to large metropolitan jurisdictions with several million .

for many jurisdictions , the administration of periodic elections is unlikely to be considered as high a priority as more regular needs such as schools and roads .

funding and personnel vary , with some jurisdictions having large , well - funded operations and others very small efforts with part - time staffing .

the demographic profile of local election officials is unusual , especially for a professional group of government employees .

according to the eac , a federal election requires a total of about 2 million pollworkers nationwide .

most pollworkers are older citizens , many retired and elderly , although no reliable demographic information is available on them nationwide .

they are usually required to work on election day from before polls open to well after they close , often a span of 14 hours or more .

they are usually either unpaid or they receive only a small stipend .

hava established two small programs to recruit college and high school students to work at the polls but has no other specific provisions regarding pollworkers .

the help america vote act requires posting voting information at each polling place , mandates disability access to voting in all polling places through the use of at least one voting device that provides the same privacy and independence as for other voters , and requires voters who have registered by mail and have not voted in the jurisdiction to provide one of a number of acceptable forms of identification ( see the discussion of these requirements in hava 2004 requirements and hava 2006 requirements above ) .

jurisdictions vary in the number and kinds of polling places used for an election .

some jurisdictions are experimenting with the use of vote centers , where any registered voter in the county can vote , instead of traditional precinct polling places .

hava provides grants to improve the accessibility of polling places but does not establish new requirements .

the security environment following the terrorist attacks of 2001 raised concerns before the 2004 elections that further attacks or other events might disrupt an election and even affect the outcome .

questions were raised about both postponement of elections and enhancement of security .

the executive branch does not currently have authority to set or change the times of elections , a power reserved for congress under the constitution , although congress may be able to delegate such authority .

either congress or the states might also pass legislation in response to a terrorist attack that would change the timing of any elections that were affected .

some states have enacted statutes providing for the temporary postponement of elections .

many state statutes also grant the governor the power to suspend certain state laws during an emergency .

those statutes might also be able to be used to postpone the general presidential election in the state during an emergency .

however , actual postponement of elections has occurred in relatively few cases over the last 150 years .

it is generally the responsibility of state and local governments to provide security at polling places .

a guide for state election - security planning recommends establishment of planning teams and preparation for a range of possible scenarios .

reactions of state and local officials varied for the november 2004 election , with some making as few visible changes as possible and others increasing police presence or even moving polling places .

the president and the vice president are elected indirectly by the electoral college , according to a compromise design that balanced equal representation from each of the states against population differences .

the u.s. constitution , in article ii , section 1 , clause 2 , as amended by the 12 th amendment , together with a series of implementing federal statutes , provides the broad framework through which electors are appointed and by which they cast votes for president and vice president .

nearly since its inception , the electoral college has engendered calls for reform .

among the criticisms are the possibility that no candidate achieves a majority of electoral college votes , resulting in election by the house of representatives ( as occurred in 1824 ) ; the election of a president and vice president who win a majority in the electoral college , but do not win the popular vote ( as happened in 1824 , 1876 , 1888 , and 2000 ) ; the assignment of electoral votes , said to give less populous states an advantage because a state's vote equals the number of members of the house of representatives ( based on population ) and the senate ( not based on population ) ; and a perceived advantage for ethnic voters , whereby the concentrations of such voters in large states are said to benefit because of a tendency to vote as a group for a single candidate , thus increasing their comparative influence .

in recent years , heightened interest in reforming the electoral college tends to coincide with closely contested presidential elections wherein the possibility exists that the electoral college winner does not win the popular vote .

despite the circumstances of the 2000 election , which focused national attention on the electoral college vote , subsequent reform efforts addressed election administration and voting issues , rather than reform of the electoral college .

reform proposals are routinely introduced in nearly every congress , but the results from the 2004 election suggest that a public mandate for changing or abolishing the electoral college has yet to emerge .

