the united states is considering fundamental changes in its natural gas supply policy .

facedwith rising natural gas demand and perceived limitations in north american gas production , manyin government and industry are encouraging greater u.s. imports of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) .

recent activities by congress , the federal energy regulatory commission , the department ofenergy , and other federal agencies to promote greater lng supplies have included changingregulations , clarifying regulatory authorities , and streamlining the approval process for new lngimport terminals .

while forecasts vary , many analysts expect lng to account for 12% to 21% oftotal u.s. gas supply by 2025 , up from approximately 3% in 2005 .

if these forecasts are correct , u.s.natural gas consumers will become increasingly dependent upon lng imports to supplement northamerican pipeline gas supplies .

recent measures before congress seek to encourage both domestic gas supply and newlng terminal construction .

the alaska natural gas pipeline act of 2004 ( 15 u.s.c .

â§ 720 , et seq .

 ) provides loan guarantees ( sec .

116 ) and other incentives for an alaska gas pipeline .

the energypolicy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) includes various incentives for domestic natural gas producers ( title iii , subtitle e ) .

the act also amends section 3 of the natural gas act of 1938 , granting thefederal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) explicit and "exclusive" authority to approveonshore lng terminal siting applications ( sec .

311c ) among other provisions .

other proposals inthe 109th congress , including h.r .

4318 , h.r .

3918 , and h.r .

3811 would lift federal restrictions on natural gas exploration and production on federal submergedlands of the outer continental shelf .

s. 1310 would authorize the expansion of a naturalgas transmission pipeline on federal lands in the northeast .

while an increase in lng imports is already underway , federal officials and members ofcongress have been debating the merits and risks of u.s. lng dependency .

in april , 2005 , forexample , president bush stated that "one of the great sources of energy for the future is liquefiednatural gas.... we need more terminals to receive liquefied natural gas...." ( 1 ) in june , 2005 department ofenergy secretary samuel bodman remarked that "lng seems to offer a solution to ... the growingdemand for natural gas that we will see all around the globe. .

 ( 2 ) in november , 2005 federalreserve chairman alan greenspan testified before congress that "severe reaction of natural gasprices to the production setbacks that have occurred in the gulf highlights again the need to ... importlarge quantities of far cheaper , liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from other parts of the world. .

 ( 3 ) some in congress havequestioned the implications of such a policy , however , drawing analogies to the consequences ofu.s .

dependency on foreign oil and citing potential instability among foreign lng suppliers .

 ( 4 ) others have expressedconcern about lng safety and vulnerability to terrorism .

 ( 5 ) specific questions are emerging about the implications of greater lng imports to the unitedstates .

lng has substantial physical infrastructure requirements and there are uncertainties abouthow this infrastructure would be integrated into north america's existing gas network .

the potentialeffects of larger lng imports on u.s. natural gas prices will be driven by the global lng marketstructure , although that market structure is still evolving .

political relationships among countries inthe lng trade may also change as lng becomes increasingly important to their economies .

this report will review the status of u.s. lng imports , including projections of future u.s.lng demand within the growing international lng market .

the report will summarize recentpolicy activities related to lng among u.s. federal agencies , as well as private sector plans for lnginfrastructure development .

the report also will introduce key policy considerations in lnginfrastructure and market structure , highlighting current market information and key uncertainties .

finally , the report will identify key questions in lng import policy development .

natural gas is widely used in the united states for heating , electricity generation , industrialprocesses , and other applications .

in 2005 , u.s. natural gas consumption was 22 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) , accounting for 23% of total u.s. energy consumption .

 ( 6 ) until recently , nearly all u.s.natural gas was supplied from north american wells and transported through the continent's vastpipeline network to regional markets .

in 2003 , however , due to constraints in north americannatural gas production , the united states sharply increased imports of natural gas from overseas inthe form of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) .

while absolute levels remain limited today , growth in lngimports to the united states is expected by many analysts to accelerate over the next 20 years,reflecting growing domestic demand and expectations for a global expansion in lng trade .

federal actions are facilitating greater u.s. lng imports , and the private sector is respondingwith plans for new lng facilities .

nonetheless , concerns are emerging about the infrastructureneeds of lng , the future structure of global lng trade , and the relationship between the unitedstates and other lng market participants .

as long as domestic demand outpaces north american natural gas production , the option ofdeveloping lng import capacity appears economically attractive .

currently , lng supplies 3% ofu.s .

natural gas , but both industry and government project this figure to rise to as much as 21% by2025 .

such an increase would pose a number of practical , immediate challenges , such as ensuringadequate production and import capacity , integrating lng efficiently into the existing natural gassupply network , and securing lng infrastructure against accident or terrorist attack .

publicopposition to lng - related facilities and new trading relationships in an increasingly integratedglobal gas market will also bear upon the expansion of the industry .

as the practical challenges to lng import expansion are addressed , the policy discussionturns to the long - term implications of increased lng imports in the nation's energy supply .

intentionally or not , the united states may be starting down a path of dependency on lng importssimilar to its current dependency on foreign oil .

such a dependency would represent a major shiftin the nation's energy policy , and may have far - reaching economic impact .

because u.s. naturalgas markets are regional , major consuming areas such as california and the northeast might beparticularly affected .

some energy analysts believe that u.s. dependency on imported lng is inevitable ; the onlyuncertainty is how quickly it will occur .

others disagree , promoting instead familiar alternativessuch as greater domestic gas production , switching to oil or other energy sources , and conservation .

recent measures before congress affect lng imports by providing incentives for domestic gasproduction and for new lng terminal construction .

if congress considers the relative merits of lngand other energy supply alternatives , three overarching policy questions may emerge .

is expanding lng imports the best option for meeting long - term natural gasdemand in the united states ? .

what future role , if any , should the federal government play in facilitating theongoing development of lng infrastructure in the united states and abroad ? .

how might congress mitigate the risks of the global lng trade within thecontext of national energy policy ? .

the answers to these questions may flow from enhanced understanding of the infrastructure andmarket structure issues discussed in this report .

with incomplete information and limited policyanalysis , lng imports may look unrealistically attractive to some , but unreasonably risky to others .

the reality probably lies somewhere in between .

it may not be possible to predict the lng future20 years from now , but choices made now can substantially affect that future .

