liquefied natural gas ( lng ) facilities are receiving a great deal of public attention due to their increasingly important role in the nation's energy infrastructure and their potential vulnerability to terrorist attack .

lng has long been important to u.s. natural gas markets , although energy economics and public perceptions about lng risks have limited the industry's growth .

concerns about rising natural gas prices and the possibility of domestic gas shortages have been driving up demand for lng imports .

but lng is a hazardous liquid transported and stored in large quantities .

consequently , lng infrastructure may directly impact the security of communities where this infrastructure is located .

faced with the widely perceived national need for greater lng imports , and persistent public concerns about lng risks , some in congress are examining the adequacy of security provisions in federal lng regulation .

s. 1594 , which was introduced by senator frank lautenberg and three cosponsors and referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation on june 12 , 2007 , would strengthen federal protection of vessels and infrastructure handling lng and other especially hazardous cargoes .

h.r .

2830 , which passed in the house of representatives on april 24 , 2008 , would require the coast guard to enforce security zones around lng tankers , would limit reliance on state and local government resources to provide lng security , and would require the coast guard to certify it has adequate resources for lng security before approving an lng facility's security plan .

h.r .

2830 would further require a comparative risk assessment of vessel - based and facility - based lng regasification processes and a report on state and local augmentation of coast guard security resources , among other provisions .

this report provides an overview of industry and federal activities related to lng security .

the report describes u.s. lng infrastructure , the industry's safety record and security risks , and the industry's security initiatives since september 11 , 2001 .

it summarizes recent changes in federal lng and maritime security law and related changes in the security roles of federal agencies .

the report discusses several policy concerns related to federal lng security efforts: ( 1 ) public costs of marine security , ( 2 ) uncertainty regarding lng terrorism risks , and ( 3 ) security implications of promoting u.s. - flagged lng tankers and u.s. crews .

the physical infrastructure of lng consists of interconnected transportation and storage facilities , each with distinct physical characteristics affecting operational risks and security needs .

this overview focuses on the three major elements of this infrastructure: tanker ships , marine terminals , and storage facilities .

the safety hazards associated with lng terminals have been debated for decades .

a 1944 accident at one of the nation's first lng facilities killed 128 people and initiated public fears about lng hazards which persist today .

technology improvements and standards since the 1940s have made lng facilities much safer , but serious hazards remain since lng is inherently volatile and is shipped and stored in large quantities .

a january 2004 accident at algeria's skikda lng terminal which killed or injured over 100 workers added to the ongoing controversy over lng facility safety .

lng infrastructure is also potentially vulnerable to terrorist attack .

operators of lng infrastructure had security programs in place prior to september 11 , 2001 , but these programs mostly focused on personnel safety and preventing vandalism .

the terror attacks of september 11 focused attention on the vulnerability of lng infrastructure to different threats , such as systematic attacks on lng facilities by foreign terrorists .

consequently , both government and industry have taken new initiatives to secure lng infrastructure in response to new threats .

several federal agencies oversee the security of lng infrastructure .

the coast guard has lead responsibility for lng shipping and marine terminal security .

the department of transportation's office of pipeline safety and the department of homeland security's transportation security administration have security authority for peak - shaving plants within gas utilities , as well as some security authority for lng marine terminals .

ferc has siting approval responsibility , with some security oversight , for land - based lng marine terminals and certain peak - shaving plants .

in addition to federal agencies , state and local authorities , like police and fire departments , also help to secure lng .

government and industry have taken significant steps to secure the nation's lng infrastructure .

but continued progress in implementing and sustaining lng infrastructure protection activities may face several challenges .

as discussed in detail in the following sections , members of congress and federal officials are concerned about the growing public costs of lng security , the uncertainty of terrorist threats against lng , and security differences between foreign and u.s. lng vessels and crews .

the u.s. lng industry is growing quickly .

while rising lng imports may offer economic benefits , they also pose risks .

lng infrastructure is inherently hazardous and it is potentially attractive to terrorists .

both lawmakers and the general public are concerned about these risks , although the lng industry has a long history of relatively safe operations and has taken steps to secure its assets against terrorist attack .

no lng tanker or land - based facility has been attacked by terrorists , and federal , state and local governments have put in place security measures intended to safeguard lng against newly perceived terrorist threats .

these measures are evolving , but a variety of industry and agency representatives suggest that these federal initiatives are reducing the vulnerability of u.s. lng to terrorism .

the ongoing debate about lng infrastructure security in the united states has often been contentious .

local officials and community groups have challenged numerous lng infrastructure proposals on the grounds that they may represent an unacceptable risk to the public .

heightened public scrutiny of lng facilities has made it difficult to site new lng terminals near major gas markets and has increased the cost and complexity of lng terminal siting approval .

nonetheless , both industry and government officials acknowledge that enough new lng infrastructure will likely be approved to meet long - term u.s. import requirements .

indeed , federal agencies have approved the construction of a number of new u.s. import terminals , several of them onshore .

numerous additional terminal proposals await federal approval .

together with the expansion of the existing u.s. import terminals and the construction of new lng terminals in canada and mexico , the approved u.s. facilities would provide enough added capacity to meet the bulk of u.s. lng demand for the next 20 years .

new u.s. lng terminals may not be ideally located so as to minimize the cost of natural gas , but building them in these locations may be better than not building them at all .

furthermore , because their security has been subject to intense public scrutiny , new lng terminal and tanker operations may be safer than they might have been without such scrutiny and their siting may be less likely to be challenged at a later time when construction is already underway .

the construction and subsequent closure of the shoreham nuclear power plant in the 1980's due to new public opposition offers an example of the need to resolve safety and security concerns before capital is invested .

from a purely economic perspective , therefore , the added costs of building more heavily protected lng terminals potentially farther from their primary markets may represent the u.s. public's willingness to pay for lng security .

whether this implicit price of lng security is reasonable is an open question , but the continued interest of private companies to invest billions of dollars in u.s. lng terminals suggests that it will not prevent needed lng development .

as congress continues its oversight of lng infrastructure development , it may decide to examine the public costs and resource requirements of lng security , especially in light of dramatically increasing lng imports .

in particular , congress may consider whether future lng security requirements will be appropriately funded , whether these requirements will be balanced against evolving risks , and whether the lng industry is carrying its fair share of the security burden .

congress may also act to improve its understanding of lng security risks .

costly "blanket" investments in lng security might be avoided if more refined terror threat information were available to focus security spending on a narrower set of infrastructure vulnerabilities .

finally , congress may initiate action to better understand the security and trade implications of efforts to promote u.s. - flagged lng tankers .

in addition to these specific issues , congress might consider how the various elements of u.s. lng security activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure .

maintaining high levels of security around lng tankers , for example , may be of limited benefit if other hazardous marine cargoes are less well - protected .

u.s. lng security also requires coordination among many groups: international treaty organizations , federal agencies , state and local agencies , trade associations and lng infrastructure operators .

reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals could be an oversight challenge for congress .

