the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , as approved and implemented bycongress , entered into force on january 1 , 1994 .

 ( 77 ) chapter 10 of nafta contains extensive procurementobligations , which generally follow and build upon provisions contained in the 1979 gattprocurement code .

 ( 78 ) since mexico is not currently a party to the wto agp , its procurement obligations with the unitedstates are governed solely by nafta .

procurement obligations between the united states andcanada had been , prior to nafta , contained in the u.s. - canada free trade agreement , whose$25,000 threshold for federal goods contracts has been carried forward into the naftaagreement .

 ( 79 ) in addition to exceptions in individual schedules , nafta procurement obligations , likethose of the agp , are subject to national security and general exceptions .

 ( 80 ) article 1018 , paragraph1 contains the agreement's national security exemption , stating that: the nafta general exception , set forth in article 1018 paragraph 2 , states .

in addition to the wto and nafta , many of the other free trade agreements ( ftas ) thatthe united states has in effect contain provisions with respect to government procurement .

theagreements vary in their respective details , but all share provisions in common , including , but notlimited to , exemptions for certain department of defense procurements and threshold requirements .

for example , the u.s. - - israel fta contains provisions for the waiver of any buy national provisionsfor contracts with a value greater than $50,000 .

 ( 83 ) moreover , our most recent ftas such as the u.s. - - chile fta,u.s. - - singapore fta , u.s. - - morocco fta and the u.s. - - australia fta ( 84 ) each contain procurementprovisions that closely track those provided for by the agp .

 ( 85 ) with respect to thresholdrequirements , however , some of the newer ftas contain thresholds that are much lower comparedto the agp .

 ( 86 ) it is alsoimportant to note that while there are "essential security" provisions in the agreements with bothchile and singapore , ( 87 ) currently , neither the morocco or australia agreements contain a national security exceptionspecifically applicable to government procurement obligations .

furthermore , the dominicanrepublic - central american free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) also contains provisions relatingto government procurement that are similar to those contained in the u.s. - morocco andu.s. - australia ftas ( i.e. , without a national security exception ) , however , while implementinglegislation has been enacted for dr - cafta , the agreement has not yet taken effect .

 ( 88 ) .

initially adopted in 1933 , the buy american act is the major domestic preference statute thatgoverns procurement by the federal government .

 ( 90 ) the buy american act requires that the government buydomestic "articles , materials , and supplies" when they are acquired for public use unless a specificexception applies .

 ( 91 ) goods qualify as domestic under the statute if they are "such unmanufactured articles,materials , and supplies as have been mined or produced in the united states," or "such manufacturedarticles , materials , and supplies as have been manufactured in the united states substantially all from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured , as the case may be , in theunited states. .

 ( 92 ) federal regulations define the term "substantially all" as meaning that the "cost of domesticcomponents must exceed 50 percent of the cost of all the components. .

 ( 93 ) there are five primary exceptions to the buy american act .

the act does not apply toprocurements where its application would be inconsistent with the public interest or unreasonablein cost .

 ( 94 ) in addition,the act does not apply to procurements of products for utilization outside the united states , or ofproducts not produced or manufactured in the united states in sufficient and reasonably availablecommercial quantities and of satisfactory quality .

 ( 95 ) lastly , the act does not apply to procurements under$2,500 .

 ( 96 ) .

when congress approved the gatt procurement code in the trade agreements act of1979 , it also authorized the president to waive procurement restrictions such as the buy americanact in implementation of international obligations .

 ( 97 ) specifically , the statute permits the president to: the president may designate a foreign country for purposes of the taa only if he determinesthat the country or instrumentality: is a party to one of the wto agreement on government procurement or thenafta and will provide appropriate reciprocal competitive government procurement opportunitiesto u.s. products and suppliers of such products ; is a country or instrumentality , other than a major industrial country , which willotherwise assume wto procurement obligations and will provide such opportunities to suchproducts and suppliers ; is a country or instrumentality , other than a major industrial country , which willprovide such opportunities to such products and suppliers ; or is a least developed country .

 ( 98 ) a provision added in the nafta implementation act of 1993 makes the waiver authorityinapplicable to any small business or minority preference .

 ( 99 ) to encourage additional countries to join the wto agp , and to provide reciprocalcompetitive government procurement opportunities to u.s. goods and suppliers , the taa requiresthe president , with regard to procurement covered by the agreement , to prohibit procurement ofproducts of a foreign country or instrumentality that has not been designated by the president .

 ( 100 ) the prohibition does not apply , however , in the case of procurement for which there are nooffers of u.s. products or services or of eligible products , or such offers are insufficient to fulfillu.s .

government requirements .

 ( 101 ) as amended by the uruguay round agreements act , the taaalso authorizes the president to waive the prohibition on procurement of products from a non - partycountry or instrumentality where the country has: ( 1 ) agreed to apply transparent and competitiveprocedures to its government procurement equivalent to those in the agreement and ( 2 ) maintainsand enforces effective prohibitions on bribery and other corrupt practices in connection with itsgovernment procurement .

the taa also permits the president to authorize agency heads to waivethe prohibition on a case - by - case basis when in the national interest , and to authorize the secretaryof defense to waive the prohibition for products of countries or entities that enter into a reciprocalprocurement agreement with the department of defense .

 ( 102 ) specific amendments to the taa have been made through the years to implementprocurement obligations contained in u.s. ftas .

 ( 103 ) at this time , however , no statutory changes have been madeto implement the procurement chapters of the u.s. ftas with jordan , chile or singapore .

