from 1994 until july 21 , 2005 , china maintained a policy of pegging its currency to the u.s. dollar at an exchange rate of roughly 8.28 yuan to the dollar .

the chinese central bank maintained this peg by buying ( or selling ) as many dollar - denominated assets in exchange for newly printed yuan as needed to eliminate excess demand ( supply ) for the yuan .

as a result , the exchange rate between the yuan and the dollar basically stayed the same , despite changing economic factors which could have otherwise caused the yuan to either appreciate or depreciate relative to the dollar .

under a floating exchange rate system , the relative demand for the two countries' goods and assets would determine the exchange rate of the yuan to the dollar .

many economists contend that for the first several years of the peg , the fixed value was likely close to the market value .

but in the last few years of the peg , economic conditions changed such that the yuan would likely have appreciated if it had been floating .

the chinese government modified its currency policy on july 21 , 2005 .

it announced that the yuan's exchange rate would become "adjustable , based on market supply and demand with reference to exchange rate movements of currencies in a basket," ( it was later announced that the composition of the basket includes the dollar , the yen , the euro , and a few other currencies ) , and that the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar against the yuan would be immediately adjusted from 8.28 to 8.11 , an appreciation of about 2.1% .

unlike a true floating exchange rate , the yuan would ( according to the chinese government ) be allowed to fluctuate by 0.3% ( later increased to 0.5% ) on a daily basis against the basket , it remained not fully convertible in international markets , and china continued tight restrictions and controls over capital transactions .

the current situation might be best described as a "managed float" — market forces are determining the general direction of the yuan's movement , but the government is retarding its rate of appreciation through market intervention .

since july 2005 , china has allowed the yuan to appreciate steadily , but slowly .

it has continued to accumulate foreign reserves at a rapid pace , which suggests that if the yuan were allowed to freely float , it would appreciate more rapidly .

china's foreign exchange reserves grew from $403 billion at the end of 2003 to $1.7 trillion at the end of march 2008 , and china's large trade surplus totaled $262 billion in 2007 .

since the 2005 reforms , there has been a significant shift in the economic environment in china and the united states .

the yuan has risen 16% against the dollar — far more than the japanese yen during the same period , for example .

the overall value of the dollar has fallen significantly , to the point where some economists and policymakers fear that a further fall could be destabilizing to the u.s. economy .

 ( by definition , any rise in the yuan is equivalent to a fall in the dollar. ) .

partly as a result of the falling dollar , total u.s. exports are the fastest growing sector of the economy , and the growth rate of imports from china appears to have slowed recently .

nevertheless , the increase in the value of the yuan to date has done little to ease concerns raised in the united states .

but china , with concerns about its own economy , has been reluctant to make significant changes to their currency .

this paper reviews the various economic issues raised by china's present currency policy .

major topics surveyed include the economic concerns raised by the united states over china's currency policy and china's concerns over changing that policy .

how china's fixed exchange rate regime works and the various economic studies that have attempted to determine china's real , or market , exchange rate .

trends and factors in the u.s. - china trade imbalance .

 ( what is causing it ? .

is china's currency policy to blame ? ) .

economic consequences of china's currency policy for both china and the united states .

china's massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and purchases of u.s. federal debt instruments .

policy options on how the united states might induce china to reform its present currency policy , including current legislation introduced in congress .

many u.s. policymakers , business people , and labor representatives have charged that china's currency is significantly undervalued vis - à - vis the u.s. dollar by as much as 40% , making chinese exports to the united states cheaper , and u.s. exports to china more expensive , than they would be if exchange rates were determined by market forces .

they further argue that the undervalued currency has contributed to the burgeoning u.s. trade deficit with china , which has risen from $30 billion in 1994 to $256 billion in 2007 , and has hurt u.s. production and employment in several u.s. manufacturing sectors ( such as textiles and apparel and furniture ) that are forced to compete domestically and internationally against "artificially" low - cost goods from china .

furthermore , many analysts contend that china's currency policy induces other east asian countries to intervene in currency markets in order to keep their currencies weak against the dollar to remain competitive with chinese goods .

several groups are pressing the bush administration to pressure china either to revalue its currency or to allow it to float freely in international markets .

these issues are addressed in more detail later in the report .

president bush and administration officials have criticized china's currency policy on a number of occasions , stating that exchange rates should be determined by market forces .

initially , the bush administration rejected calls from several members of congress to apply direct pressure on china to force it to abandon its currency peg .

instead , the administration sought to encourage china to reform its financial system — under the auspices of a joint technical cooperation program agreed to on october 14 , 2003 , for example — and take other measures that would pave the way toward adopting a more flexible currency policy .

the administration's position on china's currency peg appears to have toughened beginning around april 2005 when then - u.s. treasury secretary john snow asserted at a g - 7 meeting ( on april 16 , 2005 ) that "china is ready now to adopt a more flexible exchange rate. .

this was likely driven in part by growing complaints from members over china's currency policy and the introduction of numerous currency bills .

for example , during the 109 th congressional session , the senate on april 6 , 2005 , failed ( by a vote of 33 to 67 ) to reject an amendment ( s.amdt .

309 ) attached by senator schumer to s. 600 ( a foreign relations authorization bill ) , which would have imposed a 27.5% tariff on chinese goods if china failed to substantially appreciate its currency to market levels .

in response to the outcome of the vote , the senate republican leadership negotiated an agreement with the supporters of the bill to allow a vote on s. 295 ( which was sponsored by senator schumer and which has same language as s.amdt .

309 ) at a later date as long as the sponsors of the amendment agreed not to offer similar amendments to other bills for the duration of the 109 th congress .

supporters of s. 295 threatened to bring the bill up a vote on the bill on two separate occasions in 2006 , but were convinced not to by administration and chinese officials .

numerous other currency bills were introduced as well .

chinese officials argue that its currency policy is not meant to promote exports or discourage imports .

they claim that china adopted its currency peg to the dollar , a policy that is practiced by a variety of developing countries , in order to foster economic stability and investor confidence .

chinese officials have expressed concern that abandoning the current currency policy could spark an economic crisis in china and would especially be damaging to its export industries at a time when painful economic reforms ( such as closing down inefficient state - owned enterprises and laying off millions of workers ) are being implemented .

in addition , chinese officials also appear to be worried about the rising level of unrest in the rural areas , where incomes have failed to keep up with those in urban areas and public anger has spread over government land seizures and corruption .

chinese officials contend that appreciating the currency could reduce domestic food prices ( because of increased imports ) and agricultural exports ( by raising prices in overseas markets ) , thus lowering the income of farmers and further raising tensions .

they further contend that the chinese banking system is too underdeveloped and burdened with heavy debt to be able to deal effectively with possible speculative pressures that could occur with a fully convertible currency , which typically accompanies a floating exchange rate .

the combination of a convertible currency and poorly regulated financial system is seen to be one of the causes of the 1997-1998 asian financial crisis .

prior to the crisis , chinese officials were reportedly considering moving towards reforming their currency policy , but the severe negative economic impact among several east asian countries that had a floating currency appears to have convinced officials that china's currency peg was one of the main reasons why china's economy was relatively immune from crisis , and that gradually implementing reforms to make the currency more flexible was the best way to maintain stable economic growth .

u.s. officials counter that they are not asking china to immediately adopt a floating currency system , but to move more quickly to reform the financial sector and to make the currency more flexible ( including allowing faster appreciation of the yuan , widening the band , and decreasing the level of intervention in international currency markets ) .

fixed exchange rates have a long history of use , including the bretton woods system linking the major currencies of the world from the 1940s to the 1960s and the international gold standard before then .

to understand how china's currency policy works , it is easiest to start with an explanation of how a fixed exchange rate works , which china operated until july 2005 .

under the fixed exchange rate , the chinese central bank bought or sold as much currency as was needed to keep the yuan - dollar exchange rate constant at level ( formerly about 8.28 yuan per dollar ) .

the primary alternative to this arrangement would be a floating exchange rate , as the united states maintains with economies like the euro area , in which supply and demand in the marketplace causes the euro - dollar exchange rate to continually fluctuate .

under a floating exchange rate system , the relative demand for the two countries' goods and assets determines the exchange rate of the euro to the dollar .

if the demand for euro area goods or assets increased , more euro would be demanded to purchase those goods and assets , and the euro would rise in value ( if the central bank kept the supply of euro constant ) to restore equilibrium .

when a fixed exchange rate is equal in value to the rate that would prevail in the market if it were floating , the central bank does not need to take any action to maintain the peg .

however , over time economic circumstances change , and with them change the relative demand for a country's currency .

if the chinese had maintained a floating exchange rate , appreciation would likely have occurred in the past few years for a number of reasons .

for instance , productivity and quality improvements in china may have increased the relative demand for chinese goods and foreign direct investment in china .

for the exchange rate peg to be maintained when economic circumstances have changed requires the central bank to supply or remove as much currency as is needed to bring supply back in line with market demand , which it does by increasing or decreasing foreign exchange reserves .

this is shown in the following accounting identity , used to record a country's international balance of payments: net investment income and net unilateral transfers between the united states and china are relatively small , so the current account balance is close to the trade balance ( exports less imports ) .

thus , anytime net exports ( exports less imports ) or net private capital inflows ( private capital inflows less outflows ) increase , foreign exchange reserves must increase by an equivalent amount to maintain the exchange rate peg .

for the past several years , there has been excess demand for yuan ( equivalently , excess supply of dollars ) at the prevailing exchange rate peg .

the central bank maintained the peg through 2005 by increasing its foreign reserves by buying dollars from the public in exchange for newly printed yuan .

rather than hold u.s. dollars , which earn no interest , the chinese central bank mostly holds u.s. financial securities — primarily u.s. treasury securities , but also u.s. agency securities ( eg , the obligations of fannie mae and freddie mac ) .

a peg can be maintained as long as the central bank is willing to accumulate more foreign exchange reserves .

since july 2005 , china has continued to accumulate foreign reserves at a rapid pace ( see figure 1 ) , and in 2006 , china overtook japan to become the world's largest holder of foreign exchange reserves .

as seen in table 1 , foreign reserves grew from $75 billion in 1995 to $168 billion in 2000 to $1.53 trillion in 2007 .

from 2006 to 2007 , china's foreign exchange holdings rose by $463 billion , or 43% .

but , unlike a fixed exchange rate regime , it has no longer purchased enough foreign reserves to entirely prevent the yuan from appreciating against the dollar .

after an initial revaluation of 2% in july 2005 , the yuan has appreciated steadily .

by the end of april 2008 , it had appreciated by about 16% to 7 yuan per dollar ( see figure 2 ) .

the current situation might be best described as a "managed float" — market forces are determining the general direction of the yuan's movement , but the government is retarding its rate of appreciation through market intervention ( and thus , to some extent , is still pegging the yuan to the dollar ) .

some of china's neighbors also maintain managed floats ( such as malaysia ) or have intervened in currency markets from time to time to keep its currency low against the dollar ( such as japan from 1998-2004 ) .

the continued rapid accumulation of foreign reserves suggests that if the yuan were allowed to freely float , it would appreciate more rapidly .

preventing the yuan from appreciating against the dollar is not the only reason the chinese government could be accumulating foreign exchange reserves .

foreign exchange reserves are necessary to finance international trade ( in the presence of capital controls ) and to fend off speculation against one's currency .

a country would be expected to increase its foreign reserves for these purposes as its economy and trade grew .

however , table 1 illustrates that the increase in foreign exchange reserves in china has significantly outpaced the growth of gdp or imports in the last few years .

when china accumulates foreign reserves that are non - u.s. assets , it does not influence the yuan's value against the dollar .

little public information is available on the nature of china's foreign reserves , so it is not known what share of china's reserves are held in u.s. assets .

it is also not known what share of the annual increase in reserves is due to new accumulations , as opposed to valuation changes , exchange rate effects , or the reinvestment of earnings .

economic activity , including the level of imports and exports , is not determined by the nominal exchange rate , but by the real ( inflation - adjusted ) exchange rate .

because the united states and china had roughly similar increases in the overall price levels from 1994 to 2003 ( 39% in china vs. 31% in the united states ) , the difference between the real and nominal rate was small .

however , china had much higher inflation than the united states from 1994 to 1997 , so the real and nominal exchange rates diverged considerably during that time .

the real exchange rate appreciated from china's perspective , making their exports more expensive and u.s. imports cheaper .

from then until 2003 , the real and nominal exchange rates converged because china's inflation rate was lower than u.s. inflation .

this can be seen in figure 3 .

in 2003 , the chinese exchange rate reached its lowest level since 1994 in real terms , from the chinese perspective , making their exports progressively less expensive since 1997 .

since then , the value of the yuan has risen .

appreciation in the nominal exchange rate has brought the yuan almost back to its 1998 level in real terms .

in the long run , real ( inflation - adjusted ) exchange rates return to their market value whether they are ( nominally ) fixed or floating .

imagine that the demand for chinese goods and services were to increase .

if the yuan were floating , it would appreciate , as more yuan were acquired to purchase chinese goods .

it would continue to appreciate until the excess demand for chinese goods was exhausted ( since they are now more expensive in terms of foreign currency ) , at which point the trade balance would return to its equilibrium level .

with a fixed exchange rate , the real exchange rate returns to its market value through price adjustment instead , which takes time .

if the exchange rate were fixed below the level that would prevail in the market , chinese exports would be relatively inexpensive and u.s. imports would be relatively expensive .

as long as this situation prevailed , the trade surplus with the united states would persist .

the trade surplus ( plus net remittances ) is equal to the capital flowing from china to the united states .

part of this capital consists of the purchase of u.s. assets by private chinese citizens .

the other portion consists of the accumulation of dollar reserves by the chinese central bank .

by increasing its dollar reserves , the central bank is also increasing the supply of yuan .

this causes the inflation rate in china to rise , all else equal .

over time , as prices rise , exports will become more costly abroad and imports less costly .

at that point , the trade surplus will return to its equilibrium value .

although the nominal exchange rate never changed , because of the rise in prices , the real exchange rate would now equal the market rate that would prevail if the exchange rate had been floating .

thus , undervaluing a fixed exchange rate does not confer any permanent competitive advantage for a country's exporters and import - competing industries .

however , because price adjustment takes time , floating exchange rates return to the equilibrium value much more quickly than fixed exchange rates .

thus , when a country uses its monetary policy to influence the value of it currency , it can no longer use its monetary and fiscal policy to counteract changes in the business cycle ( the u.s. loses no policy flexibility from china's peg ) .

for example , a peg would prevent a country from lowering its interest rates to offset an economic downturn .

if it did , capital would flow out of the country to assets with higher interest rates in the rest of the world , and the country would find its currency peg under pressure ( since investors would sell the country's currency and buy foreign currency to transfer their capital abroad ) until it raised its interest rates .

this loss of monetary autonomy is relatively unimportant for small countries that fix their exchange rate to large neighbors that share the same business cycle , since the large neighbor would also likely be affected by the downturn and lower its interest rates .

but the loss in autonomy is costly when a country is tied to a partner to whom it is not closely linked and does not experience similar business cycles , as is arguably the case between the united states and china .

however , china loses less monetary autonomy than most countries with a fixed exchange rate through its use of capital controls ( legal barriers restricting access to foreign currency ) .

the currency is convertible on a current account basis ( such as for trade transactions ) , but not on a capital account basis ( for various types of financial flows , such as portfolio investment ) .

in addition , nearly all chinese enterprises are required to turn over their foreign currency holdings to china's state bank in exchange for yuan , and purchases of foreign exchange by individuals and firms in china are closely regulated .

because capital cannot easily leave china when interest rates are lowered , china retains some flexibility over its monetary and fiscal policy despite the fixed exchange rate .

critics of china's currency peg often point to the large and growing u.s. - china trade imbalance as proof that the yuan is significantly undervalued and constitutes an attempt to gain an unfair competitive advantage over the united states in trade .

however , bilateral trade balances reflect structural causes as well as exchange rate effects .

there are a number of other factors at work that are also important to consider when analyzing the bilateral trade deficit .

first , although china ( according to u.s. statistics ) had a $256 billion merchandise trade surplus with the united states in 2007 , its overall trade surplus was $262 billion ( chinese data ) , indicating that china had a small ( $6 billion ) trade surplus in its trade with the world excluding the united states ( see table 3 ) .

if the yuan is undervalued against the dollar , it should also be undervalued against other currencies , yet china runs trade deficits with several countries .

for example , according to chinese data , it had a $77.5 billion trade deficit with taiwan , a $47.9 billion deficit with south korea , and a $38.1 billion deficit with japan .

second , the sharp rise in the u.s. trade deficit with china diverts attention from the fact that , while u.s. imports from china have been rising rapidly , u.s. exports to china have been increasing sharply as well .

table 4 lists u.s. exports to its top 10 major export markets in 2007 .

these data indicate that u.s. exports to china from 2001-2007 rose significantly faster than those to any other major u.s. trading partner .

in 2007 , total u.s. exports rose 18.1% over the previous year ( they increased by 32.0% in 2006 ) .

in 2007 , china overtook japan to become the third largest u.s. export market .

finally , there is strong evidence to suggest that a significant share of the growing level of imports ( and hence u.s. trade deficit ) from china is coming from export - oriented multinational companies , especially from east asia , that have moved their production facilities to china to take advantage of china's abundant low - cost labor ( among other factors ) .

chinese data indicate that the share of china's exports produced by foreign - invested enterprises ( fies ) in china has risen dramatically over the past several years .

as indicated in table 5 , in 1986 , only 1.9% of china's exports were from fies , but by 1996 , this share had risen to 40.7% , and by 2007 it had risen to 57.1% a similar pattern can be seen with imports: fies accounted for only 5.6% of china's imports in 1986 , rose to 47.9% by 2000 , and to 58.5% in 2007 .

fies import raw materials and components ( much of which come from east asia ) for assembly in china , after which point , much of the final product is exported .

as a result , china tends to run trade deficits with east asian countries and trade surpluses with countries with high consumer demand , such as the united states .

these factors have led many analysts to conclude that much of the increase in u.s. imports ( and hence , the rising u.s. trade deficit with china ) is a result of china becoming a production platform for many foreign companies ( who are the largest beneficiaries from this arrangement ) , rather than unfair chinese trade policies .

the rising importance of fies may represent a fundamental change in trade between china and the united states that could affect the bilateral trade deficit independently of the exchange rate regime .

the sharp rise in the share of china's trade by fies appears to be strongly linked to the rapid growth in foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in china , which grew from $1.9 billion in 1986 to $74.8 billion in 2007 , much of which went to export - oriented manufacturing , a large share of which was exported to the united states .

table 5 indicates that the u.s. trade deficit with china began to increase rapidly beginning in the early 1990s ; a significant rise in fdi and exports by fies in china occurred at roughly the same time .

by comparing exports and imports in table 5 , one can see that fies have little effect on china's overall trade balance , since the fies import roughly 80% as much as they export .

table 6 provides an illustration of how foreign multinational companies have shifted a significant level of production from other ( mainly ) east asian countries to china in one industry .

in 2000 , japan was the largest foreign supplier of u.s. computer equipment ( with a 19.6% share of total shipments ) , while china ranked 4 th ( with a 12.1% share ) .

in just seven years , japan's ranking fell to 4 th , the value of its shipments dropped by over half , and its share of shipments declined to 7.0% ( 2007 ) .

china was by far the largest foreign supplier of computer equipment in 2007 with a 51.5% share of total u.s. imports .

while u.s. imports of computer equipment from china rose by 436% over the past seven years , the total value of u.s. imports from the world of these commodities rose by only 26% .

a large share of the increase in chinese computer production has reportedly come from foreign computer companies that have moved manufacturing facilities china .

if the yuan is undervalued against the dollar , as many critics charge , then there are benefits and costs of this policy for the economies of both china and the united states .

the united states could utilize a number of options to try to put more pressure on china to make further reforms to its exchange rate policy if u.s. policymakers desired .

options for currency reform include making the yuan fully convertible , allowing the currency to appreciate by a certain amount ( immediately or gradually ) , lessening china's intervention in currency markets , widening the band in which the currency is allowed to fluctuate , and furthering reforms to the financial sector to enable greater currency flexibility .

determining the best approach to achieving these outcomes has sparked a lively policy debate .

options to induce china to reform its exchange rate regime ( including proposed legislation ) are listed below ( see also section on legislation in the 110 th congress ) .

the current debate among u.s. policymakers over china's currency policy has been strongly linked to concerns over the growing u.s. trade deficit with china , the sharp decline in u.s. manufacturing employment over the past few years , and the rise of china as a major economic power .

since 2005 , china's exchange rate has appreciated slowly , but the cumulative change since then has been significant .

most economists agree that china's currency would likely appreciate against the dollar initially if allowed to float ( barring any disruption in china's financial sector ) , although market forces could drive it up or down in the long run as conditions change .

but the failure of the bilateral trade deficit to fall in response to the appreciation that has occurred thus far suggests that it is caused by more than just the value of the yuan .

if the yuan were to appreciate , there is considerable debate over the net effects this policy would have on the u.s. economy since it may benefit some u.s. economic sectors and harm other sectors , as well as consumers .

the trade deficit with china has not prevented the united states from reaching full employment .

in addition , u.s. trade with china is only one of a number of factors affecting manufacturing employment , including increased productivity growth , employment shifts to the service sector , and the overall trade deficit .

it is also not clear to what extent production in certain industrial sectors has shifted to china from the united states , as opposed to shifting to china from other low - wage countries , such as mexico , thailand , and indonesia .

the extensive involvement of foreign multilateral corporations in china's manufactured exports further complicates the issue of who really benefits from china's trade , as well as the implications of a rising u.s. trade deficit with china ( since a large share of u.s. imports are coming from foreign firms , including u.s. firms , that have shifted production from one country to china ) .

the effects of an appreciating yuan can also be considered in the broader context of concerns about the potentially destabilizing effects of the falling dollar .

by definition , increases in the value of the yuan are equivalent to decreases in the value of the dollar , so china's accumulation of u.s. assets retards the rate at which the dollar falls .

thus , there is considerable debate over what policy options would promote u.s. economic interests since changes to the current system would produce both winners and losers in the united states ( as well as in china ) .

chinese officials have stated they plan to make the currency more flexible in the near term and to eventually adopt a floating currency in the long run , but they insist that reforms should be gradual in order to avoid disruptions to the economy .

for example , they claim they need to first implement further reforms to the banking system and to reduce the level of non - performing loans .

yet the present currency policy may be undermining these efforts by expanding the money supply ( as a result of the accumulation of foreign reserves ) .

a rising money supply promotes easy credit policies by the banks — which could result in more non - performing loans .

efforts to limit bank loans in booming sectors of the economy have mainly been the result of government administrative directives rather than market forces , which may undermine the ability to establish a market - based financial system where monetary policy is used to halt inflation and bank loans are extended to ventures that offer the highest rate of return .

in addition , china's currency policy constitutes a de facto subsidy , which , while benefitting some export industries , undermines other sectors , and prevents the most efficient distribution of resources in the economy .

while u.s. officials acknowledge china's concerns over exchange rate reforms , they contend that china's exchange rate reforms are overly cautious .

they further contend that china's currency policy is preventing adjustments in global trade imbalances , especially in the united states , and that this could eventually undermine world economic growth .

this would hurt china's economy , given its dependence on exports .

both u.s. and chinese officials publicly agree that china needs to undertake major economic reforms to boost domestic consumption and to obtain more even growth , and that the united states must do more to boost its level of domestic saving .

china officials have stated their intention to boost economic development in the hinterland and expand spending on social security , health care , and education .

however , this will likely take many years to implement .

currency legislation in the 110 th congress on china's currency policy include the following: h.r .

321 ( english ) would require the treasury department to determine if china has manipulated its currency and to estimate the rate of that manipulation ( if such a determination were made ) , which then would require the imposition of additional tariffs on chinese products ( equal to the estimated rate of manipulation ) .

the bill also calls on the united states to file a wto case against china over its currency policy and to work within the wto to modify and clarify rules regarding currency manipulation .

h.r .

782 ( tim ryan ) / s. 796 ( bunning ) would apply u.s. countervailing laws ( dealing with government subsidies ) to products imported from non - market economies ( such as china ) and would establish an alternative methodology for estimating the amount of government subsidy benefit provided if information is not available on the amount of subsidies given to various industries in that country .

the bills also make exchange rate misalignment actionable under u.s. countervailing law , require the treasury department to determine whether a currency is misaligned in its semi - annual reports to congress on exchange rates , prohibit the department of defense from purchasing certain products imported from china if it is determined that china's currency misalignment has disrupted u.s. defense industries , and would include currency misalignment as a factor in determining ( china - specific ) safeguard measures on imports of chinese products that cause market disruption .

h.r .

1002 ( spratt ) would impose 27.5% in additional tariffs on chinese goods unless the president certifies that china is no longer manipulating its currency .

h.r .

2942 ( tim ryan ) would apply countervailing laws to nonmarket economies , make an undervalued currency a factor in determining antidumping and countervailing duties , require treasury to identify fundamentally misaligned currencies and to list those meeting that criteria for priority action .

if consultations fail to resolve the currency issues , the ustr would be required to take action in the wto .

s. 364 ( rockefeller ) would apply u.s. countervailing laws on non - market economies and would make exchange rate manipulation actionable under such laws .

s. 1607 ( baucus ) would require the treasury department to identify currencies that are fundamentally misaligned and to designate such currencies for priority action under certain circumstances in its semi - annual reports to congress on exchange rates .

if after consultations the country maintaining the designated currency policy fails to adopt appropriate policies within 180 days , the u.s. would make currency undervaluation a factor in determining antidumping duties , ban federal procurement of products or services from the designated country , bar financing by the u.s. overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , and would require u.s. officials to oppose multilateral financing for that country .

if the designated country failed to take appropriate measures , the ustr would be required to file a case in the wto , and the treasury department would be directed to consider taking remedial intervention in international currency markets .

a modified version of the bill passed the senate finance committee on july 31 , 2007 .

s. 1677 ( dodd ) requires the treasury department to identify countries that manipulate their currencies regardless of their intent and to submit an action plan for ending the manipulation ; and gives treasury the authority to file a case in the wto .

the bill was approved by the senate banking committee on august 1 , 2007 .

s. 2813 ( bunning ) would also require the treasury department to identify currency manipulators , submit an action plan to end the manipulation , and to consult with the imf .

a side - by - side comparison of five major currency bills: s. 1607 ( as introduced ) , s. 1677 , h.r .

782 , and s. 796 ( which are identical ) , and h.r .

2942 ) follows ( table 8 ) .

several bills were introduced in the 109 th congress to deal with foreign exchange rate policies .

this section offers a summary of bills that saw legislative action .

s.amdt .

309 ( schumer ) to s. 600 would impose a 27.5% tariff on chinese goods if china failed to substantially appreciate its currency to market levels .

on april 6 , 2005 , the senate failed ( by a vote of 33 to 67 ) to reject the amendment , in response to the vote , the senate leadership moved to allow a vote on s. 295 ( which has same language as s.amdt .

309 ) no later than july 27 , 2005 , as long as the sponsors of the amendment agreed not to sponsor similar amendments for the duration of the 109 th congress .

however , on june 30 , 2005 , senator schumer and other sponsors of s. 295 agreed to delay consideration of the bill after they received a briefing from administration officials and were told that china was expected to make significant progress on reforming its currency over the next few months .

disappointment over china's july 2005 currency reforms led senator schumer to push for consideration of s. 295 ( under the previous compromise ) .

on november 16 , 2005 , the senate agreed to consider the bill no later than march 31 , 2006 .

on march 28 , 2006 , senators schumer and graham stated that they would move to delay taking up s. 295 in the senate , based on their assessment during a trip to china that the chinese government was serious about reforming its currency policy .

however , on september 14 , 2006 , senator schumer stated that he was disappointed with china's movement to date on currency flexibility , and requested the senate to take up s. 295 .

on september 28 , 2006 , senators schumer and graham announced that they had been persuaded by president bush not to pursue a vote on s. 295 in order to give secretary of treasury henry paulson more time to negotiate with china on its currency policy .

h.r .

3283 ( english ) would ( among other things ) apply u.s. countervailing laws ( dealing with foreign government subsidies ) to non - market economies ( such as china ) ; and require the treasury department to define "currency manipulation," describe actions that would be considered to constitute manipulation , and report on china's new currency regime .

the bill passed ( 255 to 168 ) on july 27 , 2005 .

a similar bill was introduced in the senate , s. 1421 ( collins ) .

