potential adversaries and others have built hardened underground facilities to protect keyassets .

conventional weapons are unable to destroy many such facilities , though opinions differ onwhether nonnuclear means can disable or isolate them .

surface - burst nuclear weapons would havelimited effectiveness against deeply buried facilities .

in contrast , a nuclear weapon that burrows intothe ground a few meters before detonating would be more effective because it would transfer muchmore of its energy into the ground .

the united states has one type of nuclear earth penetrator , the b61-11 bomb , which wasaccepted into the stockpile in september 2001 .

 ( 1 ) that weapon , though , according to an article by several scientistsfrom los alamos national laboratory , "cannot survive delivery into certain types of terrain in whichsuch [hardened underground] facilities may be located. .

 ( 2 ) the administration proposes rnep as a study of modificationsto convert existing b83 nuclear bombs to an earth penetrator configuration .

another bomb , the b61,had also been under consideration earlier .

the air force has been leading the study , which startedin may 2003 , with nnsa in charge of studying modifications of specific warheads .

accordingly,the department of defense ( dod ) and the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , whichis the department of energy ( doe ) agency in charge of the u.s. nuclear weapons program,requested funds to study the robust nuclear earth penetrator ( rnep ) .

rnep has been the most controversial nuclear weapon program in congress for the past fewyears .

supporters argue that it is needed to attack hard and deeply buried targets ( such as leadershipbunkers or wmd production facilities ) in countries of concern , thereby deterring or defeatingchallenges from such nations ; critics assert that rnep would lower the threshold for use of nuclearweapons and prompt other nations to develop nuclear weapons to deter u.s. attack .

secretary ofdefense donald rumsfeld said in may 2003 that rnep "is a study .

it is nothing more and nothingless. .

 ( 3 ) the plan was thatthe rnep study would cost $15 million a year for fy2003-fy2005 .

while congress appropriatedthe fy2003 request of $15.0 million , the fy2004 request met much criticism .

the house rejectedan amendment by representative tauscher to transfer funds from rnep to conventional means ofattacking buried targets .

the senate tabled an amendment by senator dorgan and another by senatorfeinstein to bar funds for rnep , and adopted an amendment by senator nelson ( fl ) , and a similaramendment by senator reed , to require congressional authorization to start development engineering ( discussed below ) or later phases of rnep .

 ( the nelson amendment became section 3117 of p.l.108-136 , the fy2004 national defense authorization act. ) .

congress reduced the fy2004appropriation to $7.5 million .

in response to this reduction , nnsa planned to spend almost all of the $7.5 million to studythe b83 as an rnep candidate , and little on the b61 study .

 ( 4 ) the b83 study was being conducted by lawrence livermorenational laboratory , in livermore , ca , and sandia national laboratories' livermore branch ; theb61 study was the responsibility of los alamos national laboratory , los alamos , nm , and sandianational laboratories' headquarters site in albuquerque , nm .

for fy2005 , congress eliminatedrnep funding .

for fy2006 , the administration requested $4.0 million for nnsa to conduct a sledtest , in which a penetrator body would be shot down a test track and slammed into a material , suchas a concrete block , to help design and evaluate penetrators .

for fy2006 , the administration alsorequested $4.5 million for dod to study linking rnep to the b - 2 bomber .

the appropriation was$4.0 million for dod to conduct the sled test .

to address some technical issues that have arisen in the rnep debates , the bob stumpnational defense authorization act for fy2003 , p.l .

107-314 , section 1033 , called for a nationalacademy of sciences report on effects of nuclear and conventional earth penetrator weapons ( epws ) .

the report , released in april 2005 , had nine key conclusions: ( 1 ) many high - value buriedfacilities can be held at risk by nuclear but not conventional epws ; ( 2 ) penetration to a depth of 3meters captures most effects of epws on buried targets ; deeper penetration puts the weapon atgreater risk ; ( 3 ) epws cannot penetrate deeply enough to contain nuclear weapon effects fully ; ( 4 ) casualties from a nuclear weapon burst at shallow depth or on the surface are essentially the same ; ( 5 ) detonating a nuclear weapon at shallow depth increases the energy transmitted to a buried target,permitting a reduction in yield by a factor of 15 to 25 ; ( 6 ) attacks using nuclear epws near urbanareas could produce thousands to over a million casualties , or hundreds to several hundred thousandfor attacks in rural areas ; ( 7 ) a nuclear epw could reduce civilian casualties in an urban area by afactor of 2 to 10 compared to a surface - burst weapon with 25 times the yield ; ( 8 ) a nuclear weaponwould have to detonate within a chamber where chemical or biological agents were stored to destroythe agents ; the same is true of nonnuclear "thermobaric" bombs , which generate high heat andpressure ; and ( 9 ) in a nuclear attack on a chemical weapon facility , nuclear effects would probablykill many more civilians than would the released chemical agent , while a nuclear attack on abiological facility could kill similar numbers of civilians from nuclear effects and released biologicalagents , depending on weapon yield and amount of agent .

 ( 5 ) this report discusses the history of rnep in congress and the administration for thefy2005 and fy2006 budget cycles .

for a more extensive history and technical background , see crs report rl32130 , nuclear weapon initiatives: low - yield r&d , advanced concepts , earthpenetrators , test readiness , and crs report rl32599 ( pdf ) , 'bunker busters': sources of confusion inthe robust nuclear earth penetrator debate , both by jonathan medalia .

any consideration ofrnep in the second session of the 109th congress may hinge on whether the administration requestsfunds for the program in the fy2007 budget .

nnsa requested no funds for rnep for fy2007 .

the program appears nowhere in itsfy2007 request document .

 ( 62 ) nnsa stated in january 2006 that it disbanded the rnep teamsin march 2005 , and stated in february 2006 that it has closed out the project .

 ( 63 ) .

