this report , general management laws: major themes and management policy options , is a companion to crs report rl30795 , general management laws: a compendium ( pdf ) ( hereafter "compendium" ) .

in combination , these reports have three main objectives: to identify and describe the major general management laws under which the executive branch is required to operate , including their rationale , design , and scope ; to assist members of congress and their staff in overseeing management of the executive branch ; and to help congress when considering potential changes to the management laws , as well as other legislation , including authorizing statutes and appropriations .

the compendium contains profiles of selected "general management laws" — broad statutes designed to regulate the activities , procedures , and administration of all or most executive branch agencies .

the quality of the general management laws , as well as their implementation , are considered crucial to maintaining the accountability of the executive branch to congress , the president , and the public .

moreover , these laws influence the effectiveness of federal agencies when they implement , evaluate , and help formulate public policies .

as a complement to the compendium , this report ( "companion report" ) focuses on major themes and possible management policy options for congress that emerge when the general management laws are viewed together , as a whole .

the companion report reflects the status of general management laws at the end of the first session of the 108 th congress , and will be updated along with the compendium to reflect actions taken through the close of the 108 th congress .

the compendium includes more than 90 separate entries that describe general management laws for the executive branch .

the entries are organized into the following seven functional categories: information and regulatory management ; strategic planning , performance measurement , and program evaluation ; financial management , budget , and accounting ; organization ; procurement and real property management ; intergovernmental relations management ; and human resources management and ethics .

within the management field , functions typically refer to "business areas that require related bundles of skill" or "groups of people with similar skills and performing similar tasks. .

 ( in the private sector , by way of comparison , functions often include marketing , finance , production , and human resources. ) .

this functional orientation is a major theme to which this report will return .

most of the compendium's entries profile a specific law , or in some cases , several related laws .

the "human resources management and ethics" section , however , presents most civil service laws according to their codification in title 5 of the united states code — the way that practitioners and specialists typically discuss these laws .

for each entry in the compendium , one or more crs analysts present a brief history of the general management law , describe the law's major provisions , close with a discussion of key developments and issues , and provide source readings for readers who might want more information .

as a companion to the compendium , this report provides historical background on the roles that congress and the president play in managing the executive branch .

next , the report briefly discusses the extent to which management in the public and private sectors can or should be compared .

finally , the largest share of the report analyzes major themes that run through the general management laws and identifies potential management policy options .

can government be run like a private - sector company ? .

scholars and practitioners often see points of similarity and overlap between management of the public and private sectors , and frequently seek to take management - related "lessons learned" from one sector to the other .

they also conclude that key differences should be recognized and respected .

thus , management and public administration scholars have recommended caution , in general , before applying private - sector management principles to government agencies .

public administration scholar wallace sayre is widely cited for his aphorism: "public and private management are fundamentally alike in all unimportant respects" [emphasis added] .

one of the most significant differences is that public - sector agencies and private - sector companies operate under different sets of laws , which were established to regulate public - sector and private - sector behaviors for very different purposes .

for example , under the constitution and public law , government has coercive power: government can regulate some private activity and collect taxes .

to prevent arbitrary exercise of coercive power , the framers of the constitution established a system of checks and balances and separation of powers .

federal government agencies may only act under authority provided in public law , as formulated , executed , and adjudicated by congress , the president , and the courts , on behalf of the american public .

these laws authorize an agency's mission ( i.e. , its purpose for being ) and establish how the agency is required to operate .

in contrast , a private company operates under laws enacted to create and regulate a functioning market economy ( eg , antitrust and financial reporting laws ) .

furthermore , these laws generally do not prescribe what the company is to do , or how the company should operate .

under this framework of law , a company is , in principle , accountable primarily to its particular owners or shareholders , who bear financial risk .

scholars and commentators have cited many other differences between government agencies and private sector organizations .

for example , [t]o a much greater extent than is true of private bureaucracies , government agencies ( 1 ) cannot lawfully retain and devote to the private benefit of their members the earnings of the organization , ( 2 ) cannot allocate the factors of production in accordance with the preferences of the organization's administrators , and ( 3 ) must serve goals not of the organization's own choosing .

control over revenues , productive factors , and agency goals is all vested to an important degree in entities external to the organization — legislatures , courts , politicians , and interest groups .

given this , agency managers must attend to the demands of these external entities .

in addition , government frequently encounters comparative difficulty measuring — and coming to consensus on how to measure — the performance of agencies .

given the history of managing the executive branch and also the differences between management practices in the public and private sectors , the entries in the compendium of general management laws may raise public policy issues , both for the general management laws themselves and for specific agencies .

moreover , when considering the compendium as a whole — viewing the general management laws together — several major themes emerge .

each of these themes , in turn , may raise potential issues and "management policy" options for congress .

congress frequently faces the question "how much discretion should we leave for the executive branch ? .

for example , when examining or reexamining any of the general management laws , the question often becomes how much discretion the executive branch should be authorized to determine the contents , scope , or priorities of agency actions .

this question has been heavily debated for some time .

on one hand , giving discretion to the executive branch can provide agencies flexibility to tailor the implementation of laws to specific circumstances as the president or agencies perceive them .

in addition , some observers argue that this discretion allows agencies to be more responsive if circumstances later change .

for example , an agency might take less time to issue and implement regulations , or to exercise initiative to pursue a management action , than the time necessary for a law to be passed .

further , many argue that when agency responsibilities involve scientific standard - setting or other technical judgments , the executive is often in a better position to do so .

on the other hand , discretion can allow the president or an agency to make decisions or engage in operations that might not have support from congress , had the subject been considered explicitly during the legislative process .

the president's or an agency's views regarding the "right thing to do" might be at variance with those of congress and key stakeholders .

furthermore , some argue that if the president or an agency has different views and acts accordingly , congress might not have resources or time to notice the agency actions or to intervene in a timely way .

granting discretion to the executive branch can also put key decisions in the power of unelected agency officials , when some stakeholders might wish for more transparency and political accountability .

with regard to general management laws , congress faced this tension between flexibility and accountability in 2002 and 2003 , when considering whether to grant the departments of homeland security ( dhs ) and defense ( dod ) discretion to determine some of the contents of their human resources management ( hrm ) systems through regulation .

a similar situation arose in 1993 , when the clinton administration's national performance review ( npr ) recommended a number of ways to "cut red tape" in procurement policy , culminating in passage of the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( fasa ; 108 stat .

3243 ) .

the tension is perhaps most common in the regulatory arena .

in considering situations when congress weighs whether to give discretion to an agency , and if so , to what extent , scholars have noted four general options that can be used alone or in combination by congress to address delegation situations and help balance flexibility with accountability .

contract design: congress can set the conditions for a delegation of authority to better ensure that its intentions will be carried out by the executive branch , as well as reduce risk of adverse consequences .

for example , congress could establish goals , sanctions , probation periods , or sunsets ; require the use of pilot projects ; or establish "profit - sharing relationships" ( i.e. , establish incentives for agencies to behave in ways that benefit both the agency and the government as a whole — for example , an agency might be allowed to retain 50% of unspent funds after the end of a fiscal year , thereby providing an incentive against end - of - the - year "use it or lose it" spending behaviors ) .

screening and selection mechanisms: to avoid delegating authority to an agency in a way that could risk poor "on - the - job" performance with a given task , program , or management initiative , congress can try to look beforehand for signals or other information that indicate whether the executive branch agency and its officials will likely do the work effectively .

for example , congress could convene hearings to determine whether the agency rigorously analyzed a problem and its potential solutions or look for evidence that the agency has organizational capacity and management skill to do the job .

monitoring and reporting requirements: to increase accountability and transparency for a given activity or program , congress can require agencies to report their "actions taken," milestones they have reached , and any information the agencies have obtained during their activities .

the rationales might be to ( a ) monitor agency actions that are difficult to oversee and ( b ) make available information that is difficult for congress and outside stakeholders to access .

the advent of information technology and the web may enable such reporting to be close to real - time and more frequently updated .

however , some commentators argue that a proliferation of reporting requirements can be burdensome , and that reports to congress are not always used .

institutional checks: when authority is delegated to an agency , congress can ensure that one or more additional agencies or entities can veto or block the delegate agency's actions .

for example , congress could involve another agency in the promulgation of regulations ( such as the dhs personnel system , which requires that regulations be prescribed jointly by dhs and the office of personnel management ( opm ) ) ; require notice and comment before an agency is allowed to proceed with certain actions ; provide sequential funding within an appropriation that is contingent upon certain conditions at each of several milestones ; require the agency or additional agencies to conduct an independent study examining an issue ; or use "committee vetoes" to prevent certain actions absent congressional committee approval .

should the management laws under which agencies operate be standardized , with rules that apply uniformly to many different agencies ? .

or should some ( or all ) agencies have agency - specific laws that are customized to each agency's internal and external environments ? .

or should there be a mix of these two approaches ? .

this tension between standardization and customization arises frequently for congress with respect to management of the executive branch — where varying degrees of standardization and customization can exist in general management laws , authorizing statutes , or appropriations .

many experts believe standardization can help improve executive branch transparency and accountability .

for example , the administrative procedure act , enacted in 1946 , was intended to establish basic requirements across the executive branch for agency rulemaking .

with regard to another functional area , financial management , congress introduced standardization in stages .

the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 ( 104 stat .

2838 ) , as amended by the government management reform act of 1994 ( gmra ; 108 stat .

3410 ) , required 24 major executive departments and agencies to prepare audited financial statements covering all their accounts .

this requirement contributed to many agencies receiving unqualified ( "clean" ) opinions in fy2002 .

in 2002 , congress further amended the cfo act to extend similar requirements to most other executive agencies with passage of the accountability of tax dollars act ( 116 stat .

2049 ) .

standardization can also promote accountability by putting the burden of proof on agencies to demonstrate when ( or if ) exceptions are necessary .

by contrast , customization can also be beneficial for effective management .

customization can help align an agency's management with both the agency's internal environment ( eg , culture , size , decision - making processes ) and its external environment ( eg , economic conditions , events , stakeholder and client needs ) .

congress regularly uses authorizing statutes , appropriations , and accompanying reports to require or direct specific actions ( or prohibitions ) for agencies , but congress also builds customization into general management laws .

for example , until recently , small agencies were not generally required to prepare audited financial statements .

similarly , when the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( 116 stat .

2135 , at 2145 ) , the new agency's cfo position was not subject to cfo act requirements .

another example comes from the hrm area .

in the last two years , dhs and the dod were granted authority to customize several significant ( but not all ) aspects of their hrm systems apart from the standardized laws of title 5 of the united states code .

a third possibility is to mix the two approaches .

the examples described above move toward standardization or customization , but also represent varying degrees of a mixed approach — balancing standardization with customization .

under a mixed approach , general management laws are applied to all or most agencies , but congress can , nevertheless , make exceptions to a smaller or larger extent , or allow some flexibility within the laws' broader requirements .

an example of the mixed approach is the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ; 107 stat .

285 ) , which required most executive branch agencies , in consultation with congress , to develop strategic plans .

however , gpra provided only a general framework within which agencies were required to comply , without prescribing detailed format or contents .

each of these approaches — standardization , customization , and mixed — can bring advantages and disadvantages .

alongside the advantages described above , standardization can sometimes be too rigid , stifling initiative or creativity .

in turn , customization can sometimes reduce transparency or accountability if agencies do not report in real - time on the nature and status of their customized efforts , or if oversight and analytical resources are too scarce or distracted to support monitoring how well a customized law is working .

customization can also lead to different entities working at cross - purposes .

for example , if agencies gain pay flexibility but then were to begin a bidding war for certain types of employees , the budgets of each agency would come under pressure .

mixed approaches can suffer from all these problems .

therefore , in addition to the three general approaches outlined above , congress also has policy options for avoiding these problems .

generally , the decision to use one of these approaches is highly contextual , depending on the nature of "the problem" to be solved ( as defined differently by numerous stakeholders ) , the problem's history , the actors who are involved , and a host of other factors .

nonetheless , one overall option is to examine regularly whether increased customization or standardization in a general management law is necessary for improved transparency , accountability , efficiency , or effectiveness .

analytical support in weighing the evidence can come from a variety of sources including agency management , agency program evaluations , inspectors general , the general accounting office ( gao ) , and outside scholars and evaluators .

another overall option in situations where customization is widespread ( eg , human resources related laws ) is to reduce the analytical burden for congress and other stakeholders in their efforts to monitor the situation , by requiring the executive branch to maintain comprehensive , real - time descriptions of the current state of affairs and maintain updated comparisons showing any differences across agencies .

as illustrated by the compendium's introductory profile of title 5 human resources laws ( section vii.a. , "title 5: the federal civil service" ) , increasing fragmentation of civil service laws may increase the difficulty of monitoring , comparing , and analyzing government - wide developments in general areas like pay , performance management , and adverse actions and appeals , for different agency and bureau workforces .

establishment of reporting requirements in areas of widespread customization may help reduce the analytical burden for congress and the public in examining the extent of customization and standardization , or exploring possible changes if customization does not produce the desired outcomes .

such reporting might be possible on a real - time basis on the web .

central management agencies like the office of management and budget ( omb ) , opm , the general services administration ( gsa ) , the financial management service ( fms ) of the treasury department , or others could be candidates to report how certain management policies are customized and , thereby , facilitate government - wide analysis and comparisons .

however , such requirements would likely entail costs for the reporting agencies .

it is no coincidence that the general management laws can be grouped into "functions," such as financial management , human resources , and procurement .

most organizations in the private and public sectors manage themselves , to a greater or lesser extent , with a functional orientation or functional structures .

for example , even when an organization is structured according to "customers" — or , as in the case of the internal revenue service , "taxpayer groups" — functional perspectives still reside within business or administrative units , shared services , and headquarters .

a functional perspective is considered important , because it can boost efficiency through specialization and ensure centralized control over strategic decisions .

however , if the functional orientation becomes too inward - looking , organization - wide coordination and decision - making can become problematic , and an organization's internal development of general managers can be inhibited .

thus , borrowing a term from the management literature , various functions can tend to operate as functional silos , in isolation from each other .

this can create problems for the organization as a whole , or cause opportunities to be missed .

management literature acknowledges the continuing importance of functional perspectives , but only within the broader context of an integrated , general management perspective .

an excerpt from one business school's website explains this perspective: all of us come to a problem , opportunity , or decision with a set of assumptions that are based on our backgrounds and experiences .

for example , someone who has spent years in a finance function concentrating on , say , managing cash flow , raising capital , and budgeting will have a particular point of view that is different from someone whose experience has been in marketing focusing on product development , segmenting customers , product positioning , etc .

two implications arise from this: ( 1 ) each person will have only a "limited" view of the whole story , and may be driven to define a problem as a "finance" or "marketing" problem because this is what their experience tells them , and ( 2 ) each person may be correct , but only partially... .

the solution is to develop a general management perspective .

the general management perspective seeks to integrate multiple functional perspectives to arrive at a complete understanding of a problem or opportunity .

a recent example of this general management perspective could include efforts to use information technology to help improve human resources management and financial management .

an integrated general management perspective — especially when combined with the perspective of focusing on individual functions — provides a potential toolbox of options for addressing executive branch management problems .

many of the general management laws focus on improving the executive branch's management fundamentals in individual functional areas ( eg , cleaning up agency finances , improving the process for purchasing technology , or addressing human capital problems ) .

but the general management laws need not be viewed in isolation from one another .

instead , from an integrated general management perspective , these laws may be utilized to provide mutual support to each other , as illustrated below .

integration could occur through a variety of means , including changes to the general management laws , agency authorizing statutes , and agency appropriations , and through other legislative and oversight tools .

for example , to integrate functional perspectives , congress might consider: leveraging the e - government act of 2002 ( information technology perspective ) to achieve more timely and frequent financial and performance reporting ( financial management and program evaluation perspectives ) , by requiring agencies and the omb to utilize the federal enterprise architecture for reporting results closer to real - time , in order to better support congressional oversight , reauthorization , and appropriations ( budgeting perspective ) activities ; directing appropriations ( budget perspective ) to ensure specific funding is used to hire , train , and retain contract oversight specialists ( human resources perspective ) in order to help certain agencies better manage and monitor their contracts ( acquisition perspective ) ; restructuring the budget accounts of some agencies ( budget perspective ) to better align resources with individual programs ( organizational perspective ) and program evaluations of these programs ( performance measurement and program evaluation perspective ) to align resources with results ; or leveraging the chief human capital officers act of 2002 by requiring opm to develop metrics for assessing whether agencies dedicate sufficient staff resources ( human resources perspective ) for contract management and oversight ( acquisition and program evaluation perspectives ) .

other options for leveraging functional perspectives into an integrated general management perspective could include various combinations of the general management laws in the compendium .

these options could be constructed to apply generally to many agencies or only to specific agencies , and could include any of the following functional perspectives: information policy , regulation , strategic planning , performance measurement , program evaluation , auditing , investigation , financial management , budgeting , accounting , organization , acquisition management , real property management , intergovernmental relations , human resources management , and ethics .

the history of federal government management reform is replete with efforts , in both the legislative and executive branches , to improve agencies' performance , organization , and management practices .

many of these efforts focused on improving agency management practices and closely involved the general management laws .

however , in spite of these efforts , many observers have concluded that progress has been difficult to achieve .

congress has faced major challenges in its oversight of executive branch management , especially regarding: how to ensure executive branch agencies improve their management practices by complying with general management laws , and how ( or whether ) to measure agencies' progress in improving their management practices .

management literature generally holds that measurement can be a strong motivator to action , and frequently quotes industrial psychologist mason haire: "what gets measured gets done .

if you are looking for quick ways to change how an organization behaves , change the measurement system. .

while measurement systems can motivate action and commitment , they can also create perverse incentives in some situations .

to use an analogy from the private sector , if a company's employees are rewarded only on the basis of short - term profits and not long - term research and development that would keep the company profitable in the future , employees may show less interest in longer - term performance .

an illustration more applicable to the federal government may be the achievement of unqualified financial audits , where "[c]lean audits of an agency's financial systems ... look like a sign of good fiscal management , but not if they are achieved only by applying brute force at audit time in manually working around deficient systems. .

some history helps put the current situation into context .

in the last 25 years , agency inspectors general ( igs ) and the gao have reported persistent , major management problems in executive branch agencies in such areas as financial management , acquisition , information technology investment , human resources , and the strategic planning and implementation of major programs — areas the general management laws were intended to address .

beginning in 1992 and most recently in 2003 , gao released six continually updated series of reports detailing "high risk" areas and major management challenges that affect specific agencies or cut across many agencies government - wide .

gao stated in these reports that progress was made by the executive branch and congress to address these issues , but gao also reported that much work remained to be done .

both before and during this period , several management reform initiatives were pursued by presidential administrations , including , for example , president ronald reagan's reform '88 initiative ; president george h. w. bush's efforts to address financial management , information resources management , and high risk areas ; and president william clinton's npr .

members of congress and their committee staff frequently expressed concern during this period about the state of government management .

for example , in 1992 , the majority staff of the house committee on government operations took a retrospective look and recommended actions to improve central management , procurement , information resources management , financial management , and human resources management .

nearly a decade later , in june 2001 , senator fred thompson , chairman of the senate governmental affairs committee , released a report concluding that "urgent federal government management problems" faced the administration of president george w. bush , including problems regarding the federal workforce , financial management , information technology , and overlap and duplication .

more recently , in august 2001 , president george w. bush's office of management and budget released the president's management agenda ( pma ) , which includes five government - wide initiatives: ( 1 ) strategic management of human capital , ( 2 ) competitive sourcing , ( 3 ) improved financial performance , ( 4 ) expanded electronic government , and ( 5 ) budget and performance integration .

under the pma , omb leads quarterly evaluations of agencies to gauge "status" and "progress" for each of the initiatives with red , yellow , or green "stoplight scores," based on published "standards for success. .

these standards cite what the bush administration believes should be done to solve the most difficult management problems facing the federal government .

according to the pma website , an agency is green on status for an initiative if the agency meets all the standards for success , yellow if it has achieved some , but not all , of the criteria , and red if it has any one of a number of serious flaws .

for progress , omb assesses each agency "on a case by case basis against the deliverables and time lines established for the five initiatives," as agreed to by the agency and omb .

a green on progress means that "[i]mplementation is proceeding according to plans agreed upon with the agencies. .

in turn , yellow indicates "[s]ome slippage or other issues requiring adjustment by the agency in order to achieve the initiative objectives on a timely basis. .

finally , red shows the "[i]nitiative [is] in serious jeopardy" and is "[u]nlikely to realize objectives absent significant management intervention. .

the five government - wide pma initiatives fall , to some extent , into functional categories .

however , omb stated that the five initiatives would be mutually reinforcing , where efforts in one initiative would be consistent with and benefit from efforts in the other initiatives .

notably , the five initiatives also use a number of the general management laws to achieve the pma's goals .

for example , the competitive sourcing initiative utilizes ( "leverages" ) the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act of 1998 ; the improved financial performance initiative leverages the antideficiency act , federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 , chief financial officers act of 1990 , government management reform act of 1994 , and federal financial management improvement act ( ffmia ) of 1996 ; the expanded electronic government initiative leverages the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , e - government act of 2002 , and federal information security management act ( fisma ) of 2002 ; and the strategic management of human capital and budget and performance integration initiatives leverage the government performance and results act of 1993 .

in the news media , some agencies have stated that the pma is being taken seriously , and that significant progress is being made .

however , several additional observations about pma measurement practices can be made that relate to congressional oversight of the general management laws .

first , pma evaluation practices have not been fully transparent outside of the executive branch .

while the standards for success are publicly available , detailed rationales and worksheets behind these grades are not .

by contrast , omb assessments of agency programs using the program assessment rating tool ( part ) — a component of the budget and performance integration initiative — were considerably more transparent .

omb published overall part assessments in the president's fy2004 budget proposal , but , to increase transparency , omb also released detailed worksheets showing the evidence omb used to complete assessments of agency programs .

the stoplight scoring criteria may make subjectivity difficult to avoid for some of the initiatives .

for example , the current standards for success state that to achieve green on status for the expanded electronic government initiative , an agency must have "acceptable" information technology business cases .

similarly , for the strategic management of human capital initiative , an agency must have succession strategies that "result in a leadership talent pool. .

furthermore , independent evaluation organizations ( eg , gao or agency igs ) have not conducted verification and validation assessments of the overall agency stoplight scores .

finally , the scope of the pma does not necessarily cover all aspects of general management laws that outside observers might consider important .

for example , the pma's acquisition - related initiative , competitive sourcing , does not include either contract oversight or small business contracting concerns among its criteria , when gao and outside observers have expressed long - standing concerns over these management issues .

real property management issues are also not explicitly addressed by the pma .

the pma is not the first time that the executive branch , nongovernmental organizations , or congress have endeavored to influence agencies to improve their management practices by measuring compliance with general management laws .

for decades , agency igs and gao have focused in detail on specific problems within agencies .

as described earlier , omb and gao also created "high risk" programs to focus on particularly troublesome management areas .

moreover , some ( especially in congress ) have undertaken measurement efforts to make assessments about specific general management laws and functional areas that are comparable across agencies .

for example , for several years , representative stephen horn issued letter grades to evaluate agency financial management and information security performance .

representative adam putnam has continued that practice for information security in evaluating agency compliance with the federal information security management act of 2002 .

senator fred thompson similarly issued grades for agency annual performance reports required by the government performance and results act .

in light of this overview , one could again ask the questions that began this section .

what options are available to congress to ensure that executive branch agencies improve their management practices by complying with the general management laws ? .

furthermore , if it is possible to measure agency progress ( through cross - agency comparisons that are easily understood and that motivate action by political appointees and senior career officials ) , how could congress measure or monitor the extent to which agencies improve their management practices ? .

some options include: maintain current efforts: congress could continue to use existing oversight tools and institutions , including gao and agency igs , to monitor progress selectively in the executive branch's efforts to improve agency management practices , while preserving executive branch discretion in the scope and intensity of these efforts .

this option would arguably involve little additional cost and would not constrain the activities of the executive branch more than currently .

critics argue , however , that congress does not use these tools effectively or frequently enough .

independent verification and validation: congress could ask ( or direct ) gao and agency igs to more systematically verify and validate pma stoplight scores and the corresponding agency actions - taken , either government - wide or in selected agencies .

this option could increase congressional confidence in executive branch measurements and determinations , but would likely involve costs , and could be perceived negatively by the executive branch as micromanagement or redundant with current activities .

transparency: congress could secure from omb or the agencies access to final pma stoplight worksheets , similar to what omb currently provides for the part .

this option could further open executive branch management problems to public discussion , but the executive branch might argue that such a requirement would increase costs and managerial workloads .

independent measurement: congress could direct gao or igs to develop measures , and systematically measure agency progress in improving management practices in a way that could be compared easily across agencies — along functional lines or for specific general management laws .

this option could make management improvement measurement more systematic so that it would survive the transition from one presidential administration to another , but could increase workload and costs for gao , igs , and agencies .

measurement through gpra: congress could amend gpra to require agencies formally and explicitly to address major management problems and high - risk areas in their strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports .

this might be done , for example , by requiring the establishment of milestones and timelines for improvement , both in addressing the problems and in building agency management capacity ( eg , identifying whether , where , and to what extent management capacity needs to be improved for an agency to make adequate progress ) .

congress could also require the president to address these issues in the government - wide performance plan required by 31 u.s.c .

§ 1105 ( a ) ( 28 ) .

depending on congressional preference , this option could make management improvement measurement statutory or more systematic , or both , but could increase workload for agency and omb personnel .

a fifth and final major theme that runs through the compendium of general management laws is the expanding set of ( a ) agency "chief officer" positions ( and their equivalents ) and ( b ) interagency councils of these officers .

chief officers , who are sometimes also called "cxos," include a variety of statutory , senior positions in executive branch agencies that usually head a function ( human resources , financial management , procurement , etc. ) .

within each agency .

these chief officers now include , in chronological order of establishment by statute: inspectors general ( established 1978 ) ; chief financial officers ( established 1990 ) ; chief information officers ( cios ; established 1996 ) ; chief human capital officers ( chcos ; established 2002 ) ; and chief acquisition officers ( caos ; established 2003 ) .

on the next page , table 1 summarizes key categories of information about each of these officers , including ( 1 ) the function ( s ) with which the officer position is typically associated , ( 2 ) the law that established the officer position , ( 3 ) a united states code citation for key statutory provisions , ( 4 ) a summary of the statutory rules governing appointments for the position , and ( 5 ) the person to whom the chief officer reports .

as the table shows , some of these officers are presidentially appointed with senate confirmation ( pas ) ; some are presidentially appointed , and others may be appointed or designated by an agency head .

many positions can be filled with political or career employees , but caos and certain cfos are required to be political ( non - career ) .

with regard to reporting relationships , three chief officers are required to report directly to the agency head ( igs , cfos , and cios ) , but reporting relationships for the other two officers ( chcos and caos ) are left to an agency head's discretion .

a detailed history behind the creation of each of these chief officer positions is not within the scope of this report .

however , a common theme behind the creation of the positions was many observers' belief that senior managers within executive branch agencies paid insufficient attention to functional perspectives ( eg , financial management ) in managing their agencies .

therefore , many observers believed that each functional perspective needed to be "elevated" to a higher , more salient position within agencies' management ranks , as a means to ensure that long - standing problems would be addressed .

in turn , each group of chief officers was placed into an interagency council by statute or executive order .

table 2 , on the next page , summarizes key information about each of these councils , including ( 1 ) the statutory membership of the council , ( 2 ) the chair of the council , ( 3 ) a united states code or code of federal regulations citation for key statutory provisions or the executive order , ( 4 ) the law or executive order that established the council , and ( 5 ) notes and the council's website location , if available .

as the table shows , four of the councils were established by law , but two ( the ig councils ) exist through executive order .

memberships of the councils vary considerably , but the office of management and budget's deputy director for management is the chair or vice chair for each , thus enabling the executive office of the president to direct , or at least influence , each council's activities .

president ronald reagan established the first of these councils , the president's council on integrity and efficiency ( pcie ) , with a membership of agency igs through executive order in 1981 .

the executive order required the pcie to develop "plans for coordinated government - wide activities which attack fraud and waste in government programs and operations. .

according to one observer , "the pcie would quickly become a continuing source of leverage as the igs fought for resources within their agencies" and sought to become more independent .

furthermore , the pcie "was roundly endorsed as a tool for both enhancing the lobbying power of the igs and building the informal networks that support organizational learning. .

the pcie established standing committees in areas where igs found benefits from sharing ideas or cooperating on projects .

according to an ig who was asked what he thought about the pcie in a hearing before the house committee on government operations in 1988: i think [the pcie has] been an extraordinarily positive innovation.... [i]t has permitted us to work together , and to come together .

we develop our own work plan... .

it has provided a mechanism i think is unique in government.... we're all very close colleagues and friends because of the fact that we can work together ; we have a mechanism to go across the government on fraud , waste , and abuse issues .

i can't overstate the value of that particular vehicle of the council .

however , the pcie was also criticized in the late 1980s as "'a trade union ... for the igs , ... an opportunity to get together and figure out ways to grow.' .

in 1992 , president george h. w. bush issued a new executive order establishing two ig councils , the pcie for presidentially appointed igs and an executive council on integrity and efficiency ( ecie ) for igs typically appointed by agency heads .

the chief financial officers ( cfo ) council , the second council to be created , was established by the chief financial officers act of 1990 .

the cfo act also established the deputy director for management ( ddm ) position in the president's office of management and budget .

the cfo act gave the ddm chairperson status over the cfo council , and , moreover , charged the ddm with overall responsibility for establishing "general management policies" in the executive branch for the "functions" listed at 31 u.s.c .

§ 503 ( a ) and ( b ) , which include financial management , procurement policy , information and statistical policy , property management , human resources management , and program evaluation , among other functions .

according to one commentator , the cfo council was initially "passive. .

however , in 1994 , council members recommended several actions to energize the council: broaden membership to include career deputy cfo positions that were also established by the cfo act , elect several council officers , and set the agenda themselves rather than receive it from omb .

omb supported the recommendations .

similar to the pcie , the cfo council also formed a variety of committees for areas of special emphasis .

finally , the commentator concluded: [omb's deputy director for management] has only modest resources at his disposal , but he has tremendous leveraging opportunities through the many interagency councils he chairs .

that approach is clearly working with the cfo council , which can serve as a model for other interagency efforts .

after the cfo council was established and running , congress established three additional chief officer councils: the cio council in 2002 , the chco council in 2002 , and the cao council in 2003 .

the establishment of igs , cfos , and cios has met with little criticism .

on the contrary , long - time observers generally concur that these three chief officer positions ( the ones with longest track records ) are important and have been successful to greater or lesser extents in bringing focus to their functional perspectives .

nonetheless , as the entries in the compendium mention , observers have identified some difficult challenges that face these officers in their efforts to improve agency management practices , including high turnover among cios , potential difficulties with change management as agency financial reporting requirements continue to accelerate , and performance measurement .

more broadly , some commentators have argued that , even after these positions were created , agencies continued to suffer from persistent management difficulties when budget pressures and lack of attention from political appointees , who typically serve for short times , diminished agencies' management and analytical capabilities .

further , many management scholars remain wary of functional silos that sometimes see the world from a narrow , functional perspective at the expense of a more integrated general management perspective .

with regard to interagency councils of chief officers , observers have noted periods of more and less effectiveness , as discussed above .

however , observers generally agree that interagency councils have been beneficial .

public management scholars , in recent years , have paid increasing attention to the potential benefits of interagency collaboration .

as noted in the compendium's entry for chapter 14 of title 5 , united states code , congress received testimony from a former omb official that councils can play an important role in improving federal management: i think the [chief human capital officers] council is important because more and more academic research on how organizations work well suggests that setting up networks of people to share knowledge , share best practices , share information , share approaches , is a very important thing in getting organizations to perform well .

so i think having a situation where the different human capital officers in the different parts of the federal government meet regularly , get to know each other , talk to each other , can be very valuable .

within the management literature and in many companies and government agencies , considerable attention has been devoted to this "knowledge management" perspective .

however , management theorists are ever - wary of the possible allure of seeing agencies' problems primarily from the perspective of only one function , which they argue should be avoided if that functional perspective becomes too narrow and runs the risk of doing violence to other functions or the agency overall .

in addition , some scholars and practitioners have emphasized instead that the problem of improving federal executive branch management requires a re - thinking of the structure and role of omb , within the executive office of the president .

congress might consider further questions with regard to chief officers and interagency councils .

for example , should executive branch agencies have additional chief officers , or their equivalents ? .

are there too many chief officers already ? .

should anything be done to preserve institutional memory and continuity for chief officer positions occupied by political appointees , whose tenures are short ? .

should all the councils be statutory ? .

how should the councils be funded ? .

should the councils be made more accountable to congress through direct appropriations and periodic reporting ? .

these options are briefly outlined below. .

chief security officers " : gao has found that agencies may not have adequate plans for ensuring that government services are available in emergencies .

in the wake of the war against terrorism and increasing consciousness of physical and information security risks for federal agencies , should congress establish agency "chief security officers" ( csos ) ? .

according to a 2002 news report , over half of 72 surveyed corporate chief executive officers had designated csos .

according to the website for cso magazine , many csos deal solely with information technology and report to the company cio .

however , cso magazine 's website also asserts that , "[i]n a growing number of large enterprises , the cso handles not only it but all security responsibilities , such as access to buildings and grounds. .

while establishing statutory cso positions could encourage battles for turf between cios and csos with regard to information security , creating these positions might bring a more integrated approach to security and risk management at federal agencies .

many federal agencies , however , may already have established systems and processes to address these issues .

in addition , in view of the increasing number of chief officers , some observers might argue that requiring an additional type of chief officer for agencies would be excessive. .

chief program evaluation officers " : many observers have asserted that agencies frequently do not adequately evaluate the performance or results of their programs — or integrate evaluation efforts across agency boundaries — possibly due to lack of capacity , management attention and commitment , or resources .

congress could establish "chief program evaluation officer" ( cpeo ) positions in major agencies to bring more attention to this function if it deemed these to be serious problems .

because programs can differ considerably and the field of program evaluation is highly interdisciplinary , evaluation methods differ from program to program .

proponents might argue that establishing these chief officer positions could create a "seat at the table" for program evaluation in agency senior management teams , helping agency efforts to improve performance or coordinate programs with overlapping missions .

however , critics might argue that establishing another type of chief officer would be excessive .

chief officer appointments: if congress decided to alter existing chief officer positions or establish new ones , it would have a number of options regarding appointments .

table 1 shows how the existing chief officers are allowed ( or required ) to be appointed positions under current law .

some positions are required to be political ; others are required to be career , and some are left to an agency head's discretion .

in recent years , there has been discussion of these differences .

in congressional testimony regarding the proposed chco positions , witnesses came down on both sides of the question .

political appointees can get a "seat at the table" with the agency's leadership to ensure that a given functional perspective is considered .

however , career officials can provide continuity and institutional memory from one presidential administration to another , while by contrast , political appointees turn over frequently .

similar arguments were voiced with regard to caos .

in enacting the cfo act , congress reflected both of these perspectives ; the cfos were political , while the deputies were career .

chief officer reporting relationships: as illustrated by table 1 , cfo and cios , by law , must report directly to the agency head , while igs must report to the agency head or to the official "next in rank. .

however , the reporting relationships of chcos and caos are left to each agency head's discretion .

are these reporting relationships still appropriate , in view of agency management needs and progress ( or lack thereof ) in addressing major management problems ? .

one argument made for a direct reporting relationship to the agency head is to ensure that the chief officer ( who brings his or her functional perspective ) gets personal access to the agency's senior leadership .

however , agency heads frequently have a large number of people reporting directly to them ( i.e. , "direct reports" ) .

an additional direct report could cause too large a span of control for the heads of some executive branch agencies .

the ig councils: with regard to interagency councils , a potentially important option for congress to consider is whether to make the ig councils statutory by codifying the mandates of the pcie and ecie into law , versus the status quo of allowing the two councils to continue as organizations established by executive order .

as summarized in testimony before the committee on government reform's subcommittee on government efficiency and financial management , the vice chair of the pcie stated his belief that codification would require "modest appropriations," but would facilitate better training , strengthen the relationship between igs and congress , and improve coordination between ig offices in the federal government .

others might argue , however , that this change would reduce flexibility or control by the president .

more on this subject is discussed in the compendium's profile of the inspector general act of 1978 .

funding for interagency councils: congress has several alternatives for providing funding for the different interagency councils .

the ig councils ( the pcie and ecie ) self - finance their common activities via memorandum of understanding ( mou ) instead of by appropriations or interagency transfers .

for example , the ig offices sign an mou under which one ig office ( eg , the office for the department of health and human services ) pays for the councils' website from that office's regular appropriation , while another two ig offices pay for the publication of the councils' annual report to the president .

by contrast , operations for the chco council are funded out of the budget of the office of personnel management .

the other three councils ( cfo , cio , and procurement executives council , which may become the newly codified cao ) have been funded in recent years through interagency transfer or reimbursement under title vi general provisions in the transportation - treasury appropriations bill ( eg , $17 million for fy2004 ; see p.l .

108-199 , division f , title vi , section 627 ; 118 stat .

356 ) .

these transfers are under the control of omb , but are administered after transfer by the general services administration .

congress could maintain the status quo for these councils .

it also might consider making a separate appropriation for each council singly , or all combined .

this option could take away some discretion from the president .

on the other hand , it could also give congress additional control and leverage over the activities of these councils , and potentially improve institutional memory and continuity from one presidential administration to the next .

council reporting and strategic planning: congress could consider altering the reporting and strategic planning requirements for the interagency councils .

currently , some councils have no reporting or strategic planning requirements .

others require only a report to the president or to congress , but no articulation of strategic plans .

for example , the executive order governing the ig councils requires that the pcie and ecie report on their activities only to the president .

the cfo , cio , and cao councils currently do not have statutory requirements in their author izing legislation to report to congress or to prepare strategic plans .

they could be required to submit plans or reports to the president or to congress .

congress could also consider requiring omb to submit an overall plan for how it will lead the interagency chief officer councils , as part of the government - wide performance plan required by gpra .

given the extent to which omb and the president sometimes use the interagency councils , planning and reporting requirements might help increase transparency and make the interagency councils more accountable to congress .

planning and reporting requirements might take discretion away from the president , however , and could increase costs for the councils or omb .

