new zealand's population of just over four million has many shared values with the united states that stem from common historical roots as settler societies of the british empire .

new zealand , also known as aotearoa or "the land of the long white cloud," was first settled by the polynesian - maori people around the tenth century .

dutch navigator abel tasman discovered the western coast of new zealand in 1642 but it was english captain james cook who , over three expeditions in 1769 , 1773 , and 1777 , circumnavigated and mapped the islands .

the 1840 treaty of waitangi , between the british crown and maori chiefs , serves as the basis for defining relations between the maori and pakeha ( european ) communities .

subsequent conflict over land led to the new zealand wars between colonial forces and maori fighters .

new zealanders are over 80% urban and the nation has a 99% literacy rate .

new zealand has a land area of 103,733 square miles , which is about the size of colorado .

it is 28% forested , 50% in pasture , and 9% under cultivation .

new zealand's principal exports are agriculturally based .

new zealand was a part of the british empire until 1907 when it shifted from colonial to dominion status .

new zealand's demographic makeup defines it as an increasingly pacific nation that is still largely european in national origin though with an increasing asian population as well .

new zealand's pacific identity stems from both its indigenous maori population and other more recent pacific island immigrants from polynesia and melanesia .

maori represent 14.9% of the population while pacific islanders comprise 7.2% .

together these largely polynesian people account for 22.1% of the population .

new zealanders of european and asian origin account for 76.8% and 9.7% of the population respectively .

auckland , new zealand's largest city , is also the world's largest polynesian city .

new zealand has sought to become an influential voice in the international climate change debate .

former prime minister helen clark sought to push new zealand to become a carbon - neutral nation and set an example for the world on climate change .

clark used the prime minister's statement to parliament on march 13 , 2007 , to declare her government's intention to make new zealand the world's first truly carbon - neutral country , adding that "the pride we take in our quest for sustainability and carbon neutrality will define our nation. .

clark stated that "traditional patterns of development and fast growing populations have put an intolerable strain on the planet .

the future economic costs of doing nothing are dire. .

clark pointed to renewable energy as a key component along with the importance of forestry to climate change mitigation as key to lowering new zealand's carbon footprint .

renewable energy sources , such as hydroelectric and wind power , account for between 60% and 70% of total electricity output .

new zealand has undertaken a commitment to have 90% of its energy drawn from renewable sources by 2025 .

the new zealand government has been keen to brand new zealand as a "green producer" as it has already encountered difficulty with food exports over the "food miles" issue in great britain .

new zealand has made its case that though energy is expended in transporting new zealand food to distant markets , its meat and dairy is free - range and grass fed , and hence relatively carbon - emissions friendly when compared with concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafo ) , which feed energy intensive grain , that are more common in the united states and europe .

two studies from lincoln university in christchurch have found that there is greater energy efficiency in new zealand for the production of lamb , apples , and dairy products when compared with british products .

these studies took into account transportation costs from new zealand to the united kingdom as well as other aspects of production .

new zealand's approach to climate change is under review .

the climate change response act of 2002 requires a review of new zealand's emissions trading scheme ( ets ) by the end of 2011 .

climate change minister nick smith announced the independent review in december 2010 .

the panel is to make recommendations to government on how the ets should evolve beyond 2012 .

uncertainty over the outcome of international efforts to address climate change may influence this process .

new zealand ratified the kyoto protocol on climate change in 2002 .

new zealand seeks "an environmentally effective and economically efficient long - term global agreement to meet the objective of the un framework convention on climate change. .

new zealand also seeks "appropriate and effective mitigation action by all developed countries and by major emitting and advanced developing countries. .

new zealand is a trade - dependant nation .

as such , it is a strong advocate of free trade .

new zealand's principal exports are dairy products , meat , timber , fish , fruit , wool , and manufactured products .

new zealand has approximately 33 million sheep , 4 million cattle , and 4.2 million people .

new zealand has been pursuing free trade agreements with india and south korea as well as seeking to promote the trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement with singapore , chile , brunei , australia , peru , malaysia , the united states , and vietnam .

new zealand supports liberalized trade through the wto process but is also seeking alternative comprehensive free trade relationships in both bilateral and regional fora .

new zealand views the tpp as a way to add momentum to trade liberalization among asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) member countries .

new zealand has signed free trade agreements ( fta ) with australia , singapore , brunei , chile , thailand , the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , and china .

new zealand trade with asean has increased by approximately 17% per year in recent years .

 ( for more details on the tpp see crs report r40502 , the trans - pacific partnership agreement , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the 2011 earthquake which struck christchurch and caused widespread damage to the city centre has had a strong negative affect on the economy .

new zealand will as a result likely continue to focus government expenditure on reconstruction and aid efforts in the near term .

it has been estimated that the economy would have grown by an additional 1.5% without the economic disruption caused by the quake .

the economy is forecast to grow by 2.8% in the year ahead from april 2011 .

the new zealand dollar is forecast to fall from nz$1.39:u.s.$1 in 2010 to nz$1.51:us$1 in 2015 .

the total cost of the two earthquakes in 2010 and 2011 is estimated at nz$15 billion or 8% of gnp .

real gdp growth in the fourth quarter of 2010 was very weak or non - existent .

new zealand's government is seeking ways to boost economic growth and increase its competitiveness with australia , with which it is closely linked through the closer economic relations ( cer ) agreement .

in october 2010 , personal and corporate taxes were cut , with corporate taxes now 2% below rates in australia .

throughout its history new zealand has been an active participant in support of its allies and has fought alongside the united kingdom and the united states in most of their major conflicts .

new zealand contributed troops in support of the british in the boer war , world war i , world war ii , the malayan emergency 1947-1960 , the korean war , and the indonesian - malaysia confrontation 1962-1966 .

new zealand sent combat troops in support of the u.s. in vietnam and has a provincial reconstruction team in bamiyan province afghanistan .

new zealand also sent support troops to iraq .

new zealand defense forces have also participated in numerous united nations peace operations , many of them far from new zealand shores .

new zealand supports a rules - based international order with safe and secure trade routes .

the contribution of military forces to afghanistan has been new zealand's most visible contribution to international security undertaken in tandem with the united states in recent years .

that said , there have been other significant developments in bilateral security cooperation .

it was notable that prime minister john key was the only leader present at president obama's nuclear summit from a state that did not possess nuclear weapons , nuclear power , or nuclear materials .

other recent notable developments in the bilateral relations include joint surveillance between the u.s. coast guard and new zealand to curb illegal fishing in the south pacific and reports that prime minister key will visit the white house in the summer of 2011 .

u.s. director of national intelligence jim clapper met with prime minister john key in new zealand in march 2011 .

the new zealand naval ship hmnzs canterbury participated in joint naval exercises with the uss cleveland in april 2011 .

it was also announced that new zealand will participate in the large - scale rimpac naval exercise in 2012 which includes naval forces from australia , japan , chile , peru , canada , malaysia , singapore , and thailand .

new zealand has not participated in such naval exercises with the united states since the mid 1980s .

the december 2010 memoranda of understanding on emergency management collaboration and the arrangement for cooperation on nonproliferation assistance signed in april 2009 also demonstrate recent diplomatic cooperation .

u.s. relations with new zealand became increasingly close in 2007 .

u.s .

ambassador william mccormick in 2007 described the bilateral relationship with new zealand as an "already strong relationship" that has "stepped up a gear to become even stronger. .

in her remarks with then - prime minister helen clark during a visit to new zealand in july 2008 , then - secretary of state condoleezza rice described new zealand as a "friend and an ally" and pointed out that the relationship had "moved beyond a whole host of problems. .

she added that the relationship was now structured for cooperation to "meet the post september 11 th challenges" and stated that new zealand is one of the "strongest and most active members" in its participation in the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) .

at that time she also pointed to new zealand's contribution in promoting adherence to international atomic energy association ( iaea ) and the united nations security council , the south pacific , counterterrorism cooperation , maritime security , disaster relief , and support in afghanistan .

new zealand's participation in psi has also led to increased participation in military exercises with the united states .

in congressional testimony in march 2008 , admiral timothy keating , commander u.s. pacific command , pointed to new zealand's participation in psi activities , including a planned psi exercise to be hosted by new zealand in september 2008 , and stated that "... we support new zealand defense force participation in approved multilateral events that advance our mutual security interests. .

the south pacific has been described as new zealand's "near abroad" and is an area of particular interest to new zealand .

new zealand government priorities for the pacific include developing enhanced governance and political stability , developing renewable energy , and better monitoring of fisheries resources .

new zealand also shares pacific island states' concerns over climate change and related issues .

new zealand's pacific identity as well as its historical relationship with the south pacific leads it to play a constructive role in the region .

new zealand works closely with pacific island states on a bilateral and multilateral basis through the pacific islands forum , which is based in fiji .

the forum has supported the south pacific nuclear free weapons zone , regional security , and efforts to promote sustainable use of fisheries resources .

an estimated $2 billion worth of fish is taken from the waters of the 14 pacific island forum countries with an additional $400 million worth of fish thought to be taken illegally each year .

new zealand works with regional states to help them monitor their fisheries resources .

new zealand has traditionally had particularly close ties with the united kingdom and australia and is a member of the commonwealth and the five power defence arrangements ( fpda ) .

 ( see below. ) .

it has also had a close association with singapore and malaysia through the fpda of 1971 .

in recent years , new zealand has sought to expand its traditionally close relationships by reaching out to develop closer ties , particularly through expanded trade , with asian states .

