over the last two years , the european union ( eu ) has been considering lifting its armsembargo on the people's republic of china ( prc ) , imposed after the june 1989 tiananmen squarecrackdown .

 ( 1 ) manycountries imposed sanctions on china , after deng xiaoping and other prc rulers ordered themilitary , the people's liberation army ( pla ) , to violently suppress peaceful demonstrators inbeijing on june 4 , 1989 .

 ( although the killing of demonstrators took place beyond the tiananmensquare in the capital of beijing , the crackdown is commonly called the tiananmen crackdown inreference to the square that was the focal point of the nation - wide pro - democracy movement. ) .

the bush administration opposes an end to the eu's arms embargo on china , seeing it asa relaxation in the eu's human rights and arms export policies toward china , and out of step withu.s .

sanctions on arms sales to china that have remained since 1989 .

overall , there are two sets ofquestions for congress in examining u.s. policy toward this question .

what are the implicationsfor u.s. political and security interests concerning europe and china ? .

if u.s. interests are adverselyaffected , what are some options for congress to discourage the eu from lifting its arms embargo onchina and , if it is lifted , to protect u.s. national security interests ? .

the purpose of this crs reportis to discuss u.s. concerns and implications for u.s. interests , as the eu considers the future of thearms embargo , as well as options for u.s. policy .

given strenuous u.s. objections , there are concerns that a decision made by the eu to expandengagement with china by lifting the arms embargo would negatively impact the trans - atlanticalliance ( if there is a division in u.s. and european approaches toward china ) and defensecooperation ( if the united states responds by restricting technology transfers to europe or defenseprocurement from europe ) .

at the same time , the current disagreement presents an opportunity forcloser coordination of u.s. - european policies , including controls over military - related exports andstrategy towards china .

the united states has important interests in maintaining strong allianceswith common approaches toward a rising china .

like europe , washington increasingly has engaged beijing on the economic , political , andmilitary fronts .

a fundamental issue , then , has been how engagement is pursued and whether itcontributes to a more responsible china in domestic and international affairs or aggravatesdevelopments in china with adverse implications .

for decades , u.s. - prc relations have expandedwith trade and cooperation on international issues .

there remain western concerns , however , aboutrestrictions on human rights and democracy in china , and about the impact of china's weaponsproliferation practices and military buildup on peace and stability in asia and other regions aroundthe world .

because some european companies have transferred defense - related systems to china underthe arms embargo that is not legally binding , the united states has called for the eu to maintain theembargo and strengthen export controls .

there are fears that any acceleration of china's militarymodernization with european defense technology would result in instability in the taiwan strait,which could involve u.s. military intervention .

this concern stems from one dilemma for u.s.policy: adherence to the "one china" policy since the nixon administration started secret talks withthe prc in 1971 while maintaining diplomatic relations with the republic of china ( commonlycalled taiwan ) until 1979 and unofficial relations since then .

taiwan remains the major u.s. - prc issue that could bring the countries into conflict .

the1979 taiwan relations act ( tra ) , p.l .

96-8 , governs u.s. policy toward taiwan , including offeringarms to assist its self - defense .

the tra did not commit the president and congress to determineany decision to intervene in the event of threats to taiwan , other than to consider any non - peacefulefforts to determine taiwan's future "of grave concern to the united states. .

nonetheless , amongthe stipulations of u.s. policy , the tra declared that it is u.s. policy "to maintain the capacity ofthe united states to resist any resort to force or other forms of coercion that would jeopardize thesecurity , or the social or economic system , of the people on taiwan. .

 ( 2 ) thus , in addition to issuesabout arms sales to taiwan and the extent of any u.s. commitment to help defend taiwan , onequestion is whether the u.s. forces have the capability to deter or defeat the pla , not only in theevent of a use of force but also coercion against taiwan .

maintenance of cross - strait stability hasrequired a careful balance of ties with both the prc and taiwan .

there have been periodicallyheightened tensions between the prc and taiwan since the taiwan strait crisis of 1995-1996,sensitive assertions of a separate national identity in taiwan since 1999 , and president bush'sarticulation of stronger u.s. support for taiwan's self - defense in 2001 , later qualified by criticismof taiwan's president in 2003 for perceived attempts to change the cross - strait status quo .

congress exercises oversight of the effectiveness of the bush administration's diplomacytoward europe .

since 2004 , u.s. officials have pressured eu member states not to lift the armsembargo .

congress has supported this stance .

congress also has expressed concerns about policy toward china , including promotion ofhuman rights .

moreover , congress has expressed increasing concerns about the pla'smodernization , particularly following the military exercises and missile launches targeted againsttaiwan in 1995-1996 .

because many eu member states have narrowly interpreted the armsembargo as banning only lethal weapons , some eu countries have sold defense - related technologyto china .

there is concern that without the arms embargo , eu countries might sell additionaldual - use technology and / or weapons systems to china .

the pla could then employ europeantechnology and weapons against u.s. forces and friends , in the event of a conflict with china .

moreover , there is concern about the potential for eu companies involved in u.s. - european defensecooperation to transfer u.s. defense technology to china , undermining u.s. export controls andsanctions on arms sales to china .

in may 2004 , the house passed its version of the national defense authorization act forfy2005 ( h.r .

4200 ) , reported out of the house armed services committee , whichincluded a provision to impose procurement sanctions against any foreign person that transferscertain military items to china .

 ( also see section on legislation below. ) .

in early 2005 , senator richard lugar warned that "the technology the u.s. shares witheuropean allies could be in jeopardy if allies were sharing that through these commercial sales withthe chinese. .

 ( 3 ) senatorjoseph biden said that lifting the embargo is "a non - starter with congress. .

 ( 4 ) in the house , representativehenry hyde wrote that "the choice for europe could not be clearer: it is between policies thatpromote the development of democracy in china or those that support china's military buildup andthreaten u.s. security interests. .

 ( 5 ) at a hearing of the senate foreign relations committee on march 16 , 2005 , senator lugarcautioned that if european military - related transfers to china rises markedly , "we should reassesssales to europe of our most critical military technology. .

referring to china's adoption two daysearlier of its "anti - secession law" threatening the use of force against taiwan and raising cross - straittensions , senator lugar counseled that "this is no time to be taking steps that might either help chinaachieve a decisive military advantage over taiwan or send the wrong political signal. .

likewise,senator biden urged the europeans to maintain the embargo as well as strengthen the code ofconduct on arms sales , particularly given the timing when the bush administration "has reached outto try to begin to mend our frayed relationships with our european allies...." ( 6 ) convening a joint hearing in april 2005 , representatives duncan hunter , ike skelton , henryhyde , and tom lantos , the chairs and ranking members of the house armed services andinternational relations committees expressed their opposition to an end to the eu's armsembargo .

 ( 7 ) .

on the eve of the eu - china summit in december 2004 , china's foreign ministry assertedthat the eu's arms embargo should be ended , because it represented "political discrimination" againstchina .

china argued that its demand on the eu to lift the arms embargo had nothing to do withbuying "massive weapons from the eu," since china has "neither the capacity nor the intention todo so. .

 ( 42 ) nonetheless , if the eu lifts its arms embargo on china , there are u.s. concerns that this stepcould: increase china's leverage if there are more competingbidders increase china's acquisitions of arms and militarytechnology improve china's domestic defense industries strengthen china's ability to threaten or use force against taiwan , u.s. allies,or u.s. forces increase china's weapons proliferation to unstable areas ( in the mideast , asia,and africa ) increase china's rising influence regionally as well asglobally .

one of china's major objectives has been faster military modernization , particularly inbuilding up offensive capabilities for use against taiwan and possible intervening u.s. forces andallies .

in 1995 and 1996 , the pla conducted provocative military exercises and launches ofshort - range ballistic missiles into waters near taiwan .

to underscore serious u.s. concerns aboutchina's willingness to use or threaten force , president clinton deployed two aircraft carrier battlegroups near taiwan in march 1996 .

the united states is especially concerned that plamodernization has accelerated after the 1995-1996 taiwan strait crisis .

the pentagon's report tocongress warned in may 2004 that "after close to 20 years of spectacular economic growth in china,beijing's diplomatic successes , and steady improvement in the pla's military capabilities , thecross - strait balance of power is steadily shifting in china's favor. .

 ( 43 ) on february 16 , 2005 , thedirector of central intelligence ( dci ) porter goss testified that beijing's military modernization andmilitary buildup are tilting the balance of power in the taiwan strait and that improved placapabilities threaten u.s. forces in the region .

 ( 44 ) in particular , the pla has engaged in a missile buildup,increasing its offensive , mobile short - range ballistic missiles , according to the pentagon .

in 2005,the pla was estimated to have deployed 650-730 such missiles targeted at taiwan , with thesemissiles increasing at about 100 per year .

 ( 45 ) the united states also has been concerned that the pla couldattack u.s. forces based in okinawa .

both political and economic considerations have been driving eu proclivities toward liftingthe arms embargo on china .

however , eu policymakers argue that the current eu arms embargoon china is largely symbolic and weak .

its end , they assert , will pave the way for a strengthened euarms export control regime - - including a revised and enhanced eu code of conduct on armsexports - - that will be more effective in controlling arms sales not only to china , but also globally .

as noted previously , the united states opposes an end to the eu's arms embargo on chinaand continues to urge the eu to maintain its embargo and strengthen export controls .

in the eventthat the eu opts to overturn the embargo , eu officials insist that it will not lead to more arms salesto china .

they point out that at the eu's december 2004 summit , the eu pledged that any eventualeu decision to end the arms embargo on china should not result in "an increase of arms exportsfrom eu member states to china , neither in quantitative nor qualitative terms. .

this pledge has beendubbed the "standstill clause. .

in addition , the eu announced plans to adopt a revised code ofconduct and a new "toolbox" - - i.e. , measures that will pertain to arms exports for countries , likechina , that are emerging from an eu arms embargo .

both the revised code and the "toolbox" seekto improve consultation , transparency , and accountability among member states .

the unitedkingdom and some smaller member states with human rights concerns about china have been keydrivers behind these efforts aimed at strengthening the code .

they claim that the eu arms embargoon china will not be lifted until there is agreement on a more robust code and on the "toolbox. .

 ( 85 ) the strengthened code and the "toolbox" have reportedly been finalized at the technicallevel , but await political approval from eu leaders .

 ( 86 ) publicly available details of the contents of both documents,however , are currently sketchy .

press reports and discussions with european officials suggest thatprovisions in the revised code will seek to tighten requirements for technology transfers and theexport of dual - use goods , and to clarify the code's annual reporting requirements for member states .

the "toolbox" is expected to call on member states to inform one another of defense export licensesgranted as well as those denied to post - embargo countries ( the current code only requiresnotification of denials ) .

to establish a baseline to judge whether some member states are violatingthe eu's "standstill clause" on china , the "toolbox" will also require eu member states to exchangeinformation on all licenses approved and denied for the last five and three years respectively .

many observers , however , doubt the credibility of the eu's "standstill clause" given whatthey view as strong european commercial interests in increasing arms sales to china .

they questionhow compliance with the "standstill clause" or even a strengthened code of conduct will bemeasured or enforced .

they also remain skeptical that eu member states possess the political willto significantly improve the code or to increase information - sharing among themselves about theirarms exports .

some member states have been resistant to sharing detailed information about licensesgranted , arguing that company confidentiality must be respected .

furthermore , it is unclear how longthe "toolbox" will apply .

some member states reportedly want its provisions requiringinformation - sharing on new licenses granted to be applicable for only a few years - - perhaps three - - while other members have advocated that the "toolbox" should remain in place for a decade atleast .

 ( 87 ) eu officials hope that their efforts to strengthen their arms export control regime will addressu.s .

concerns about lifting the arms embargo on china .

additional options the eu might considerto ameliorate u.s. concerns include: seek explicit commitments from china on human rights .

the eu claims it hasbeen pressing china to ratify the u.n.'s 1976 international covenant on civil and political rightsand for the release of chinese political prisoners .

press reports suggest that the eu may ask chinafor a "significant gesture" on human rights as a condition for lifting the embargo .

 ( 88 ) seek commitments from china on nonproliferation of weapons of massdestruction and an agreement from china that it will refrain from re - exporting conventional armsand weapons systems obtained from eu member states .

establish a "no sell" list with the united states that would set out specificweapons and advanced technologies that neither side would export to china .

this might be donein the context of establishing a regular u.s. - eu technical consultative mechanism to discuss militaryand dual - use technology exports to china .

european officials maintain that such a dialogue wouldhave to be a two - way exchange of information .

 ( 89 ) ensure that equipment would not be sold directly or indirectly to china'sinternal security forces , including the ministry of public security and the paramilitary people'sarmed police ( pap ) , that could be used for repression of dissent and for crackdowns on muslimpopulations ( in the northwestern xinjiang region ) or tibetans .

deepen involvement in the dispute across the taiwan strait to promote apeaceful resolution .

in january 2004 , german foreign minister joschka fischer acknowledged toreporters that germany "sees a need for further discussion [with china] on human rights and ontaiwan. .

 ( 90 ) in his testimony to congress on april 14 , 2005 , under secretary of state nicholas burns reportedthat the administration would soon begin a "strategic dialogue" with the eu on the arms embargoon china and other asian security issues .

however , he stressed that the talks would not be anegotiation over terms for lifting the embargo .

itar waivers .

on june 22 , 2004 , the senateapproved an amendment ( s.amdt .

3429 ) to the national defense authorization act forfy2005 ( s. 2400 ) that would have waived section 38 ( j ) of the arms export controlact for the u.k. ( and australia ) .

section 38 ( j ) requires that for a foreign country to become exemptfrom u.s. defense export licensing requirements it must have first concluded a "binding bilateralagreement" with the united states which obligates the foreign country to have or to establish adomestic defense export control regime consistent with the detailed guidelines set out in sections38 ( j ) ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of the arms export control act .

in order to permit an export licensing exemptionfor the u.k. , given the differences of its national export control system from that of the unitedstates , congress must waive section 38 ( j ) .

on october 9 , 2004 , the house and senate approved aconference report on a bill that removed the senate provision waiving section 38 ( j ) , replacing it witha new provision ( section 1225 of h.r .

4200 ) which requires expedited processing ofdefense export licenses for the u.k. ( and australia ) , but does not exempt them from review .

h.r.4200 was signed into law ( p.l .

108-375 ) on october 28 , 2004 .

resolutions urging the eu to keep the embargo .

on february 2 , 2005 , the house passed h.res .

57 to urge the eu to maintain its armsembargo on china .

on march 17 , 2005 , the senate passed s.res .

91 , urging the euto maintain its arms embargo on china .

defense procurement sanctions .

in may 2004,the house passed its version of the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act forfy2005 ( h.r .

4200 ) , which included a provision to impose procurement sanctionsagainst any foreign person that transfers certain military items to china .

the senate's bill did nothave similar language , and the section was dropped in conference .

on may 25 , 2005 , the house passed h.r .

1815 , the national defenseauthorization act for fy2006 ( h.r .

1815 ) with a provision ( section 1212 ) that , among other things,would forbid the secretary of defense from procuring "by contract or otherwise , any goods orservices" from "any foreign person" the secretary determines has "exported , transferred or otherwiseprovided to governmental or nongovernmental entities of the people's republic of china any itemor class of items on the united states munitions list. .

foreign persons determined by the secretaryof defense to have engaged in any of the forbidden transactions with the prc would not bepermitted to engage in procurement transactions with the defense department for five years .

duringconference , the house receded on its language .

the bill became p.l .

109-163 on january 6 , 2006 .

east asia security act .

on june 29 , 2005,representative henry hyde , chairman of the house international relations committee , introducedh.r .

3100 , the east asia security act of 2005 , to deter arms transfers by foreign countries to theprc .

among the measures , the bill sought to require presidential reports on european or otherforeign countries that export to china military or dual - use items on the wassenaar munitions listand those that have defense cooperative projects with the united states .

the bill also sought to addlicensing requirements and to give the president discretionary authority to impose sanctions ( denialof security assistance , u.s. weapons research , etc. ) .

to countries reported to have engaged in defenseexports to china .

during an extended floor vote on july 14 , 2005 , representative donald manzulloled opposition to the bill , so that an original count of 342 favorable votes changed to the final voteof 215-203 ( less than two - thirds support ) to defeat the bill .

 ( 107 ) then , on july 19 , 2005 , representative hyde introduced language for the east asia securityact to amend h.r .

2601 , the foreign relations authorization act for fys 2006 and 2007 .

thehouse agreed by voice vote to the amendment , after representative hyde lamented that the failureof h.r .

3100 to pass was "the wrong outcome for u.s. national security" and obtained the supportof representative manzullo , since changes were made to clarify that the legislation would apply tointernational transfers of weapons and related technology , and not to civilian , commercial trade .

manzullo said that the amendment "makes sure that the chinese army does not receive sensitiveinformation from our allies and , at the same time , it does not hinder the export of our valuablemanufacturing. .

 ( 108 ) the house passed h.r .

2601 on july 20 , 2005 , and it was placed on the senate's calendar two dayslater .

the following tables present information from unclassified reports on non - russianmilitary - related ( including dual - use ) transfers to china from european countries , israel , and othersecondary sources of supplies .

table 1 reports on non - russian systems that have been transferredor are under contracts .

table 2 reports on non - russian systems that have been reported asnegotiated ( not those in which china has shown interest ) , but contracts or transfers are not as evidentas those in table 1 .

the information should not be considered exhaustive , since commercialcontracts for defense - related trade are closely guarded .

crs makes no claims as to whether suchreported transfers violated any policies or contributed to the pla's capabilities to threaten securityinterests of the united states or other countries .

table 1 .

china's acquisitions under reported contracts formilitary - related systems from europe ( excluding russia ) , israel , and others since the1990s table 2 .

china's reported negotiations for military - relatedsystems from non - russian sources since the 1990s sources ( to supplement the citations above ) : these tables were compiled by shirley kan,specialist in national security policy .

department of defense ( dod ) , "report to congress on prc military power," july 2003 and may2004 .

fisher , richard , "zhuhai airshow , november 3-8 , 2002," center for security policy , 2002 .

fisher , richard , "known and projected prc weapons acquisitions," table in a report for theu.s. - china economic and security review commission , january 2004 .

goldstein , lyle and william murray , "china emerges as a maritime power," jane's intelligencereview , october 1 , 2004 .

office of naval intelligence ( oni ) , "worldwide challenges to naval strike warfare," 199 .

