after the collapse of the soviet union , the world's security landscape is said to have undergone a transformation from the seeming stability of the bi - polar balance of power to a system in whichnot only any nation , but sub - national groups as well , may be able to acquire weapons of massdestruction ( wmd ) .

strategies based on containment and deterrence , it is argued , are insufficientto guarantee security in the twenty - first century threat environment ; terrorists and "rogue" nationsare not amenable to being deterred or contained .

 ( 1 ) the need to prevent the proliferation of chemical,biological , and nuclear weapons was highlighted in the national security strategy of the unitedstates of america issued in september , 2002 .

 ( 2 ) according to the bush administration , in order tostrengthen nonproliferation efforts to prevent rogue states and terrorists from acquiring weapons ofmass destruction , [w]e will enhance diplomacy , arms control , multilateral export controls , and threat reduction assistance that impede states and terrorists seeking wmd , andwhen necessary , interdict enabling technologies and materials .

 ( 3 ) toward that end , president bush issued his national strategy to combat weapons of massdestruction in december , 2002 .

the administration's plan combines efforts aimed atcounterproliferation , ( 4 ) nonproliferation , and wmdconsequence management .

its purported intentis to eliminate or "roll back" wmd from certain states and terrorist groups who possess suchweapons or are close to acquiring them , including potentially the use of force and aggressivemethods of interdiction of wmd - related goods , technologies , and expertise .

 ( 5 ) the use of interdictionas a counterproliferation measure appears to be part of a strategy that foresees the u.s. taking"anticipatory action to defend ourselves" against terrorists and rogue states , "even if uncertaintyremains as to the time and place of the enemy's attack," ( 6 ) and "to detect and destroy an adversary'swmd assets before these weapons are used. .

 ( 7 ) a high - profile incident involving the interception of scud missiles and rocket fuel on board a ship traveling from north korea in december , 2002 , however , illustrated possible legal impedimentsto the strategy .

acting on intelligence from the united states , a spanish frigate stopped and boardedthe so san , an unmarked north korean commercial vessel , and discovered the missiles .

however,after confirming that the missiles were purchased by yemen , the united states allowed the vesselto proceed on its voyage .

the bush administration concluded that there was no legal basis to arrestthe vessel or seize its cargo , because north korea had not violated any law .

 ( 8 ) in may 2003 , president bush announced a new facet of the wmd strategy , to be known as the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) .

 ( 9 ) the psi isan effort to reach agreements among nations toallow searches of ships and aircraft carrying suspected weapons - related cargo .

 ( 10 ) undersecretary ofstate for arms control and international security john bolton told congress: the initiative reflects the need for a more dynamic active approach to the global proliferation problem .

it envisions partnerships of states working inconcert , employing their national capabilities to develop a broad range of legal , diplomatic,economic , military and other tools to interdict threatening shipments of wmd and missile relatedequipment and technologies .

to jump - start this initiative , we have begun working with several close allies and friends to expand our ability to stop and seize suspected wmd transfers.over time we will extend this partnership as broadly as possible to keep the world's most destructiveweapons away from our shores and out of the hands of our enemies .

we aim ultimately , not just toprevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction , but also to eliminate or roll back such weaponsfrom rogue states and terrorist groups that already possess them or are close to doing so .

 ( 11 ) rather than seeking to change existing treaties or negotiate new ones , the psi appears to relyon international agreements that will enhance cooperation in interdiction efforts , including sharinginformation and conducting exercises using military or civilian assets to develop the participatingnations' ability to conduct air , ground , and maritime interception .

 ( 12 ) however , recognizing thatcooperation may not always be forthcoming from all nations whose assistance is requested , theadministration has intimated that it will act unilaterally , if necessary .

 ( 13 ) these developments raise questions related to the international law of jurisdiction .

international law outlines the bounds of the permissible conduct for purposes of self - defense and law enforcementactivities abroad , insofar as some activities could be viewed as unwarranted or unlawful interferencewith the rights of other nations to conduct international commerce and maintain sovereignty overtheir territory .

this report provides an overview of the international law of the sea as it relates to thepermissible range of methods for interdicting wmd - related contraband on the sea and in the air , andalso of selected pertinent international regimes and agreements .

after a short outline of the currentlegal regime for the international control of wmd , the report outlines the basic concepts ofjurisdiction in international law .

next , the report describes concepts central to the law of the sea,the rights and limitations .

the report then turns to the international legal framework limiting theconduct of nations as it applies during times of war and peace , as well as during what might be called"quasi war," as is often deemed to be the case today .

from a u.s. perspective , the problem of controlling the proliferation of wmd is particularlythorny because , unlike the control of illicit drugs , it does not suffice to keep the materials fromentering the united states or to prevent their manufacture and dispersal on u.s. territory .

completesecurity from the dangers of a wmd attack would require that dangerous materials be kept out ofthe hands of any potential enemy .

moreover , some materials that can be used in the production ofwmd also have peaceful uses , and may even be necessary for the operation of wholly legitimateindustries .

interference in the trade of "dual use" materials could impair the ability of other statesto carry out legitimate trade , possibly leading to international discord .

finally , under internationallaw , sovereign states have the right in general to possess weapons for their self - defense .

only theuse of such weapons is constricted by customary international law .

 ( 14 ) while many states have agreedto limit their production and possession of some types of wmd and conventional weapons , they mayhave conditioned their consent on the conduct of other states , and may be able to revoke theirconsent in accordance with any such conditional agreement .

while secret development of wmdon the part of a state that has agreed not to engage in such conduct would constitute a breach of atreaty obligation , it is not necessarily a crime or an act of aggression under international law merelyto possess such weapons .

the concept of 'sovereignty' lies at the heart of the international political system .

nation - states ( states ) are considered the "international persons" who are both the creators and the subjects ofinternational law .

each state is independent and has supreme authority over its territory and generalauthority over its citizens .

the term "jurisdiction" refers to the authority of the state to affect thelegal interests of individuals and entities .

jurisdiction may describe a state's authority to make itslaw applicable to certain actors , events , or things ( jurisdiction to prescribe ) ; a state's authority tosubject certain persons or things to the processes of its courts ( jurisdiction to adjudicate ) ; or a state'sauthority to compel compliance with its laws and punish transgressors ( jurisdiction to enforce ) .

 ( 39 ) the ability to interdict , seize , and destroy weapons would most significantly implicate thejurisdiction to prescribe and enforce under international law .

a state's ability legally to assert jurisdiction over persons and things within its reach depends on principles of international law designed to prioritize the rights of various states which may havea claim to jurisdiction over a matter .

historically , the most commonly asserted basis for jurisdictionis the "territoriality principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to the place where the offenseis committed ) .

 ( 40 ) other bases of jurisdictioninclude the "nationality principle" ( determiningjurisdiction by reference to the nationality of the person accused of committing the offense ) ; the"protective principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to the national interest injured by theoffense ) ; and the "passive personality principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to thenationality of the victim ) .

where more than one state can assert jurisdiction over a particular matter,the state with the greatest interest should prevail .

 ( 41 ) the right of each state to control its sovereign territory and the territorial waters extending no more than 12 miles from its coast ( "territorial sea" ) is well - recognized in international law .

statesmay also exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction under certain circumstances , but in general , this doesnot include the right to enforce laws on the territory of another state without that state's permission .

for certain crimes , there may exist "universal jurisdiction" permitting a state to try crimes thatoccurred outside of its territory that did not involve any of its nationals , but the scope of universaljurisdiction is not well - settled , and may not include the authority to take enforcement action on theterritory of another state without its permission .

at any rate , the possession or delivery of wmd orrelated materials is not generally recognized as a crime subject to universal jurisdiction , like suchinternational crimes as piracy or slave trade .

under international law , the united states clearly has authority to regulate the possession or transfer of wmd materials within or across its borders and , subject to any right to innocentpassage , ( 42 ) within its territorial waters and airspace .

the united states can also place restrictions onthe conduct of u.s. citizens anywhere in the world ( 43 ) with regard to wmd under the principle ofnationality ; ( 44 ) however , that authority does notencompass a right to carry out law enforcementactivities in another state without its permission .

furthermore , if u.s. law enforcement or militaryforces encounter wmd trade outside the territory of the united states , even if the activity isunlawful under the laws of the state where it takes place or violates the international obligations ofany state , there is no automatic authority under international law for u.s. forces to take action tothwart it .

efforts to interdict wmd - related materials outside the territory of the united states would fall within the boundaries of customary international law , including the law of the sea , and any relevantmultilateral or bilateral agreements the united states has entered into .

specific instances determinedby the united nations security council to constitute aggression or a threat to international peace andsecurity may be dealt with through action under chapter vii of the u.n. charter .

 ( 45 ) specific threatsto the united states that amount to an armed attack or imminent threat of an armed attack may justifya belligerent response , such as the implementation of a blockade or the use of armed force in selfdefense .

such a response could draw reactions from other states and possibly escalate into afull - blown armed conflict .

thus , the permissibility of options available to combat the proliferation of wmd varies according to where the action takes place and whose laws are said to be broken .

while enforcementactivity by a sovereign power over its own territory has relatively few international implications,actions in the territory of another state would implicate the sovereignty of that state , and would besubject to that state's terms of agreement or willingness and capacity to resist .

enforcement actionin places where no state has sovereign authority , such as the high seas , may meet with relatively lightresistance from other states , but remains subject to international law .

the law of the sea divides authority among nations to conduct activity in or above the oceansand external waterways that both divide and connect nations .

the basic rules of international lawwith respect to jurisdiction over vessels on the high seas are set forth in the convention on the highseas ( 46 ) and the more recent united nations lawof the sea convention ( unclos ) .

 ( 47 ) the unitedstates is a party to the first convention and is a signatory , but not a party , to unclos .

 ( 48 ) however,even while objecting to certain parts of the latter convention when it was first concluded in 1982,the united states has acknowledged that its provisions concerning navigation and the uses of theoceans "generally confirm existing maritime law and practice and fairly balance the interests of allstates. .

 ( 49 ) both conventions affirm that the highseas are open to all states , that freedom ofnavigation is a basic freedom of the high seas , and that every state has "the right to sail ships underits flag on the high seas. .

 ( 50 ) the law of the seabalances the rights of maritime states to navigatefreely with the rights of coastal states to maintain security .

it also deals with some aspects of airtransportation , applying to aircraft some , but not all , of the rules that apply to maritime vessels .

the following sections address the rights and obligations of states and non - public vessels andaircraft , which vary depending not only on location and status but according to whether the situationis considered one of war or peace , or somewhere in between .

during peacetime , states generallyemploy law enforcement techniques , for example , to restrict trade or interdict unlawful materials .

international law also permits states to enforce certain international prohibitions on or above thehigh seas .

international law recognizes that states have the right to interdict vessels and aircraft in certainlimited circumstances ; however , that legal authority exists that would allow psi nations completely"to halt shipments of dangerous technologies to and from states and non - state actors of proliferationconcern - at sea , in the air , and on land" ( 181 ) appears doubtful under the current state of internationallaw .

the united states and its allies may consider whether to amend the treaties regarding the lawof the sea ( and air ) explicitly to include wmd and missile trade within the prohibitions that may beuniversally enforced .

other options include amending the proliferation treaties to enhancecompliance and , as the european union stressed in its statement of non - proliferation principles , toreduce the perception among states that wmd are necessary for their own security .

 ( 182 ) probably thefirmest legal basis for interdicting wmd materials would be provided by explicit authorization bythe u.n. security council .

psi participants are committed to the following interdiction principles to establish a morecoordinated and effective basis through which to impede and stop shipments of wmd , deliverysystems , and related materials flowing to and from states and non - state actors of proliferationconcern , consistent with national legal authorities and relevant international law and frameworks,including the un security council .

they call on all states concerned with this threat to internationalpeace and security to join in similarly committing to: undertake effective measures , either alone or in concert with other states , for interdicting thetransfer or transport of wmd , their delivery systems , and related materials to and from statesand non - state actors of proliferation concern .

"states or non - state actors of proliferationconcern" generally refers to those countries or entities that the psi participants involvedestablish should be subject to interdiction activities because they are engaged in proliferationthrough: ( 1 ) efforts to develop or acquire chemical , biological , or nuclear weapons andassociated delivery systems ; or ( 2 ) transfers ( either selling , receiving , or facilitating ) of wmd,their delivery systems , or related materials .

adopt streamlined procedures for rapid exchange of relevant information concerning suspectedproliferation activity , protecting the confidential character of classified information providedby other states as part of this initiative , dedicate appropriate resources and efforts to interdictionoperations and capabilities , and maximize coordination among participants in interdictionefforts .

review and work to strengthen their relevant national legal authorities where necessary toaccomplish these objectives , and work to strengthen when necessary relevant international lawand frameworks in appropriate ways to support these commitments .

take specific actions in support of interdiction efforts regarding cargoes of wmd , theirdelivery systems , or related materials , to the extent their national legal authorities permit andconsistent with their obligations under international law and frameworks , to include: not to transport or assist in the transport of any such cargoes to or from states or non - stateactors of proliferation concern , and not to allow any persons subject to their jurisdictionto do so .

at their own initiative , or at the request and good cause shown by another state , to takeaction to board and search any vessel flying their flag in their internal waters or territorialseas , or areas beyond the territorial seas of any other state , that is reasonably suspected oftransporting such cargoes to or from states or non - state actors of proliferation concern , andto seize such cargoes that are identified .

to seriously consider providing consent under the appropriate circumstances to theboarding and searching of its own flag vessels by other states , and to the seizure of suchwmd - related cargoes in such vessels that may be identified by such states .

to take appropriate actions to ( 1 ) stop and / or search in their internal waters , territorialseas , or contiguous zones ( when declared ) vessels that are reasonably suspected ofcarrying such cargoes to or from states or non - state actors of proliferation concern and toseize such cargoes that are identified ; and ( 2 ) to enforce conditions on vessels entering orleaving their ports , internal waters or territorial seas that are reasonably suspected ofcarrying such cargoes , such as requiring that such vessels be subject to boarding , search,and seizure of such cargoes prior to entry .

at their own initiative or upon the request and good cause shown by another state , to ( a ) require aircraft that are reasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes to or from states ornon - state actors of proliferation concern and that are transiting their airspace to land forinspection and seize any such cargoes that are identified ; and / or ( b ) deny aircraftreasonably suspected of carrying such cargoes transit rights through their airspace inadvance of such flights .

if their ports , airfields , or other facilities are used as transshipment points for shipment ofsuch cargoes to or from states or non - state actors of proliferation concern , to inspectvessels , aircraft , or other modes of transport reasonably suspected of carrying suchcargoes , and to seize such cargoes that are identified .

source: white house fact sheet , sep. 4 , 2003 , available at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / news / releases / 2003 / 09 / 20030904-11.html .

