india is a federal republic of more than one billion inhabitants .

the bulk of executive powerrests with the prime minister and his or her cabinet ( the indian president is a ceremonial chief of statewith limited executive powers ) .

most of india's prime ministers have come from the country'shindi - speaking northern regions and , until 2004 , all but one had been upper - caste hindus .

 ( 2 ) the 543-seat lok sabha ( people's house ) is the locus of national power , with directly - elected representatives from each ofthe country's 28 states and seven union territories .

a smaller upper house , the rajya sabha ( councilof states ) , may review , but not veto , most legislation , and has no power over the prime minister orthe cabinet .

national and state legislators are elected to five - year terms .

the previous nationalelection was held in october 1999 .

although india's political stage is crowded with numerousregional and caste - based parties , recent years have seen an increasingly dyadic battle between twomajor parties that vie for smaller allies in a system that now requires coalitional politics ( no partyhas won a national election outright since 1984 ) .

since 1998 , the bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) hadled a ruling national democratic alliance ( nda ) coalition of more than 20 parties working underthe leadership of prime minister atal bihari vajpayee .

the october 1999 lok sabha electionssolidified the bjp's standing .

the key opposition party during this time was the congressparty .

 ( 3 ) during april and may 2004 , india held a four - phase national election to seat a new loksabha .

the nda called elections six months early in an apparent effort to capitalize on perceivedmomentum from positive economic news and from three convincing state - level victories overcongress in december 2003 .

some 380 million indians cast ballots at nearly 700,000 pollingstations .

when results were announced on may 13 , nearly all observers and participants - - includingprime minister atal vajpayee - - were surprised by the upset defeat of the nda , and by asimultaneous resurgence of the congress party led by sonia gandhi , the italian - born widow offormer prime minister rajiv gandhi , which had forged strategic and unprecedented alliances withpowerful regional parties .

on may 18 , gandhi stunned her supporters by declining the position ofprime minister in a new united progressive alliance ( upa ) coalition government , insteadnominating her party lieutenant , oxford - educated economist manmohan singh , for the job .

asfinance minister from 1991-1996 , singh was the architect of major indian economic reform andliberalization efforts .

on may 22 , the widely - esteemed sikh became india's first - ever non - hinduprime minister .

poll results also were notable for the best - ever showing of a leftist alliance led by thecommunist party of india ( marxist ) , which won a total of 62 seats , nearly all of them from westbengal and kerala .

although this left front is not part of the new upa government , it is supportingthe upa from outside .

investor fears that a new coalition government including communists mightcurtail or halt india's economic reform and liberalization process apparently led to huge losses in thecountry's stock markets: bombay's benchmark sensex index lost 11% of its value on may 17 , thesecond - largest daily loss ever , and the value of india's largest companies reportedly declined by some$40 billion over seven days , with state - owned businesses slated for public sale taking the greatesthits .

market recovery began after congress party leaders offered assurances that the newgovernment would be "pro - growth , pro - savings , and pro - investment. .

 ( 4 ) numerous analysts weighed in on the meaning of the complex electoral results .

a longtradition of anti - incumbency was only partly apparent in 2004 , as many states re - elected sittingparliamentarians .

it also is notable that the bjp - led coalition received slightly more total votes thandid the congress - led alliance .

however , huge reversals for the incumbent nda - allied telugudesam party of the andhra pradesh state - - as well as for the bjp , which fell from 181 seats inparliament to only 138 - - were seen by many as evidence that india's rural poor were not persuadedby the nda's "india shining" campaign that sought to highlight the country's economic gains ( andhra pradesh's capital , hyderabad , has been touted as an information technologyboom - town ( 5 ) ) .

it may bethat voters found the nda insufficiently attentive to the core issues of " bijli , sadak , pani " ( power,roads , water ) and voiced a rejection of neo - liberal economic reforms that were seen to benefit india'smiddle - and upper - classes only .

 ( 6 ) other analysts saw in the results a rejection of the hindu nationalism associated with the bjp ( just days after a december 2002 state election victory in gujarat , the bjp's president declared thathis party would "duplicate the gujarat experience everywhere" as it represented a "mandate for the[hindutva] ideology" ( 7 ) ) .

sonia gandhi's foreign origin had become a key point of criticism for these groups and it is likelythat her decision to pass on the prime ministership was in part a result of her not wanting to becomea subject of controversy , as hindu nationalist groups had threatened to launch a nationwide protestcampaign if she took the prime ministership .

it also is widely held that gandhi's action was drivenby a perceived interest in establishing circumstances in which her son rahul , who ran for and wona parliamentary seat for the first time this year , can assume the family "dynasty" mantle later in thedecade .

 ( 8 ) .

prime minister singh has insisted that development will be a central priority of the upagovernment , with reforms aimed at reducing poverty and increasing employment .

he alsoemphasizes that privatization is not part of upa ideology and that major public sector concerns willnot be sold off .

the appointment of harvard - educated lawyer and economic reformer palaniappanchidambaram to head the finance ministry , and a upa common minimum program ( cmp ) emphasizing economic growth and increased investment , have been welcomed by most businessinterests , even if the pace of privatization and labor reform efforts may slower .

the upa's firstbudget , released on july 8 , generally was lauded by indian industrial groups as "progressive andforward - looking. .

 ( 19 ) the budget calls for a major increase in defense expenditures , up 27 percent over the previous year .

both prime minister singh and his new external affairs minister , career diplomat natwarsingh , have given indications that their initial foreign policy focus will be on india's immediateneighbors .

this may mean a deeper diplomatic engagement in the sri lankan conflict , along withmore energetic efforts to assist the nepali government in its struggle with communist rebels .

perhaps most significantly , the india - pakistan peace initiative begun in april 2003 suffered noapparent damage from the change of government in new delhi , with both sides insisting that theprocess will continue .

the upa has indicated that it will make the 1972 simla agreement betweenindia and pakistan the basis of its relationship with islamabad , even as it will abide by all subsequentaccords .

 ( 20 ) since thenew government was seated , india and pakistan have agreed to increase bilateral counternarcoticscooperation ; to establish a hotline to reduce the threat of accidental nuclear war ; to continue mutualnotifications of missile launches ; to return their respective embassies to full strength ; and tore - establish consulates in bombay and karachi .

new national security advisor j.n .

dixit has beenassigned to take the lead role in relations with china , replacing his predecessor , brajesh mishra , andthe world's two most populous countries have vowed to bolster defense and trade ties while movingforward on efforts to resolve outstanding territorial disputes .

 ( 21 ) india also agreed toincrease bilateral defense ties with japan through periodic ministerial - level interaction .

the new prime minister has vowed to repeal the controversial 2002 prevention of terrorismact that some have called a tool for discrimination against religious minorities and oppositionpolitical figures .

statements about the necessity of preventing a repeat of the communal violenceseen in gujarat in 2002 have encouraged those who hope that a secularist , left - leaning governmentwill do more to both oppose such divisiveness and bring to justice those who encourage it throughlawless means .

 ( 22 ) itremains unclear how the upa intends to address roiling separatist violence in several of india'snortheastern states .

on military issues , the upa states an intent to hasten india's modernizationefforts and to maintain a "credible nuclear weapons program" while pursuing confidence - buildingmeasures with its "nuclear neighbors. .

 ( 23 ) .

it is as yet unclear how , if at all , the congress - led government might differ from itspredecessor in terms of relations with the united states .

many of prime minister singh's toplieutenants were steeped in the non - alignment policies of the congress party during the cold war .

external affairs minister natwar singh and national security advisor j.n .

dixit have in the pastbeen highly critical of such issues as u.s. involvement in iraq , u.s. nonproliferation policy , and u.s.designation of pakistan as a "major non - nato ally. .

their criticisms often went far beyond similarconcerns raised by the outgoing bjp - led alliance .

 ( 24 ) the congress - led government continues to state that it has noplans to contribute indian troops for service in iraq , although u.s. officials are reportedly seekingto "overcome" indian reservations .

 ( 25 ) the possible influences of communist parties have added toconcerns that new delhi may become at least somewhat more critical of and less cooperative withthe united states on bilateral and global issues .

however , early statements from the upa , includingsections of its common minimum program , indicate that the congress - led government will seek"closer engagements and relations" with the united states , even as it will "oppose all attempts atunilateralism" in world affairs .

a june meeting of the u.s. - india defense policy group - - the firstbetween high - level u.s. officials and the upa government - - and a five - day india - united statesconference on space science and commerce in bangalore brought joint statements that cooperativebilateral relations will continue .

 ( 26 ) .

