on july 20 , 2012 , a 24-year - old male entered a theater in aurora , co , and perpetrated what has been described as one of the worst mass shootings in modern u.s. history .

james holmes allegedly shot to death 12 people and wounded another 58 people , seven of them critically .

he was armed with an m16 variant semiautomatic rifle equipped with a drum magazine , a 12-gauge pump shotgun , and at least one , possibly two .40-caliber handguns .

he reportedly bought these firearms legally from federally licensed gun dealers in colorado .

he also reportedly purchased over 6,000 rounds of ammunition through internet - based transactions .

sixteen days later , on august 5 , 2012 , a 40-year - old u.s. army veteran entered a sikh temple and committed a mass - casualty shooting in the oak creek suburb of milwaukee , wi .

in this attack , wade michael page allegedly shot to death six worshipers and critically wounded another three people .

one of the wounded victims was a police officer , whom page allegedly shot numerous times as the officer administered first aid to another victim .

then , page shot himself to death , after being wounded by a responding police officer .

page was armed with a 9mm semiautomatic pistol that he had acquired legally , when he resided in north carolina .

press accounts describe page as a neo - nazi , white supremacist , and it is widely thought that he mistook the sikh temple for a muslim mosque .

these and other mass - casualty shootings prompted some members of the 112 th congress to reconsider proposals to reinstate a 1994 ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and large capacity ammunition feeding devices , which expired in september 2004 .

there were similar calls to ban such feeding devices ( see h.r .

308 and s. 32 ) following the january 8 , 2011 , tucson , az , shooting , in which 6 people were killed and 14 wounded , including representative gabrielle giffords , who was grievously wounded .

similarly , the aurora , co , shootings led some members to call for greater regulation of interstate , internet - based ammunition transfers ( s. 3458 / h.r .

6241 ) .

since march 2011 , much of the gun control debate in the 112 th congress has swirled around allegations that the department of justice ( doj ) and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) mishandled a phoenix , az - based gun trafficking investigation known as "operation fast and furious. .

in december 2010 , two suspect firearms linked to that investigation were found at the murder scene of border patrol agent brian terry .

in january 2010 , atf whistleblowers contacted senator charles grassley with assertions that suspected gun traffickers had not been arrested in a timely fashion and , as a result , a large number of suspect firearms had not been interdicted and have reportedly passed into the hands of drug traffickers and other criminals .

the whistleblowers referred to this investigative tactic as "gun walking. .

according to one source , 665 of these firearms have been recovered by law enforcement at crime scenes on both sides of the border .

another 1,355 suspect firearms reportedly remain unaccounted for .

senator grassley , ranking minority member on the committee on the judiciary , and representative darrell issa , chairman of the committee on oversight and government reform , have issued four joint staff reports on operation fast and furious , and the house committee has held several related hearings .

representative elijah cummings , the committee's ranking minority member , has also issued two reports related to this controversial operation .

on november 1 , 2011 , a high - ranking doj official testified before the senate committee on the judiciary's crime and terrorism subcommittee that he had identified "gun walking" as a potentially risk laden investigative technique in april 2010 but failed to inform the attorney general about the potential risks .

on november 8 , 2011 , the senate committee on the judiciary held a doj oversight hearing , and attorney general eric holder fielded questions about operation fast and furious .

the attorney general conceded that a february 4 , 2011 , letter from doj to congressional investigators contained "inaccurate" information regarding the depth of knowledge that departmental officials had of atf's use of the "gun walking" tactic .

on december 8 , 2011 , the house committee held a hearing to explore , among other things , whether senior departmental officials knew more about operation fast and furious than what was previously indicated in a may 3 , 2011 , hearing before that committee .

on november 18 , 2011 , the president signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( h.r .

2112 ; p.l .

112-55 ) , following house and senate passage on the previous day .

this act provides atf with $1.152 billion for fy2012 .

in response to operation fast and furious , congress included in that act a provision ( §219 ) that reflects a senate - passed amendment sponsored by senator john cornyn to prevent the expenditure of any funding provided under it to be used by a federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of an operable firearm to a person known to be or suspected of being connected to a drug cartel without that firearm being continuously monitored or controlled .

the act , however , does not include an amendment that was sponsored by representative denny rehberg and adopted in house full committee markup that would have prevented atf from collecting multiple long gun sales reports from federally licensed gun dealers in southwest border states .

in addition , two atf funding provisos and one federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) funding proviso were made permanent with the inclusion of "futurity" language , as opposed to temporary , annual appropriations restrictions .

these provisos essentially prohibit the consolidation or centralization of firearm acquisition and disposition records .

in its fy2013 doj budget submission , the administration proposed dropping the cornyn language prohibiting "gun walking," arguing that the prohibition is unnecessary .

the administration also proposed stripping the futurity language out of the atf and fbi funding provisions noted above , which were made permanent in the fy2012 appropriations cycle .

in addition , the administration proposed stripping futurity language out of a long - standing but controversial provision known as the tiahrt amendment , which prohibits atf from releasing firearms trace data under a range of circumstances .

besides including futurity language , congress has altered the language of the tiahrt amendment several times in recent years to clarify under which circumstances and at what level of detail it is proper to release firearms trace data to law enforcement and other governmental officials , as well as to researchers , the media , and the general public .

other legislative developments in the 112 th congress include the following: on october 29 , 2012 , representative issa and senator grassley released part ii of their three - part , final joint staff report entitled fast and furious: the anatomy of a failed operation .

the second of three parts , part ii examines the interaction of senior doj officials in the criminal division and the office of the deputy attorney general with atf headquarters , the phoenix field division , and the arizona u.s. attorney's office .

on september 22 , 2012 , the senate voted to invoke cloture on the sportsmen's act of 2012 ( s. 3525 ) , clearing the way for the senate to consider this bill , possibly , when it reconvenes .

like the sportsmen's heritage act of 2102 ( h.r .

4089 ) , the senate bill includes provisions designed to promote access to federal lands for hunting and other sporting activities .

on september 20 , 2012 , the committee on oversight and government reform held a hearing on a report by the doj office of inspector general ( oig ) entitled a review of atf's operation fast and furious and related matters .

the oig testified to the report's findings that high - ranking , supervisory officials within atf headquarters and the phoenix field division , as well as the u.s. attorney's office for the district of arizona and main justice ( doj headquarters ) , were responsible for misguided strategies and tactics , errors in judgment , and management failures related to operation fast and furious .

on july 31 , 2012 , representative darrell issa , chairman of the committee on oversight and government reform , and senator charles grassley , ranking minority member of the committee on the judiciary , released a report entitled fast and furious: the anatomy of a failed operation .

the first of three , this report essentially chronicles how the atf phoenix division and the u.s. attorney's office for the arizona district ran a gun trafficking investigation from october 2009 through january 2010 , during which controversial "gun walking" tactics were employed that — in representative issa and senator grassley's estimation — seriously compromised public safety and contributed to violent crime and death on both sides of the international border .

on june 28 , 2012 , the house passed a resolution ( h.res .

711 ) citing attorney general eric holder in contempt of congress for his failure to produce additional , subpoenaed documents related to operation fast and furious by a roll call vote of 255-67 ( roll no .

441 ) .

the committee on oversight and government reform had previously approved a report ( h.rept .

112-546 ) that accompanied this resolution by a vote of 23-17 .

shortly before the committee took up the resolution , president barack obama asserted executive privilege , rather than disclose subpoenaed documents related to atf's operation fast and furious .

the house also passed a related resolution ( h.res .

706 ) that authorizes the committee to initiate or intervene in judicial proceedings to enforce certain subpoenas .

on may 18 , 2012 , the house passed the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2013 ( h.r .

4310 ) .

this bill includes a provision that would allow department of defense ( dod ) mental health professionals and commanding officers to inquire about privately owned firearms that a service member might hold off - base , if he is considered to be a risk of suicide or a danger to others .

a provision included in the fy2011 ndaa ( p.l .

111-383 ) prohibits the secretary of defense from collecting information on privately owned firearms held by service members , dod civilian employees , or their families off - base .

on may 10 , 2012 , the house passed a measure ( h.r .

5326 ) that would fund atf for fy2013 at $1.151 billion .

this measure includes the cornyn anti - gun walking provision , and would make several additional atf appropriations riders permanent law by including futurity language in those provisions , instead of following the administration's proposal and stripping futurity language out of the provisions that were made permanent law in the fy2012 appropriations cycle .

the house - passed bill also includes a provision that would prohibit atf from collecting long gun sales reports .

this provision reflects a rehberg amendment that was successfully offered in full committee markup .

on may 3 , 2012 , representative issa , chairman of the house oversight and government reform committee , issued a staff briefing paper to committee members that included a draft resolution to cite the attorney general with contempt for not fully complying with committee subpoenas for information about operation fast and furious and other matters .

on april 19 , 2012 , the senate committee on appropriations reported a bill ( s. 2323 ) that would fund atf for fy2013 at $1.153 billion .

this bill includes the cornyn provision , but it does not include any language similar to the rehberg amendment .

like the house bill , it does not address the administration's proposal to strip futurity language out of the provisions that were made permanent law in the fy2012 appropriations cycle , but it would not make any additional provisos permanent law .

on april 17 , 2012 , the house passed the sportsmen's heritage act of 2012 ( h.r .

4089 ) , a bill that would require agencies that manage federal public lands to facilitate access to and use of those lands for the purposes of recreational fishing , hunting , and shooting with certain exceptions set out in statute .

language to a similar effect was included in the fy2013 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill ( h.r .

6091 ) , which the house committee on appropriations reported on july 10 , 2012 .

on november 16 , 2011 , the house passed a bill ( h.r .

822 ) that would establish a greater degree of reciprocity between states that issue concealed carry permits for handguns to civilians than currently exists under state law .

the senate considered a similar amendment , which was narrowly defeated , in the 111 th congress .

on october 11 , 2011 , the house passed a veterans' benefits act ( h.r .

2349 ) .

this bill includes a provision that would prohibit the department of veterans affairs from determining a beneficiary to be mentally incompetent for the purposes of gun control , unless such a determination were made by a judge , magistrate , or other judicial authority based upon a finding that the beneficiary posed a danger to himself or others .

similar proposals were considered in either the house or the senate in the 110 th and 111 th congresses , in the wake of the enactment of the nics improvement amendments act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-180 ) .

during may 2011 , firearms - related amendments were offered to bills to extend certain usa patriot act provisions related to national security investigations ( h.r .

1800 , s. 1038 , and s. 990 ) , but those amendments were not passed .

on the one hand , representative mike quigley's amendment would have allowed firearms transfers to be denied , if prospective transferees were the subject of a fbi national security investigation .

on the other hand , senator rand paul's amendment would have specifically excluded firearms transfer records from the business records that can be collected without a warrant during a national security investigation .

the 112 th congress could also examine issues potentially arising from the tragic shootings in tucson , az , on january 8 , 2011 , in which 6 people were killed and 13 wounded , including representative giffords .

armed with a 9mm glock 19 semiautomatic pistol loaded with a 33-round extended magazine , the shooter reportedly fired 31 shots before bystanders were able to subdue him while he was attempting to reload with another 33-round extended magazine .

he also carried two additional 15-round magazines .

as discussed below , these magazines were previously defined under federal law as large capacity ammunition feeding devices ( lcafds ) and were banned for 10 years , from september 13 , 1994 , through september 13 , 2004 , as part of the larger semiautomatic assault weapons ban .

legislation has been introduced to reinstate the lcafd ban ( h.r .

308 and s. 32 ) and to ban firearms within the proximity of certain high - level federal officials ( h.r .

367 and h.r .

496 ) .

congressional interest could also focus on the shooter's mental illness and illegal drug use .

on november 15 , 2011 , the senate committee on the judiciary's subcommittee on crime and terrorism held a hearing on the fix gun checks act of 2011 ( s. 436 / h.r .

1781 ) .

this proposal would amend p.l .

110-180 to advance certain deadlines and apply deeper cuts to a wider array of federal law enforcement assistance grant programs to incentivize the greater sharing of firearms - related disqualifying records .

congress passed p.l .

110-180 in the wake of the tragic april 16 , 2007 , virginia tech shootings .

two major federal statutes regulate the commerce in and possession of firearms: the national firearms act of 1934 ( 26 u.s.c .

§5801 et seq. ) .

and the gun control act of 1968 , as amended ( 18 u.s.c .

chapter 44 , §921 et seq. ) .

supplementing federal law , many state firearms laws are stricter than federal law .

for example , some states require permits to obtain firearms and impose a waiting period for firearms transfers .

other states are less restrictive , but state law cannot preempt federal law .

federal law serves as the minimum standard in the united states .

during the 111 th congress , the gun control debate was colored by two key supreme court decisions .

in district of columbia v. heller , the court found that the district of columbia ( dc ) handgun ban , among other regulations , violated an individual's right under the second amendment to lawfully possess a firearm in his home for self - defense .

in mcdonald v. city of chicago , the court found that an individual's right to lawfully possess a firearm for the purposes of self - defense under the second amendment applied to the states by way of the fourteenth amendment .

although the decision arguably limits a state's , city's , or local government's ability to prohibit handguns outright , it does not precisely delineate what would constitute permissible gun control laws under the second amendment .

consequently , these delineations will likely be developed in future cases .

in the 111 th congress , members revisited several gun control issues that were previously considered in the 110 th congress .

for example , some members in the house of representatives , who were dissatisfied with the district's response to the heller decision , passed a bill in the 110 th congress that would have overturned provisions of the district's revised gun laws .

in the 111 th congress , members of the senate amended and passed a dc voting rights bill ( s. 160 ) with similar language .

when the house turned its attention to dc voting rights , the leadership attempted to negotiate a compromise but ultimately tabled its version of the dc voting rights bill ( h.r .

157 ) rather than risk amendments to overturn dc guns laws .

the dc gun amendments were introduced as stand - alone bills ( h.r .

5162 / s. 3265 ) .

so far , the 112 th congress has not revisited this issue .

the senate veterans' affairs committee reported stand - alone legislation that would have revamped procedures by which veterans are adjudicated "mentally incompetent" and , thus , lose their firearms possession and transfer eligibility ( s. 669 ) .

this reported bill reflected an amendment that senator richard burr had offered and the senate committee had adopted in the 110 th congress during consideration of s. 2969 .

also in the 111 th congress , the house veterans' affairs committee considered a draft veterans' benefits bill and adopted an amendment offered by representative john boozman that included similar provisions .

however , when the house considered the reported bill ( h.r .

6132 ) under suspension of the rules , it was called to the floor without the boozman provisions .

nevertheless , as discussed below , this issue has reemerged in the 112 th congress , when the house passed similar legislation ( h.r .

2349 ) .

the senate also considered an amendment offered by senator john thune to the fy2010 defense authorization act ( s. 1390 ) that was narrowly defeated and arguably would have provided for national reciprocity between states regarding the concealed carry of firearms .

in the 112 th congress , the house has passed similar legislation ( h.r .

822 ) .

the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing on denying firearms to persons watch - listed as known or suspected terrorists ( s. 1317 / h.r .

2159 and s. 2820 ) .

the 112 th congress revisited related issues during consideration of legislation to reauthorize the usa patriot act ( h.r .

1800 , s. 1038 , and s. 990 ) .

also , in the 111 th congress , the house financial services committee reported a bill ( h.r .

3045 ; h.rept .

111-277 ) that included a provision that would have prohibited public housing authorities from barring tenants from possessing legal firearms as a condition of their lease .

this committee approved another housing bill that included a similar provision ( h.r .

4868 ) .

the house also passed amendments ( h.r .

5827 ) to federal bankruptcy law that would have allowed persons to claim either a single firearm or a collection of firearms of up to $3,000 in value as a federal exemption .

and , on at least two occasions , the senate committee on the judiciary scheduled a hearing on a bill to reform federal statutes under which federally licensed firearms dealers are regulated ( s. 941 / h.r .

2296 ) .

in addition , during the 111 th congress , members sponsored several proposals that were enacted .

the senate adopted an amendment offered by senator tom coburn to the credit card act of 2009 ( h.r .

627 ) to allow people to carry firearms in national parks and wildlife refuges .

the house voted on the coburn amendment as a separate measure and passed it as well ( p.l .

111-24 ) .

the senate adopted an amendment offered by senator roger wicker to the fy2010 transportation - hud appropriations bill ( h.r .

3288 ) that allows private persons to carry firearms in their checked luggage on amtrak trains .

h.r .

3288 became the vehicle for the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , which included the wicker provision .

congress reconsidered and passed amendments to the law enforcement officers safety act ( leosa ; p.l .

108-277 ) to clarify and widen eligibility for certain qualified police officers to carry concealed firearms across state lines ( s. 1132 ; p.l .

111-272 ) .

congress altered , but continued to make permanent , a funding limitation on the release of atf firearms trace data ( p.l .

111-8 and p.l .

111-117 ) , which is known for its original sponsor , representative todd tiahrt .

two firearms - related provisions were included in the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

one provision ( §1062 ) , sponsored by senator jim inhofe , prohibits the secretary of defense , and by implication base commanders , from collecting any information on privately owned firearms kept by military personnel , department of defense civilian employees , and their family members off - base .

another provision ( §346 ) sponsored by senators jon tester and max baucus addresses the demilitarization of small arms ammunition of several types and calibers , which is commonly sold as military surplus .

finally , during the 111 th congress , gun trafficking across the southwest border from the united states to mexico was also an ongoing concern , as it has been for the 112 th congress .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , included increased funding for atf to investigate additional gun trafficking cases .

in addition , congress provided atf with an fy2010 supplemental appropriation to combat further southwest border gun trafficking ( p.l .

111-230 ) .

for a fuller discussion of legislative action in the 111 th congress , see appendix a .

in the wake of the aurora , co , theater and oak creek , wi , sikh temple mass - casualty shootings , several members of congress called for reconsideration of the 1994-2004 ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and the large capacity ammunition feeding devices .

there were similar calls to ban such feeding devices ( see s. 32 / h.r .

308 ) following the january 8 , 2011 , tucson , az , mass shooting .

the 112 th congress has also seen considerable attention paid to atf southwest border gun trafficking investigation known as "operation fast and furious. .

at several congressional hearings , the attorney general was questioned at length about whom among the departmental officials conceived of , knew about , and / or approved this operation .

it has led to the resignation of the u.s. attorney for the district of arizona .

the house committee on oversight and government reform has held several hearings specifically on matters related to this operation .

when the president asserted executive privilege rather than turn over additional , subpoenaed documents to the committee , the house passed a resolution holding the attorney general in contempt of congress for his failure to produce subpoenaed documents .

the committee has also held a hearing on the doj office inspector general findings concerning both an earlier , tucson , az - based investigation , known as operation wide receiver , and operation fast and furious .

in addition , the committee has released parts i and ii of its three - part , final report on operation fast and furious .

several other gun control issues have emerged in the 112 th congress .

for example , the house passed a bill ( h.r .

822 ) that would establish greater reciprocity between states with firearms concealed carry statutes .

the house also passed a veterans' benefits bill ( h.r .

2349 ) that would prohibit the department of veterans affairs from making mentally incompetent determinations about beneficiaries for the purposes of gun control , unless such determinations were made by a judge , magistrate , or other judicial authority .

firearms - related amendments were also offered to bills that extended an expiring usa patriot act provision related to national security investigations and fbi access to business records .

both chambers have also considered bills to promote access to federal lands for hunting and other sporting activities ( s. 3525 and h.r .

4089 ) .

other salient firearms - related issues that continue to receive attention include ( 1 ) screening firearms background check applicants against terrorist watch lists ; ( 2 )  combating gun trafficking and straw purchases ; ( 3 ) reforming the regulation of federally licensed gun dealers ; ( 4 ) requiring background checks for private firearms transfers at gun shows ; ( 5 ) more - strictly regulating certain firearms previously defined in statute as "semiautomatic assault weapons" ; and ( 6 ) banning or requiring the registration of certain long - range .50 caliber rifles , which are commonly referred to as "sniper" rifles .

on november 5 , 2009 , u.s. army major nidal malik hasan allegedly shot 13 persons to death and wounded over 30 at fort hood , tx .

prior to the shootings , hasan had corresponded by email with a radical muslim imam , anwar al - aulaqi , who u.s. authorities had long suspected of having substantial ties to al - qaeda .

although fbi counterterrorism agents were aware of hasan's communications with al - aulaqi , it was unclear at what level hasan was being scrutinized by the fbi .

if he had been the subject of a full counterterrorism investigation , fbi policy would have required that he be watch - listed .

depending upon the sequence of events , had hasan been watch - listed , there is a possibility that his purchase of a pistol and the required brady background check could have alerted fbi counterterrorism agents to that transfer , and they might have been able to take steps that would have prevented the shootings .

the fort hood shootings renewed interest in the u.s. government's use of terrorist watch lists for firearms - and explosives - related background checks .

before february 2004 , terrorist watch list checks were not part of the brady background check process because being a suspected or known terrorist was and is not a disqualifying factor for firearms transfer / possession eligibility under federal or state law .

as is the case today , to determine such eligibility , the national instant criminal background checks system ( nics ) queries three databases maintained by the fbi .

they include the national crime information center ( ncic ) , the interstate identification index ( iii ) , and the nics index .

the nics index includes disqualifying records on persons that would not be included in the iii or ncic , for example , persons dishonorably discharged from the armed forces , adjudicated as a mental defective , or convicted of certain serious immigration violations , among others .

the iii contains criminal history records for persons arrested and convicted of felonies and certain serious misdemeanors .

the ncic contains law enforcement files on fugitives and persons subject to restraining orders , among other persons .

ncic also contains a file known as the violent gang and terrorist organization file ( vgtof ) .

prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , this file included limited information on known or suspected terrorists and gang members .

nics examiners were not informed of vgtof hits , as such information was not considered relevant to determining firearms transfer / possession eligibility .

in november 2002 , doj initiated a nics transaction audit to determine whether prohibited aliens ( non - citizens ) were being improperly transferred firearms .

as part of this audit , nics procedures were changed so that nics examiners would be informed of vgtof hits .

under homeland security presidential directive 6 , moreover , the administration initiated a broad - based review of the use of watch lists , among other terrorist identification and screening mechanisms .

in september 2003 , the fbi - administered terrorist screening center ( tsc ) was established and work was begun to improve and merge several watch lists maintained by the u.s. government into a consolidated terrorist screening database ( tsdb ) .

following those efforts , tsdb lookout records from other agency watch lists were downloaded into vgtof .

by may 2007 , vgtof contained more than 100,000 records .

in 2009 , the fbi created a separate file for "known and appropriately suspected terrorists ( kst ) " by splitting vgtof into separate gang and terrorist files .

as of march 31 , 2010 , the kst included 278,219 terrorist watch list records .

in november 2003 , doj directed the fbi to revise its nics procedures to include measures to screen prospective firearms transferees and permittees against terrorist watch list records ( kst , formerly vgtof ) .

effective february 2004 , the brady background check process was altered to include a terrorist watch list check and to alert nics staff when a prospective firearms transferee or permit applicant is potentially identified as a known or suspected terrorist .

in the case of a watch list hit , nics sends a delayed transfer ( for up to three business days ) response to the querying ffl or poc .

if nics examiners cannot find a prohibiting factor , they immediately contact the tsc and fbi counterterrorism division ( ctd ) to ( 1 ) validate the hit and ( 2 ) allow fbi special agents in the field to check for possible prohibiting factors .

if no prohibiting factors are uncovered within the three - day period , a firearms dealer may proceed with the transaction at his discretion , but fbi counterterrorism officials continue to work the case for up to 90 days , during which time the background check is considered to be in an "open" status .

if and when a transaction is approved , all identifying information submitted by or on behalf of the transferee is to be destroyed within 24 hours .

at the end of the 90-day period , if no prohibiting factor has been reported to the nics center , all records related to the nics transaction are destroyed except for the nics transaction number ( ntn ) and date of the transaction .

if the ffl proceeded with the transaction at his discretion following three business days and the applicant is found to be disqualified , then the atf is to be notified and a firearms retrieval action is to be initiated in coordination with a jttf .

when congress passed the brady act in 1994 , the use of terrorist watch lists during firearms - related background checks was not considered .

as a consequence , the attorney general has no specific statutory authority to screen prospective gun buyers against terrorist watch list records .

nevertheless , the fbi adopted procedures to do this because being on such a list suggests that there may be an underlying factor that would bar a prospective background check applicant from possessing a firearm .

hence , a possible issue for congress could be whether terrorist watch list checks should be incorporated statutorily into the brady background checks for firearms .

in addition , a proviso attached to the fy2005 doj annual appropriation and every year thereafter requires that nics - generated approved firearms transaction records be destroyed within 24 hours .

nevertheless , as described above , the fbi has been retaining approved firearms transaction records for up to 90 days , if those records are related to terrorist watch list hits .

furthermore , information on the subjects of those checks are passed on to fbi investigators in the field .

while the nics records are eventually destroyed for non - denials , it is unknown what happens to the information generated by nics - related terrorist watch list hits that are passed on to the fbi ctd and special agents in the field , who are usually assigned to joint terrorism task forces .

information about those firearms transactions is possibly recorded and stored electronically in the fbi's investigative case files .

in the brady act , however , there is a provision that prohibits the ( 1 ) transfer of any brady system record to any other federal or state agency , or ( 2 ) the use of the brady system as a national registry of firearms or firearms owners .

in light of the former prohibition , a second issue for congress could be whether to grant the fbi greater authority to maintain and access nics records for the purposes of counterterrorism , or should existing statutory limitations that were arguably designed to prevent the maintenance of and access to such records be strengthened .

in light of the first two issues , it follows that a third issue for congress could be whether the attorney general should be given explicit authority to deny firearms transfers to watch - listed persons on a case - by - case basis , or should all known or suspected terrorists be statutorily prohibited from possessing firearms and explosives .

as described above , although watch - listed persons may be the subject of ongoing foreign intelligence , national security , and criminal investigations , they may not be persons prohibited from possessing firearms or explosives under current law .

as subsequent events would indicate , doj concluded that it was limited under current law in its authority to use terrorist watch lists as part of the background check processes to deny firearms and explosives transfers to known or suspected terrorists .

in hearings before the house committee on the judiciary , attorney general alberto gonzales was questioned several times by members of congress about nics procedures and terrorist watch list hits .

representative chris van hollen: "does it make sense to you that we stop a person from boarding the airline in order to protect the public safety , [but] that an individual can turn around , get in their car , go to the local gun shop and buy 20 semiautomatic assault weapons ? .

attorney general gonzales: "i think we should be doing everything we can to ensure that people [who] are in fact terrorists shouldn't have weapons in this country , the truth of the matter is .

but unless they are disabled [disqualified] from having a weapon under the statute there's not much that we can do other than maybe try and get them out of the country or , by the way , to see if there's any disability under the statute that would allow us to deny them a firearm. .

in 2005 , then attorney general gonzales directed the doj to form a working group to review federal gun laws — particularly in regard to nics background checks — to examine whether additional authority should be sought to prevent firearms transfers to known or suspected terrorists .

nearly two years later , on april 25 , 2007 , doj proposed legislation that would give the attorney general authority to deny a firearm transfer , state - issued firearms permit , or explosive license to any person found "to be or have been engaged in conduct constituting , in preparation for , in aid of , or related to terrorism. .

in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , senator lautenberg and representative king introduced this proposal ( s. 1237 / h.r .

2074 ) , but no further action was taken on either bill .

in the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) , several bills were introduced that would have addressed firearms - and explosives - related background checks and terrorist watch list checks .

senator lautenberg and representative king reintroduced their bill that was based on the doj draft proposal ( s. 1317 and h.r .

2159 ) .

representative mccarthy reintroduced her bill , newly titled the no fly , no buy act of 2009 , that would have allowed the attorney general to deny firearms to persons who are on the tsa's no fly terrorist watch list ( h.r .

2401 ) .

and , senator lautenberg introduced a bill that would have allowed the attorney general to maintain nics records on approved transfers that were also related terrorist watch list hits ( s. 2820 ) .

in addition , gao provided congress with updated data on nics - related terrorist watch list hits , lending renewed impetus to the reintroduction of the doj draft proposal .

and , the november 2009 fort hood shootings renewed interest in terrorist watch list records and firearms - related background checks .

nearly four years after the first gao report , gao issued a follow - up report on nics - related terrorist watch list hits in may 2009 .

gao reported that from february 2004 through february 2009 there were 963 nics background checks that resulted in terrorist watch list matches and , of those checks , about 90% ( 865 ) were allowed to proceed and a firearms or explosives transfer may have occurred ; however , only one explosives background check resulted in a proceed with transaction ; and of the 10% that resulted in denials ( 98 ) , the denials were based on felony convictions , illegal immigration status , fugitive from justice status , and the unlawful use of , or addiction to , a controlled substance .

all of these denials involved firearms , as opposed to explosives .

in this report , gao also recommended that if congress should move forward with legislation providing the attorney general with the discretionary authority to deny a firearms transfer or permit , or an explosives license / permit , based on a terrorist watch list hit , then , consideration should be given to including a provision in that legislation that would require the attorney general to promulgate guidelines that would delineate under what circumstances such authority could be evoked .

following this report , representative king and senator lautenberg reintroduced the doj draft proposal as nearly identical bills ( h.r .

2159 and s. 1317 ) , which supporters dubbed the "terror gap" proposal .

on may 5 , 2010 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing on "terrorists and guns: the nature of the threat and proposed reforms. .

gao testified about measures taken by the fbi to improve firearms and explosives background checks for counterterrorism purposes .

gao reported that from february 2004 through february 2010 , there were 1,228 positive encounters with individuals watch - listed as terrorists through nics related firearms or explosives transactions .

these encounters involved 650 individuals because 450 of these individuals were involved in multiple transactions .

six of these individuals were involved in 10 or more transactions .

in 1,119 encounters , the transactions were allowed to proceed .

in 109 encounters , the transactions were denied .

from march 2009 to february 2009 , moreover , there were 272 positive encounters and all of the transactions were allowed to proceed , including one that involved explosives .

senator joseph lieberman , chair of the committee , noted that firearms had been used in at least two deadly terrorist plots perpetrated by muslim extremists .

those incidents included the fort hood shootings noted above and the june 2009 little rock , ar , recruiting center shootings , where two u.s. servicemen were shot — one was killed and the other wounded .

in several other thwarted plots , conspirators were arrested for planning to use firearms to attack servicemen at fort dix , nj , in 2006 and the quantico , va , marine base in 2009 .

senator lindsey graham , however , voiced opposition to the terror gap proposal .

he maintained that denying a firearms transfer based upon a felony conviction in a lawful court was fundamentally different from doing so based on a terrorist watch list record that was created by an investigator or intelligence analyst .

in the 112 th congress , senator lautenberg and representative king have reintroduced the terror gap proposal ( s. 34 and h.r .

1506 ) .

as in the preceding two congresses , these nearly identical bills are based upon the april 2007 doj proposed legislative language .

in the 112 th congress , four proposals that address gun trafficking have been introduced ( h.r .

2554 , s. 1973 , h.r .

4190 , and h.r .

6195 ) .

while no further action has been taken on any of these proposals , as described above , several members have voiced their support for such a proposal and the attorney general has indicated that the administration would work with congress to develop such a proposal .

on july 15 , 2011 , representative carolyn maloney introduced the stop gun trafficking and strengthen law enforcement act of 2011 ( h.r .

2554 ) .

this proposal would amend the gca to establish a new federal "trafficking in firearms" offense under two provisions .

under the first proposed provision , it would be unlawful for any person to receive , transfer , or otherwise dispose of two or more firearms that have been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce ( regardless of whether anything of value is exchanged ) , while knowing , or having reasonable cause to believe , that one or more of those firearms would be transferred subsequently to another person whose receipt of a firearm would be unlawful , or who intends to or will use , carry or possess , or dispose of the firearm unlawfully .

under the second proposed provision , it would be unlawful for any person knowingly to direct , promote , or facilitate such conduct .

violations of either provision would be punishable by a fine and / or not more than 20 years' imprisonment .

moreover , it would provide that any person who acts in the capacity of an organizer , supervisory position , or any other management position , in concert with five or more other persons would be subject to not more than 25 years' imprisonment .

in addition , under h.r .

2554 it would also be unlawful to conspire to violate the first provision , and the proposal would make such a conspiracy punishable by a fine and / or not more than 10 years' imprisonment .

on december 18 , 2011 , senator kirsten gillibrand introduced the gun trafficking prevention act of 2011 ( s. 1973 ) .

this proposal would amend the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) and establish a new federal "trafficking in firearms" offense .

under this provision , it would be unlawful for any person knowingly to ship , transport , transfer , or otherwise dispose of two or more firearms to another person if he ( the transferor / seller ) knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such actions would be , or would result in , a violation of any federal , state , or local law that is punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ( excluding misdemeanors punishable by two years or less of imprisonment ) ; receive two or more firearms from another person if he ( the transferee / buyer ) knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such receipt would be , or would result in , a violation of federal , state , or local law that is punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ( excluding misdemeanors punishable by two years or less of imprisonment ) ; make materially false statements to an ffl , and purchase , receive , or otherwise acquire two or more firearms for , or on behalf of , any other person ( a straw purchase ) ; and direct , promote , or facilitate the unlawful conduct described above .

violations of any of the four subparagraphs described above would be punishable by a fine and / or not more than 20 years' imprisonment for a violation .

this provision would also establish an affirmative defense to any prosecution under the subparagraphs described above if the firearm ( s ) in question were transferred following a background check pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

§922 ( t ) that showed that the "actual buyer" was not a prohibited person under either federal or state law .

s. 1973 would also make it unlawful to conspire to commit such violations , and would make such a conspiracy punishable at the same level as the actual criminal act ( s ) , a fine and / or not more than 20 years' imprisonment .

regarding such conspiracies , the proposal would direct the u.s .

sentencing commission to recommend increased penalties for graduated offense levels for violations that involve more than 4 , but fewer than 15 firearms ; more than 14 , but fewer than 25 firearms ; more than 24 , but fewer than 100 firearms ; or more than 100 firearms .

it is noteworthy that the federal sentencing guidelines since 1987 have included a graduated table of sentencing enhancements based on the number of firearms involved .

it was last amended in 2001 so that an offense level , used to determine the sentencing range , could be enhanced if the unlawful activity involved 3-7 firearms , 8-24 firearms , 25-99 firearms , 100-199 firearms , or 200 or more firearms .

as the sentencing guidelines attempt to provide the most appropriate sentencing range based on the severity of the crime and the extent of the offender's criminal record , this bill would possibly impose a more severe sentencing range on a first - time or low - level offender because it would take a lesser number of firearms to trigger a sentence enhancement .

in addition , s. 1973 includes several provisions designed to "crack down" on corrupt gun dealers , who knowingly violate certain provisions of the gca , national firearms act ( nfa ) , and arms export control act ( aeca ) .

with regard to firearms trace data , the proposal would require the attorney general to annually identify certain ffls who posed a "heightened risk of firearms being diverted to criminal use. .

such determinations would be made based on a "specific criteria" that would include the following elements: short "time - to - crime" for firearms traced to the dealer , incomplete crime trace results for firearms sold by a dealer , significant or frequent reports by a dealer of firearms losses or thefts , and other violations of federal firearms laws by a dealer .

furthermore , it would increase penalties for certain recordkeeping violations from "not more than" one year to "up to" three years' imprisonment .

finally , it would require gao to conduct a study on firearms that are either lost or stolen in transit between ffls .

on march 8 , 2012 , representative adam schiff introduced the straw purchase penalty enhancement act ( h.r .

4190 ) .

this bill would amend the gca to create a mandatory minimum sentence of two years' imprisonment for any person who makes a false statement in violation of either 18 u.s.c .

§§922 ( a ) ( 6 ) or 924 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) in the firearms transfer records ( atf form 4473 ) that ffls are required to maintain under current law , if the transferee knows or has reason to believe that the false statement will further the transfer of two or more firearms to a prohibited person ; and has the intent to conceal the identity of the prohibited person to whom the firearm is to be transferred .

on july 25 , 2012 , representative peter king introduced h.r .

6195 , the detectives nemorin and andrews anti - gun trafficking act of 2012 .

this proposal would have amended the gca by creating a new subsection at 18 u.s.c §924 — penalties .

this amendment would have created a new separate "gun trafficking" crime punishable by a fine and / or imprisonment of not more than 20 years for committing a certain offense under the gca under one of two sets of conditions .

the first set of conditions would have been the offering for sale , transfer , or barter of two or more handguns , semiautomatic assault weapons , short - barreled shotguns , short - barreled rifles , or machine guns , of which at least one was transported , received or possessed by that person and stolen or had the importer's or manufacturer's serial number removed .

the second set of conditions would have been the offering for sale , transfer , or barter of two or more handguns , semiautomatic assault weapons , short - barreled shotguns , short - barreled rifles , or machine guns , of which at least one was offered by sale , transfer , or barter to another who is either prohibited by federal or state law from possessing a firearm , not 18 years of age , is in a school zone , or is not a resident of the state in which he has attempted to acquire the firearms .

if someone committed one of the offenses already punishable by the gca , each of which carries its own penalty , under either of these conditions , such a person could be prosecuted under this separate gun trafficking crime and face a fine and / or imprisonment of not more than 20 years .

this bill was silent as to whether the sentences for the proposed "gun trafficking" crime and the individual predicate gca offenses , if a person was prosecuted under both provisions , would have been served consecutively or concurrently .

it appears that such a matter would have likely been influenced by the u.s .

sentencing commission guidelines .

this bill also included numerous other provisions oriented toward gun trafficking .

among other things , the bill would have ( 1 ) increased funding for project safe neighborhoods ; ( 2 ) required the ag to give a biennial report to congress on firearms tracing and prosecutions ; ( 3 ) required the fbi to give atf access to its stolen gun files maintained in its national crime information center ; ( 4 ) required the ag to establish a "national instant stolen gun check system" ; and ( 5 ) made it unlawful to transport , possess , or receive a firearm that had the importer's or manufacturer's serial number removed , obliterated , or altered , regardless of one's awareness of this fact .

on at least two occasions during the 111 th congress , the senate judiciary committee postponed hearings on the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives reform and firearms modernization act ( s. 941 ) .

senator mike crapo and senator patrick leahy , chair of the judiciary committee , introduced this bill on april 30 , 2009 .

representatives steve king and zack space introduced a companion bill ( h.r .

2296 ) .

in regard to regulating federally licensed firearms dealers , this proposal would have established a two tier , graduated penalty system for violations characterized as being of a minor or serious nature ; established a process by which atf licensing decisions could be reviewed by an administrative law judge ; required the attorney general to issue guidelines governing atf investigations of gca violations ; and defined the "willful" standard of intent to mean "knowingly and intentionally" disregarding a "legal duty. .

proponents for this proposal argue that these provisions would allow federal firearms licensees greater opportunity to address non - substantive recordkeeping issues that under current law could lead to the revocation of their licenses .

opponents argue that relaxing such provisions would weaken atf authority and efforts to reduce the number of "kitchen table top" dealers , who are not substantively engaged in the business and , hence , are ineligible for such licenses , and "rogue" dealers , who are not adequately controlling and accounting for their firearms inventories .

additional provisions in the bill would have addressed several other firearms - related issues concerning machine guns , firearms parts , and handgun possession of a minor in the presence of a parent or legal guardian .

in the 112 th congress , representative steve king and senator mike crapo have reintroduced this proposal ( h.r .

1093 / s. 835 ) .

federal law does not regulate gun shows specifically .

federal law regulating firearms transfers , however , is applicable to such transfers at gun shows .

federal firearms licensees — those licensed by the federal government to manufacture , import , or deal in firearms — are required to conduct background checks on non - licensed persons seeking to obtain firearms from them , by purchase or exchange .

conversely , non - licensed persons — those persons who transfer firearms but who do not meet the statutory test of being engaged in the business — are not required to conduct such checks .

to some , this may appear to be an incongruity in the law .

why , they ask , should licensees be required to conduct background checks at gun shows but not non - licensees ? .

to those opposed to further federal regulation of firearms , it may appear to be a continuance of the status quo ( i.e. , non - interference by the federal government into private firearms transfers within state lines ) .

on the other hand , those seeking to increase federal regulation of firearms may view the absence of background checks for firearms transfers between non - licensed / private persons as a loophole in the law that needs to be closed .

a possible issue for congress is whether federal regulation of firearms should be expanded to include private firearms transfers at gun shows and other similar venues .

among gun show - related proposals , there are two basic models .

the first model is based on a bill ( s. 443 ) that was introduced in the 106 th congress by senator lautenberg , who successfully offered this proposal as an amendment to the senate - passed violent and repeat juvenile offender act ( s. 254 ) .

several members introduced variations of the lautenberg bill in the 107 th congress .

in the 108 th congress , representative conyers — ranking minority member of the judiciary committee — introduced h.r .

260 , which was very similar to the lautenberg bill .

in addition , former senator daschle introduced the justice enhancement and domestic security act of 2003 ( s. 22 ) , which included gun show language that was similar to the lautenberg bill .

the second model is based on a bill ( s. 890 ) introduced in the 107 th congress by senators mccain and lieberman .

in the 108 th congress , senator mccain reintroduced this proposal as well ( s. 1807 ) .

and , representative michael castle introduced a similar gun show proposal ( h.r .

3832 ) .

also in the 108 th congress , on march 2 , 2004 , during consideration of the protection of lawful commerce in arms act ( s. 1805 ) , the senate passed a gun show - related amendment ( s.amdt .

2636 ) offered by senator mccain by a yea - nay vote of 53-46 ( record vote number: 25 ) .

however , the bill's floor manager , senator larry craig , pulled this bill from further floor consideration before a final vote could be taken on the measure rather than risk passage of a bill that included gun control and assault weapons ban provisions ( the latter provision is described below ) .

in the 109 th congress , representative castle reintroduced his proposal ( h.r .

3540 ) , but a similar measure was not introduced in the senate .

in the 110 th congress , representative castle and senator lautenberg reintroduced separate gun show proposals ( h.r .

96 and s. 2577 ) .

senator biden included similar provisions in the crime control and prevention act of 2007 ( s. 2237 ) .

in the 111 th congress , senator lautenberg and representative castle again reintroduced similar measures that would have required background checks for private firearms transfers at guns shows ( s. 843 and h.r .

2324 ) .

in the 112 th congress , senator lautenberg has reintroduced this measure ( s. 35 ) and representative mccarthy has introduced a companion measure ( h.r .

591 ) .

in 1994 , congress banned for 10 years the possession , transfer , or further domestic manufacture of semiautomatic assault weapons ( saws ) and large - capacity ammunition feeding devices ( lcafds ) that hold more than 10 rounds that were not legally owned or available prior to the date of enactment ( september 13 , 1994 ) .

the saw - lcafd ban expired on september 13 , 2004 .

the saw ban statute classified a rifle as a semiautomatic assault weapon if it was able to accept a detachable magazine and included two or more of the following five characteristics: ( 1 ) a folding or telescoping stock , ( 2 ) a pistol grip , ( 3 ) a bayonet mount , ( 4 ) a muzzle flash suppressor or threaded barrel capable of accepting such a suppressor , or ( 5 ) a grenade launcher .

there were similar definitions for pistols and shotguns that were classified as semiautomatic assault weapons .

semiautomatic assault weapons that were legally owned prior to the ban were not restricted and remained available for transfer under applicable federal and state laws .

opponents of the ban argue that the statutorily defined characteristics of a semiautomatic assault weapon were largely cosmetic , and that these weapons were potentially no more lethal than other semiautomatic firearms that were designed to accept a detachable magazine and were equal or superior in terms of ballistics and other performance characteristics .

proponents of the ban argue that semiautomatic military - style firearms , particularly those capable of accepting large - capacity ammunition feeding devices , had and have no place in the civilian gun stock .

during and following world war ii , assault rifles were developed to provide a lighter infantry weapon that could fire more rounds , more rapidly ( increased capacity and rate of fire ) .

to increase capacity of fire , detachable self - feeding magazines were developed .

these rifles were usually designed to be fired in fully automatic mode , meaning that once the trigger is pulled , the weapon continues to fire rapidly until all the rounds in the magazine are expended or the trigger is released .

often these rifles were also designed with a "select fire" feature that allowed them to be fired in short bursts ( eg , three rounds per pull of the trigger ) , or in semiautomatic mode ( i.e. , one round per pull of the trigger ) , as well as in fully automatic mode .

by comparison , semiautomatic firearms , including semiautomatic assault weapons , fire one round per pull of the trigger .

according to a 1997 survey of 203,300 state and federal prisoners who had been armed during the commission of the crimes for which they were incarcerated , fewer than 1 in 50 , or less than 2% , used , carried , or possessed a semiautomatic assault weapon or machine gun .

under current law , any firearm that can be fired in fully automatic mode or in multi - round bursts is classified as a "machine gun" and must be registered with the federal government under the national firearms act of 1934 .

furthermore , it is illegal to assemble a machine gun with legally or illegally obtained parts .

the population of legally owned machine guns has been frozen since 1986 , and they were not covered by the semiautomatic assault weapons ban .

in the 108 th congress , proposals were introduced to extend or make permanent the ban , whereas other proposals were made to modify the definition of "semiautomatic assault weapon" to cover a greater number of firearms by reducing the number of features that would constitute such firearms , and expand the list of certain makes and models of firearms that are statutorily enumerated as banned .

a proposal ( s. 1034 ) introduced by senator dianne feinstein would have made the ban permanent as would have a proposal ( h.r .

2038 / s. 1431 ) introduced by representative mccarthy and senator lautenberg .

the latter measure , however , would have modified the definition and expanded the list of banned weapons .

senator feinstein also introduced measures that would have extended the ban for 10 years ( s. 2109 / s. 2498 ) .

in addition , on march 2 , 2004 , the senate passed an amendment to the gun industry liability bill ( s. 1805 ) that would have extended the ban for 10 years , but the senate did not pass this bill .

in the 109 th congress , senator dianne feinstein introduced a bill that would have reinstated previous law for 10 years ( s. 620 ) .

representative mccarthy and senator lautenberg reintroduced their bills to make the ban permanent ( h.r .

1312 / s. 645 ) .

in the 110 th congress , representative mccarthy reintroduced a similar proposal ( h.r .

1022 ) and another measure ( h.r .

1859 ) that would prohibit the transfer of a semiautomatic assault weapon with a large - capacity ammunition feeding device , among other things .

representative mark steven kirk introduced the assault weapons ban reauthorization act of 2008 ( h.r .

6257 ) .

senator biden included provisions to reauthorize the ban in the crime control and prevention act of 2007 ( s. 2237 ) .

in the wake of the tucson shootings , representative mccarthy introduced a measure that would reinstate the large capacity ammunition feeding device ban ( h.r .

308 ) .

senator lautenberg introduced a similar measure ( s. 32 ) .

in the 109 th congress , legislation was introduced to regulate more strictly certain .50 caliber rifles .

some of these rifles are chambered to fire a relatively large round originally designed for the browning machine gun ( bmg ) and have been adopted by the u.s. military as long - range "sniper" rifles .

gun control advocates argue that these firearms have little sporting , hunting , or recreational purpose .

they maintain that these rifles could be used to shoot down aircraft , rupture pressurized chemical tanks , or penetrate armored personnel carriers .

gun control opponents counter that these rifles are expensive , cumbersome , and rarely , if ever , used to commit crimes .

furthermore , they maintain that these rifles were first developed for long - range marksmanship competitions and then adopted by the military as sniper rifles .

the fifty caliber sniper weapons regulation act of 2005 ( s. 935 ) , introduced by senator dianne feinstein , would have amended the national firearms act ( nfa ) to regulate ".50 caliber sniper weapons" in the same fashion as short - barreled shotguns and silencers by levying taxes on the manufacture and transfer of such firearms and by requiring owner and firearms registration .

in the 110 th congress , senator feinstein introduced a similar measure ( s. 1331 ) .

the other proposal introduced by representative james moran , the 50 caliber sniper rifle reduction act ( h.r .

654 ) , also would have amended the nfa to include those weapons , but it would have also amended the gun control act to effectively freeze the population of those weapons legally available to private persons and to prohibit any further transfer of those firearms .

in other words , h.r .

654 would have grandfathered - in existing rifles but would have banned their further transfer .

consequently , the proposal would have eventually eliminated those rifles all together from the civilian gun stock .

it would have been likely that covered .50 caliber rifles would have had to be destroyed or handed over to the atf as contraband when the legal firearm owner died or wanted to give up the firearm .

h.r .

654 included no compensation provision for rifles destroyed or handed over to the federal government .

furthermore , both proposals ( s. 935 and h.r .

654 ) would have defined ".50 caliber sniper weapon" to mean "a rifle capable of firing center - fire cartridge in .50 caliber , .50 bmg caliber , any other variant of .50 caliber or any metric equivalent of such calibers. .

many rifles , and even some handguns , are chambered to fire .50 caliber ammunition , meaning the projectile is about one - half inch in diameter .

opponents of this legislation note that this definition was very broad and would have likely covered .50 caliber rifles that would not be considered "long - range" or "sniper" rifles .

the .50 bmg caliber round , on the other hand , is an exceptionally large cartridge ( projectile and casing ) , which was once used almost exclusively as a heavy machine gun round .

representative moran also offered an amendment to the fy2006 department of commerce appropriations bill ( h.r .

2862 ) that would have prohibited the use of funding provided under that bill to process licenses to export .50 caliber rifles , but that amendment was not adopted by the house .

appendix a .

legislation in the 111 th congress the 111 th congress revisited several issues previously considered in the 110 th congress .

for example , congress considered amendments to dc voting rights bills that would have further overturned dc gun laws ( s. 160 and h.r .

157 ) .

in addition , congress passed several other gun - related provisions included in enacted legislation that address carrying firearms on public lands ( p.l .

111-24 ) , transporting firearms in passenger luggage on amtrak trains ( p.l .

111-117 ) , widening law enforcement off - duty concealed carry privileges ( p.l .

111-272 ) , prohibiting higher health care premiums for gun owners ( p.l .

111-148 ) , and prohibiting the department of defense ( dod ) from regulating firearms privately owned but lawfully held by service members , dod civilian personnel , and their family members off - base ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

the 111 th congress also reconsidered or newly considered several other provisions that were not enacted: gun rights restoration for veterans previously deemed to be mentally incompetent ( s. 669 and h.r .

6132 ) , interstate reciprocity of concealed carry privileges ( s. 1390 and s. 845 ) , firearms possession in public housing ( h.r .

3045 and h.r .

4868 ) , and the treatment of firearms under bankruptcy proceedings ( h.r .

5827 / s. 3654 ) .

constitutionality of dc handgun ban and related legislation on june 26 , 2008 , the supreme court issued its decision in district of columbia v. heller on the constitutionality of a dc law that banned handguns for 32 years , among other things .

passed by the dc council on june 26 , 1976 , the dc handgun ban required that all firearms within the district be registered and all owners be licensed , and it prohibited the registration of handguns after september 24 , 1976 .

in a 5-4 decision , the supreme court found the handgun ban to be unconstitutional because it violated an individual's right under the second amendment to possess a handgun in his home for lawful purposes such as self - defense .

dc council passes emergency law on july 15 , 2008 , the dc council passed a temporary , emergency law that allowed residents through a registration / certificate process to keep a handgun in their home as long as that firearm had a capacity of fewer than 12 rounds of ammunition and was not loadable from a magazine in the handgrip , which in effect limited legal handguns under the temporary law to revolvers as opposed to semiautomatic pistols .

the emergency law also continued to require that handguns be kept unloaded and disassembled , or trigger locked , unless an attack in a home was imminent or underway .

pro - gun groups immediately criticized the council's emergency law for not being in the "spirit" of the supreme court's decision because it continued to ban semiautomatic pistols and did not fully roll back the trigger lock requirement .

since the initial emergency law was passed , the dc council has passed several other pieces of similar temporary , emergency laws related to the heller decision .

these laws include new firearms - related provisions that were also included in permanent legislation passed by the dc council that is described below .

legislation related to dc gun laws several members of congress were dissatisfied with the dc council's temporary law .

on july 24 , 2008 , representative mike ross filed a motion to discharge the rules committee from consideration of h.res .

1331 , a resolution that would have provided for the consideration of a bill to restore second amendment rights in the district of columbia ( h.r .

1399 ) .

this bill was similar to previous bills introduced by representative mark souder and senators kay bailey hutchison and orrin hatch in previous congresses .

representative ross introduced h.r .

1399 in the 110 th congress for himself and representative souder on march 27 , 2007 , and senator hutchison introduced a companion measure ( s. 1001 ) on march 28 , 2007 .

in the 110 th congress , representative travis childers introduced a similar bill ( h.r .

6691 ) on july 31 , 2008 .

all three bills would have amended the dc code to limit the council's authority to regulate firearms ; remove semiautomatic firearms that can fire more than 12 rounds without manually reloading from the definition of "machine gun" ; amend the registration requirements so that they do not apply to handguns , but only to sawed - off shotguns , machine guns , and short - barreled rifles ; remove restrictions on ammunition possession ; repeal requirements that dc residents keep firearms in their possession unloaded and disassembled , or bound by a trigger lock ; repeal firearms registration requirements generally ; and repeal certain criminal penalties for possessing or carrying unregistered firearms .

representatives john dingell , john tanner , and mike ross reportedly negotiated an agreement with the house leadership to consider h.r .

6691 in early september .

h.r .

6691 included language that stated as a congressional finding that dc officials "have indicated their intention to continue to unduly restrict lawful firearm possession and use by citizens of the district. .

h.r .

6691 also included a provision that would have allowed dc residents to purchase firearms from federally licensed gun dealers in virginia and maryland .

on september 9 , 2008 , the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing on the possible effects h.r .

6691 might have on the district .

on the same day , representative eleanor holmes norton introduced h.r .

6842 , a bill that would have required the dc mayor and council to ensure that regulations were promulgated that would have been consistent with the heller decision .

on september 15 , 2008 , the house oversight and government reform committee reported h.r .

6842 ( h.rept .

110-843 ) .

on september 17 , 2008 , however , the house amended h.r .

6842 with the text of h.r .

6691 and passed the childers bill .

dc council passes permanent legislation on december 16 , 2008 , the dc council passed the firearms control amendment act of 2008 ( fcaa ; b17-0843 ) and the inoperable pistol amendment act of 2008 ( ipaa ; b17-0593 ) .

mayor adrian fenty signed the fcaa into law on january 28 , 2009 ( l17-0372 ) .

this bill was transmitted to congress on february 10 , 2009 .

from the day of transmittal , congress had 30 legislative days to review this bill under the dc home rule act ( according to the district of columbia ) .

among other things , this law amends the dc code to adopt the federal definition of "machine gun," which does not include semiautomatic pistols ; prohibit the possession and registration of "assault weapons" and rifles capable of firing .50 caliber browning machine gun ( bmg ) rounds ; and require that all firearms made after january 1 , 2011 , be microstamped .

many provisions of this law , including the assault weapons ban and the microstamping provisions , were modeled after california state law .

mayor fenty signed ipaa into law on january 16 , 2009 ( l17-0388 ) .

it was transmitted to congress on february 4 , 2009 .

because the bill includes penalty provisions , congress had 60 legislative days to review this bill under the dc home rule act .

among other things , this permanent legislation amends the dc code to criminalize the possession of inoperable firearms ; criminalize the discharge of firearms ; prohibit carrying a rifle or shotgun ; allow for the transportation of firearms under the same conditions as permitted under federal law ; and change the waiting period to purchase a firearm from 48 hours to 10 days .

dc voting rights and gun laws in the 111 th congress on february 26 , 2009 , senator john ensign successfully amended ( s.amdt .

576 ) the district of columbia house voting rights act of 2009 ( s. 160 ) by a yea - nay vote of 62-36 ( record vote number 72 ) with language that would have overturned certain dc guns laws and prevent the district from legislating in these areas in the future .

the senate passed this bill on the same day by a yea - nay vote of 61-37 ( record vote number 73 ) .

this bill was tabled while the house leadership attempted to negotiate an end to the impasse over the dc gun laws and bring its version of the dc voting rights bill ( h.r .

157 ) to the floor .

in april 2010 , efforts were made to revive the voting rights bill , but some members prepared amendments to overturn the city's gun laws .

consequently , members managing the dc voting rights bill postponed further consideration rather than risk passage of amendments that would overturn the city's gun laws .

senator john mccain and representative travis childers introduced their amendments as stand - alone bills , the second amendment enforcement act ( s. 3265 / h.r .

5162 ) .

in the 112 th congress , representative mike ross has introduced a proposal to restore second amendment rights in the district of columbia ( h.r .

645 ) .

constitutionality of the chicago handgun ban on june 28 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its 5-4 decision in mcdonald v. city of chicago and found that the individual right to lawfully possess a firearm for the purposes of self - defense under the second amendment applied to the states by way of the fourteenth amendment .

although the mcdonald decision arguably nullified the chicago handgun ban by limiting a state , city , or local government's ability to prohibit handguns outright , it does not delineate what would constitute permissible gun control laws under the second amendment .

indeed , the supreme court remanded the chicago handgun ban back to the seventh circuit court of appeals for a rehearing .

consequently , the delineation of permissible gun laws will likely be developed in future cases .

nevertheless , the city of chicago has reportedly adopted handgun regulations that are similar to those adopted by the district of columbia .

these regulations allow eligible residents to register one operable handgun per household , but in most cases that handgun must be locked and rendered inoperable , and it cannot be carried outside of the home .

public lands and firearms possession and use in the 111 th congress , senator tom coburn successfully amended the credit card act of 2009 ( h.r .

627 ) with a provision ( s.amdt .

1067 ) that allows private persons to carry firearms in national parks and wildlife refuges ( effective february 22 , 2010 ) .

this amendment passed by a vote of 67 to 29 ( record vote number 188 ) on may 12 , 2009 .

under h.res .

456 , the house voted on the coburn amendment as a separate measure and passed it by a vote of 279 to 147 .

president barack obama signed h.r .

627 into law on may 22 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-24 ) .

previously , in the 110 th congress during consideration of a public land bill ( s. 2483 ) , senator coburn offered but later withdrew an amendment ( s.amdt .

3967 ) that would have overturned federal regulations that prohibit visitors to parks and wildlife refuges managed by the national park service ( nps ) and fish and wildlife service ( fws ) from possessing operable and loaded firearms .

while these regulations were last revised substantively in 1981 and 1983 , similar firearms restrictions were promulgated in the 1930s in an effort to curb poaching and other illegal activities .

there are exceptions for hunting and marksmanship under current law .

since the 1980s , however , many states have passed laws that allow persons to carry concealed handguns for personal protection .

although 48 states have "concealed carry" laws , only 24 of those states reportedly allow concealed handguns to be carried in state parks .

on april 30 , 2008 , in part at the urging of some members of congress , the department of the interior ( doi ) published proposed regulations that would authorize the possession of loaded and concealed firearms , as long as carrying those firearms in that fashion would be legal under the laws of the states where the public lands are located .

while the initial comment period was scheduled to end on june 30 , 2008 , it was extended until august 8 , 2008 .

doi reported receiving approximately 90,000 comments on those proposed regulations .

final regulations were issued on december 10 , 2008 .

those regulations took effect on january 9 , 2009 .

however , on march 19 , a u.s. district judge issued a preliminary injunction on the regulations in a lawsuit brought by three groups: the brady campaign to prevent gun violence , the national parks conservation association , and the coalition of national park service retirees .

on march 20 , the nra filed a notice to appeal in federal district court in opposition to the preliminary injunction .

senator coburn also introduced a bill , the protecting americans from violent crime act of 2008 ( s. 2619 ) , that was very similar to his proposed amendment and doi's proposed regulations .

supporters of those proposals pointed to a reported rise in illegal activities and violent crime on public lands .

opponents argued that the risk of a violent crime encounter in national parks and wildlife refuges was negligible .

they further argued that allowing others to carry loaded and concealed handguns on their person would make them less safe .

in the 111 th congress , similar measures were introduced by representative doc hastings and senator mike crapo ( h.r .

1684 / s. 816 ) .

amtrak passengers and firearms on september 16 , 2010 , senator roger wicker amended the fy2010 transportation - hud appropriations bill ( h.r .

3288 ) with language to authorize private persons to carry firearms and ammunition in their checked luggage on amtrak trains .

the wicker amendment ( s.amdt .

2366 ) passed by a yea - nay vote , 68-30 ( record vote number 279 ) .

on september 17 , 2009 , the senate passed this bill .

later , h.r .

3288 became the vehicle for the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 .

conferees retained the wicker language in the conference agreement ( h.rept .

111-366 ) , and the president signed h.r .

3288 into law ( p.l .

111-117 ) on december 16 , 2009 .

section 159 of the act requires amtrak , with the transportation security administration , to report to congress ( within six months of enactment — june 16 , 2010 ) on proposed guidance and procedures to implement a "checked firearms program. .

the reported guidance and procedures are to be implemented within one year of enactment .

the act further requires that checked firearms be placed in a locked , hard - sided container , and that passengers planning to carry firearms in their luggage declare their intentions to amtrak at the time they make their reservations or within 24 hours of departure .

similar requirements are set out for placing ammunition in checked luggage .

law enforcement officers safety act amendments the 111 th congress passed amendments to clarify and expand eligibility under the law enforcement officers safety act ( leosa ; p.l .

108-277 ) .

this law authorizes certain qualified active - duty and retired law enforcement officers to carry concealed firearms across state lines , while off duty .

senator leahy , the judiciary committee chair , introduced the amendments as a stand - alone bill ( s. 1132 ) .

in the house , representative j. randy forbes introduced a similar measure ( h.r .

3752 ) .

the senate judiciary committee approved s. 1132 on march 11 , 2010 , and the senate passed the bill on may 13 , 2010 .

the senate judiciary committee filed a report on this bill on july 27 , 2010 ( s.rept .

111-233 ) .

the house passed s. 1132 on september 29 , 2010 .

the president signed s. 1132 into law on october 12 , 2010 ( p.l .

111-272 ) .

the 2010 leosa amendments ( 1 ) clarify that certain amtrak and executive branch law enforcement officers are eligible for concealed carry privileges under p.l .

108-277 , ( 2 ) reduce the length of service criterion for eligibility under that law from 15 to 10 years , and ( 3 ) clarify other provisions of the law related to certification and credentialing .

previously , in the 110 th congress , the senate judiciary committee reported a similar bill ( s. 376 ; s.rept .

110-150 ) on september 5 , 2007 .

this bill was also introduced by senator leahy .

representative forbes introduced a similar bill ( h.r .

2726 ) .

the language of s. 376 was incorporated into s. 2084 , the school safety and law enforcement improvement act of 2007 , when that bill was reported on september 21 , 2007 ( s.rept .

110-183 ) .

in the 109 th congress , the senate amended h.r .

1751 , the court security improvement act of 2006 , with similar leosa provisions and passed that measure .

patient protection and affordable care act and firearms the 111 th congress included language in the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; p.l .

111-148 ) that prohibits data collection on gun ownership or higher premiums for gun owners under wellness program provisions .

the catalyst for this language was an "action alert" that gun owners of america ( goa ) sent out , urging its membership to oppose a senate health care reform proposal released on november 18 , 2009 .

the goa argued that the senate proposal , along with other enacted provisions of law , would have required doctors to provide "gun - related health data" to a computerized national health information network .

with such information , the goa maintained that the federal government would deny individuals the ability to obtain a firearm or firearms permit .

of particular concern for the goa were mental health records .

another concern raised by the goa was the possibility that insurance providers under the senate proposal would have been required or prompted to raise premiums for persons who exhibited arguably "unhealthy behaviors," such as firearms ownership .

although the senate proposal included provisions to amend the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) that addressed electronic data transaction standards for national health information sharing purposes to facilitate eligibility determinations and health care plan enrollments , it did not include any provisions that would have directly required the national collection of "gun - related health data. .

without a clear directive , it is debatable whether the department of health and human services ( hhs ) would have undertaken such data collection on firearms ownership and possession given other provisions in current law , albeit in different statutory contexts , that prohibit the establishment of a registry of privately held firearms or firearms owners .

dr. david blumenthal , then national coordinator for health information technology at hhs , said that the current system does not include a database into which such information could be fed , nor are there plans to create one .

blumenthal added that "we don't want to do it and it's not authorized. .

nor did the senate proposal include any provisions that would have required or prompted insurance providers to raise premiums on gun owners .

on the other hand , the senate legislation did include provisions that would have codified and amended hipaa wellness program provisions that would have addressed employer - based incentives for healthy behavior to reduce health care costs .

arguably , these provisions would not have precluded the secretary of health and human services from promulgating regulations that addressed risks associated with firearms ownership , possession , use , and storage .

however , such regulations , if proposed , would have likely been tested in administrative and judicial review as to their impact on second amendment rights .

nonetheless , senate legislators included new language in their patient protection and affordable care proposal , which the senate passed as an amendment to h.r .

3590 on december 24 , 2009 .

the senate language , which was included in p.l .

111-148 , prohibits any wellness and health promotion activity sponsored under the act's hipaa amendments from requiring the disclosure or collection of any information about the presence or storage of a lawfully possessed firearm or ammunition in the residence or on the property of an individual , or the lawful use , possession , or storage of a firearm or ammunition by an individual .

the language also states that nothing in the bill would be construed to authorize any data collection on the lawful ownership , possession , use , or storage of firearms or ammunition , or to maintain records on individual ownership or possession of a firearm or ammunition .

in addition , with regard to any health insurance to be provided under the act , this provision prohibits providers from increasing premium rates ; denying coverage ; or reducing or withholding discounts , rebates , or rewards for participation in a wellness program because of an individual's lawful ownership , possession , use , or storage of a firearm or ammunition .

finally , under the data collection activities authorized under the act , the language states that no individual would be required to disclose any information relating to the lawful ownership , possession , use , or storage of a firearm or ammunition .

guns held off - base and surplus ammunition and shell casings in addition , two firearms - related provisions were included in the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

one provision ( §1062 ) , sponsored by senator jim inhofe , prohibits the secretary of defense , and by implication base commanders , from collecting any information on privately owned firearms kept by military personnel , department of defense civilian employees , and their family members off - base .

another provision ( §346 ) sponsored by senators jon tester and max baucus addresses the demilitarization of small arms ammunition of several types and calibers , including spent shell casings , which is commonly sold as military surplus .

nics improvement amendments act of 2007 in the wake of the virginia tech tragedy , the 110 th congress passed legislation to improve firearms - related background checks .

the senate amended and passed the nics improvement amendments act of 2007 ( h.r .

2640 ) following lengthy negotiations , as did the house , on december 19 , 2007 , clearing that bill for the president's signature .

president bush signed the bill into law on january 8 , 2008 ( p.l .

110-180 ) .

this law amends and strengthens a provision of the brady handgun violence prevention act ( brady act ; p.l .

103-159 ) that requires federal agencies to provide , and the attorney general to secure , any government records with information relevant to determining the eligibility of a person to receive a firearm for inclusion in databases queried by nics .

the act also includes provisions designed to encourage states , tribes , and territories ( states ) to make available to the attorney general certain records related to persons who are disqualified from acquiring a firearm , particularly records related to domestic violence misdemeanor convictions and restraining orders , as well as mental health adjudications .

to accomplish this , the act establishes a framework of incentives and disincentives , whereby the attorney general is authorized to either waive a grant match requirement or reduce a law enforcement assistance grant depending upon a state's compliance with the act's goals of bringing firearms - related disqualifying records online .

the original proposal ( h.r .

2640 ) was introduced by representative mccarthy and co - sponsored by representative john dingell .

as passed by the house by a voice vote on june 13 , 2007 , h.r .

2640 reportedly reflected a compromise between groups favoring and opposing greater gun control .

the senate judiciary committee approved similar , but not identical , nics improvement amendments as part of the school safety and law enforcement improvement act of 2004 on august 2 , 2007 , and reported this bill on september 21 , 2007 ( s. 2084 ; s.rept .

110-183 ) .

the senate judiciary committee included five other measures in s. 2084 .

with some modification , those measures included the school safety enhancements act ( s. 1217 ) , the equity in law enforcement act ( s. 1448 ) , the precaution act ( s. 1521 ) , the terrorist hoax improvements act ( s. 735 ) , and the law enforcement officers safety act of 2007 ( leosa ; s. 376 ) .

support for the nics improvement and the leosa amendments ( described below ) in s. 2084 was reportedly divided and uneven , however .

citing privacy and cost issues related to the nics amendments , senator coburn reportedly placed a hold on that legislation .

in addition , some opposition to nics improvement amendments had coalesced around an assertion made by larry pratt of gun owners of america that , under these amendments , any veteran who was or had been diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) and was found to be a "danger to himself or others would have his gun rights taken away .. .

forever. .

under current law , however , any veteran or other va beneficiary who is adjudicated or determined to be a mental defective , because he poses a danger to himself or others , or is incapable of conducting his day - to - day affairs , is ineligible to possess a firearm .

a diagnosis of ptsd in and of itself is not a disqualifying factor for the purposes of gun control under the nics improvement amendments or previous law .

under the enacted nics improvement amendments , va beneficiaries who have been determined to be mental defectives could appeal for administrative relief and possibly have their gun rights restored if they could demonstrate that they were no longer afflicted by a disqualifying condition .

veterans , mental incompetency , and firearms eligibility in the 110 th congress , senator burr successfully amended the veterans' medical personnel recruitment and retention act of 2008 ( s. 2969 ) in full committee markup on june 26 , 2008 .

the language of the burr amendment would have provided that "a veteran , surviving spouse , or child who is mentally incapacitated , deemed mentally incompetent , or experiencing an extended loss of consciousness shall not be considered adjudicated as a mental defective" for purposes of the gun control act , "without the order or finding of a judge , magistrate , or other judicial authority of competent jurisdiction that such veteran , surviving spouse , or child is a danger to him or herself or others. .

senator burr introduced a bill , the veterans' 2 nd amendment protection act ( s. 3167 ) , that would have achieved the same ends as his amendment to s. 2969 .

in the 111 th congress , senator burr reintroduced his bill as s. 669 , and the senate committee on veterans' affairs reported this bill ( s.rept .

111-27 ) on june 16 , 2009 .

representative jerry moran introduced a similar bill ( h.r .

2547 ) .

the house veterans' affairs committee considered and approved a similar provision that representative john boozman offered as an amendment to a draft bill in full committee markup on september 15 , 2010 .

this provision was included in the reported version of the bill ( h.r .

6132 ; h.rept .

111-630 ) .

however , when the house considered h.r .

6132 under suspension of the rules , an amended version of h.r .

6132 was called up that did not include the boozman provision .

mental defective adjudications under 27 c.f.r .

section 478.11 , the term "adjudicated as a mental defective" includes a determination by a court , board , commission , or other lawful authority that a person , as a result of marked subnormal intelligence or a mental illness , incompetency , condition , or disease , ( 1 ) is a danger to himself or others , or ( 2 ) lacks the mental capacity to manage his own affairs .

the term also includes ( 1 ) a finding of insanity by a court in a criminal case and ( 2 ) those persons found incompetent to stand trial or found not guilty by reason of lack of mental responsibility pursuant to articles 50a and 72b of the uniform code of military justice , 10 u.s.c .

sections 850a , 876 ( b ) .

this definition of "mental defective" was promulgated by the atf in a final rule published on june 27 , 1997 .

in the final rule , the atf noted that the va had commented on the "proposed rulemaking" and had correctly interpreted that "adjudicated as a mental defective" includes a person who is found to be "mentally incompetent" by the veterans benefit administration ( vba ) .

under veterans law , an individual is considered "mentally incompetent" if he or she lacks the mental capacity to contract or manage his or her own affairs for reasons related to injury or disease ( under 38 cfr §3.353 ) .

in a proposed rulemaking , the atf opined that the inclusion of "mentally incompetent" in the definition of "mental defective" was wholly consistent with the legislative history of the 1968 gun control act .

reportedly , the va could have been the only federal agency that had promulgated a definition like "mentally incompetent" that overlapped with the term "mental defective. .

va referrals to the fbi in november 1998 , the vba provided the fbi with disqualifying records on 88,898 va beneficiaries .

va rating specialists had determined based upon medical evidence that these beneficiaries were unable to manage their own financial affairs .

the va appointed a fiduciary for purposes of receiving and managing each beneficiary's va benefits .

according to the va , during the determination process beneficiaries were notified that va proposed to rate them "incompetent" and that they were able to request a hearing and submit evidence to the contrary if they wished .

va also advised these beneficiaries regarding their right to appeal any final rating regarding their ability to receive and manage their own va benefits .

despite the resultant nics referral , however , the va did not necessarily inform the beneficiary that he would lose his gun rights as a consequence of this determination .

as described above , under the p.l .

110-180 the va is required to inform the beneficiary of this outcome .

interestingly , the veterans medical administration has not submitted any disqualifying records on va medical care recipients to the fbi for inclusion in nics for any medical / psychiatric reason ( like ptsd ) .

while veterans with ptsd or any other condition , who have been involuntarily committed under a state court order to a va medical facility because they posed a danger to themselves or others , are ineligible to ship , transport , receive , or possess a firearm or ammunition under federal law , the veterans medical administration would not make a related referral about that ineligibility to the fbi .

instead , the state in which the court resides would submit the disqualifying record to the fbi , if such a submission would be appropriate and permissible under state law .

nevertheless , the decision by the va to submit vba records on "mentally incompetent" veterans to the fbi for inclusion in the nics mental defective file generated some degree of controversy in 1999 and 2000 .

critics of this policy underscored that veterans routinely consented to "mentally incompetent" determinations so that a fiduciary ( designated payee ) could be appointed for them .

those critics contended that to take away a veteran's second amendment rights without his foreknowledge was improper .

they also pointed out that no other federal agencies were providing similar disqualifying records to the fbi .

this controversy subsided , but it re - emerged when congress considered the nics improvement amendments ( described above ) .

according to the bureau of justice statistics , as of may 1 , 2011 , there were 130,886 files in the nics mental defective file , which had been referred to the fbi by the va. those va files accounted for 99.2% of mental defective files ( 131,979 ) referred to the fbi by any federal department or agency .

in the view of some members of congress , it may be incongruous that other federal agencies , such as the social security administration , that provide similar disability and income maintenance benefits to persons who are mentally incapacitated refer relatively few , if any , firearms - related disqualifying records about beneficiaries whom they serve to the fbi .

moreover , there are other individuals in the u.s. population who are similarly incapacitated due to their age - related infirmities or mental disabilities , but in many cases there are no mechanisms for state or local authorities to make similar referrals to the fbi .

as a consequence , even with the changes put in place by p.l .

110-180 , those members of congress may view the va's continued referral of firearms - related disqualifying records on veterans who have had a fiduciary appointed on their behalf but have not behaved in a threatening or dangerous manner to be an unjustified indignity placed on individuals who have served their country honorably in the armed forces .

other members of congress would maintain that the va has faithfully complied with the law and that public safety is enhanced by making those referrals to the fbi .

they might also argue that opposition to the va policy waned between november 1998 and the 2007 congressional debate , demonstrating that veterans who were "adjudicated mental defective," rarely , if ever , sought to acquire and were subsequently denied firearms in a manner that could be described as an injustice .

those members would likely underscore that , in their view , the va's current policy does not diminish national recognition of those veterans' honorable service .

rather , the va's policy has been implemented to protect those veterans and others from the harm that might result if they acquired a firearm and used it improperly due to reasons possibly related to their mental incompetency .

public housing and firearms possession and use in the 110 th congress , the house passed a bill ( h.r .

6216 ) on july 9 , 2008 , that would have made changes related to the administration of the public housing program administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) through local public housing authorities ( phas ) .

the bill includes a provision that would have prohibited the hud secretary from accepting as reasonable any management or related fees charged by a pha for enforcing any provision of a lease agreement that requires tenants to register firearms that are otherwise legally possessed , or that prohibits their possession outright .

on the other hand , the bill would have allowed phas to terminate the lease of any tenant who was found to be illegally using a firearm .

the gun - related provision in h.r .

6216 reportedly reflected a compromise .

the original language restricting fees for enforcing gun restrictions was included in a motion to recommit offered during floor debate on a similar public housing bill ( h.r .

3521 ) .

that bill was not approved by the house , but was sent back to the house financial services committee for further consideration .

a new version of the public housing bill ( h.r .

5829 ) was introduced that included language from the motion to recommit , but it did not include the lease termination proviso , and the bill received no further consideration .

in the 111 th congress , the financial services committee reported the section 8 voucher reform act of 2009 ( h.r .

3045 ; h.rept .

111-277 ) on july 23 , 2009 .

in committee markup , representative price successfully amended the bill on july 9 , 2009 , with language that would have prevented authorities from prohibiting firearms in public housing .

the committee approved another housing bill that included a similar provision ( h.r .

4868 ) on july 27 , 2010 .

concealed carry and reciprocity ( thune amendment ) on july 22 , 2009 , the senate considered an amendment ( s.amdt .

1618 ) offered by senator thune to the fy2010 defense authorization act ( s. 1390 ) that would have arguably provided for national reciprocity between states regarding the concealed carry of firearms .

by agreement , the amendment needed 60 votes to pass , but it was narrowly defeated by a recorded vote , 58-39 .

senator thune introduced a similar bill , the respecting states rights and concealed carry reciprocity act of 2009 ( s. 845 ) .

as background , the issue of concealed carry under state law can be divided into four categories: ( 1 ) no permit required , ( 2 ) mandatory or "shall issue," ( 3 ) discretionary or "may issue," and ( 4 ) no concealed carry permitted .

in alaska and vermont , state law allowed concealed carry without a permit ( no permit required ) , as is the case today .

when the thune amendment was debated , 35 states had "shall issue" laws , in that the state issues the permit as long as the applicant meets the eligibility criteria .

eleven states were "may issue" states , in that the state had discretion in whether to issue a permit .

and , wisconsin and illinois state law prohibited the concealed carry of firearms by civilians under any circumstances .

many states with concealed carry laws have extended concealed carry privileges , or reciprocity , to the residents of other states .

according to the nra , however , those concealed carry laws are often very technical and subject to change .

moreover , there are no national eligibility criteria , or training standards regarding concealed carry .

although the thune amendment did not address the issue of national standards , it arguably would have required "may issue" states to honor the permits issued by "shall issue" states .

by extension , it would also have required "shall issue" and "may issue" states to honor the eligibility of all residents of alaska and vermont to carry concealed firearms in their states , as long as those persons were not otherwise prohibited from possessing firearms .

bankruptcy and firearms representative john a. boccieri and senator leahy introduced the protecting gun owners in bankruptcy act of 2010 ( h.r .

5827 / s. 3654 ) .

this proposal would have amended federal bankruptcy law to permit an individual to exempt from the property of his estate a single rifle , shotgun , or pistol , or any combination thereof , as long as the total value of the exemption did not exceed $3,000 .

on july 28 , 2010 , the house passed h.r .

5827 by a roll call vote ( two - thirds required ) of 307-113 ( roll no .

479 ) .

in the 112 th congress , representative tim griffin has introduced a similar measure ( h.r .

1181 ) .

atf appropriations and southwest border gun trafficking the 111 th congress considered legislation to either fund atf or authorize increased appropriations for the agency .

the atf enforces federal criminal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives .

atf works both independently and through partnerships with industry groups ; international , state , and local governments ; and other federal agencies to investigate and reduce crime involving firearms and explosives , acts of arson , and illegal trafficking of alcohol and tobacco products .

atf appropriations for fy2011 the president's fy2011 budget request included $1.163 billion for atf , an increase of $42.2 million , or 3.8% , compared to the fy2010-enacted appropriation .

proposed increases ( over base ) included $11.8 million for project gunrunner and $1.2 million for emergency support function #13 ( esf - 13 ) , the public safety and security annex to the national response framework ( nrf ) .

the nrf sets broad responsibilities and lines of authority for federal agencies in the event of a national emergency or major disaster .

under the nrf , the attorney general is responsible for esf - 13 , which entails all hazards law enforcement planning and coordination for the entire united states and its territories .

the attorney general , in turn , has delegated his responsibility for esf - 13's implementation to the atf .

on july 22 , 2010 , the senate appropriations committee reported an fy2011 cjs appropriations bill ( s. 3636 ; s.rept .

111-229 ) .

this measure would have provided atf with $1.163 billion for fy2011 , matching the administration's request .

on july 22 , 2010 , the senate appropriations committee marked up and reported the fy2011 commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations bill ( s. 3636 ) .

the senate bill would have matched the administration's request .

in the absence of an enacted cjs appropriations bill , congress passed several continuing resolutions .

as described above , the 112 th congress finalized the fy2011 atf appropriation and provided the agency with $1.113 billion .

atf appropriations for fy2010 for fy2010 , the administration requested $1.121 billion and 5,025 full - time equivalent ( fte ) positions for atf , or $66.6 million and 68 fte positions more than the amounts appropriated for fy2009 ( $1.054 billion and 4,957 ) .

of the difference , $23.6 million and 22 fte positions were base adjustments .

for southwest border enforcement , the fy2010 request included a budget enhancement of $18 million to support project gunrunner and $25 million for the new national center for explosives training and research center ( ncetr ) .

compared to the enacted fy2009 level of funding , the fy2010 request would have provided a 4.9% increase .

for atf , congress appropriated $1.121 billion in the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( h.r .

3288 ) .

the president signed this bill into law on december 16 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the act provided an amount that was equal to the administration's request .

this amount was $52.5 million more than the final fy2009-enacted amount , or an increase of 4.9% .

conference report language ( h.rept .

111-366 ) indicated that the act included $18 million for project gunrunner , the same amount requested by the administration .

in addition , the act also included $10 million to increase the violent crime impact team program , $6 million for construction ( phase two ) of the ncetr , and $1.5 million to complete atf headquarters construction projects .

on july 28 , 2010 , the house passed an fy2010 supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r .

5875 ) that included $39.1 million for atf to increase southwest border gun trafficking investigations .

on august 5 , 2010 , the senate passed its version of h.r .

5875 , which included $37.5 million for atf .

on august 9 , the house introduced a new border security supplemental bill ( h.r .

6080 ) , which was subsequently passed by the house on august 10 .

this bill contained language identical to senate - passed h.r .

5875 .

reportedly , the house took up the bill with a new number to avoid a dispute related to its constitutional obligation to originate all revenue measures .

this dispute arose with the addition of funding provisions in senate - passed h.r .

5875 that were not included in the house - passed version .

on august 12 , the senate passed h.r .

6080 .

on august 13 , the president signed h.r .

6080 into law ( p.l .

111-230 ) .

it provides atf with an additional $37.5 million for project gunrunner .

southwest border gun trafficking on the southwest border with mexico , firearms violence has spiked sharply in recent years as drug trafficking organizations have reportedly vied for control of key smuggling corridors into the united states .

in march 2008 , president felipe calderón called on the united states to increase its efforts to suppress gun trafficking from the united states into mexico .

in the 110 th congress , the house passed a bill ( h.r .

6028 ) that would authorize a total of $73.5 million to be appropriated over three years , for fy2008 through fy2010 , to increase atf resources dedicated to stemming illegal gun trafficking into mexico as part of the mérida initiative .

similar authorizations were included in s. 2867 , h.r .

5863 , and h.r .

5869 .

in the 111 th congress , similar authorizations were included in several bills ( s. 205 , h.r .

495 , h.r .

1448 , and h.r .

1867 ) .

tiahrt amendment and firearms trace data limitations representative todd tiahrt offered an amendment that placed several funding restrictions and conditions on atf and the fbi during full committee markup of the fy2004 doj appropriations bill ( h.r .

2799 ) .

while modified , those restrictions were included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) .

amended to the atf appropriations every year since ( fy2005-fy2012 ) , the tiahrt restrictions prohibit the use of any funding appropriated for atf to disclose firearms trace or multiple handgun sales report data for any purpose other than supporting "bona fide" criminal investigation or agency licensing proceedings , prohibit the use of any funding appropriated for atf to issue new regulations that would require licensed dealers to conduct physical inventories of their businesses , require the next - day destruction of approved brady background check records , and require atf to include certain data disclaimers with any firearms tracing study it releases .

of these limitations , the first , dealing with disclosure of firearms trace or multiple handgun sales report data , probably was and is the most contentious .

a coalition of u.s. mayors , including new york city mayor michael bloomberg , maintain that they should have access to such data in order to identify out - of - state federally licensed gun dealers who wittingly or unwittingly sell large numbers of firearms to illegal gun traffickers .

for fy2008 , the tiahrt limitation on firearms trace and multiple handgun sales report data was the source of debate when the senate cjs appropriations subcommittee did not include this limitation in its draft bill .

senator richard shelby amended the fy2008 cjs appropriations bill ( which became s. 1745 ) with similar , but modified , limitations in full committee markup .

similar language was included in the house - passed cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

3093 ) , and was included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ; h.r .

2764 ) , into which the cjs appropriations were folded .

the modified fy2008 limitation included new language that authorizes atf to share firearms trace data with tribal and foreign law enforcement agencies and federal agencies for national intelligence purposes ; share firearms trace data with law enforcement agencies and prosecutors to exchange among themselves ; and release aggregate statistics on firearms traffickers and trafficking channels , or firearms misuse , felons , and trafficking investigations .

the fy2008 limitation , however , continued to prohibit the release of firearms trace data for the purposes of suing gun manufacturers and dealers .

moreover , the limitation includes the phrase "in fiscal year 2008 and thereafter," which made it permanent law according to the government accountability office ( gao ) .

despite the futurity language , congress has modified the limitation's language and included it ( with futurity language ) in the fy2009 , fy2010 , fy2011 , and fy2012 commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) , and related agencies appropriations acts ( p.l .

111-8 , p.l .

111-117 , p.l .

112-10 , and p.l .

112-55 ) .

appendix b .

major federal firearms and related statutes the following principal changes to the gun control act have been enacted since 1968 .

the firearms owners' protection act , mcclure - volkmer amendments ( p.l .

99-308 , 1986 ) , eases certain interstate transfer and shipment requirements for long guns , defines the term "engaged in the business," eliminates some recordkeeping requirements , and bans the private possession of machine guns not legally owned prior to 1986 .

the armor piercing ammunition ban ( p.l .

99-408 , 1986 , amended in p.l .

103-322 , 1994 ) prohibits the manufacture , importation , and delivery of handgun ammunition composed of certain metal substances and certain full - jacketed ammunition .

the federal energy management improvement act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-615 ) requires that all toys or firearm look - a - likes have a blazed orange plug in the barrel , denoting that it is a non - lethal imitation .

the undetectable firearms act ( p.l .

100-649 , 1988 , amended by p.l .

108-174 , 2003 ) , also known as the "plastic gun" legislation , bans the manufacture , import , possession , and transfer of firearms not detectable by security devices .

the gun - free school zone act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-647 ) , as originally enacted , was ruled unconstitutional by the u.s. supreme court ( united states v. lopez , 514 u.s. 549 ( 1995 ) , april 26 , 1995 ) .

the act prohibited possession of a firearm in a school zone ( on the campus of a public or private school or within 1,000 feet of the grounds ) .

in response to the court's finding that the act exceeded congress's authority to regulate commerce , the 104 th congress included a provision in p.l .

104-208 that amended the act to require federal prosecutors to include evidence that the firearms "moved in" or affected interstate commerce .

the brady handgun violence prevention act , 1993 ( p.l .

103-159 ) , requires that background checks be completed on all non - licensed persons seeking to obtain firearms from federal firearms licensees .

the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) prohibited the manufacture or importation of semiautomatic assault weapons and large - capacity ammunition feeding devices for 10 years .

the act also bans the sale or transfer of handguns and handgun ammunition to , or possession of handguns and handgun ammunition by , juveniles ( younger than 18 years of age ) without prior written consent from the juvenile's parent or legal guardian ; exceptions related to employment , ranching , farming , target practice , and hunting are provided .

in addition , the act disqualifies persons under court orders related to domestic abuse from receiving a firearm from any person or possessing a firearm .

it also increased penalties for the criminal use of firearms .

the assault weapons ban expired on september 13 , 2004 .

the federal domestic violence gun ban ( the lautenberg amendment , in the omnibus consolidated appropriations act for fy1997 , p.l .

104-208 ) prohibits persons convicted of misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence from possessing firearms and ammunition .

the ban applies regardless of when the offense was adjudicated: prior to , or following enactment .

it has been challenged in the federal courts , but these challenges have been defeated .

the omnibus consolidated and emergency appropriations act , 1999 ( p.l .

105-277 ) , requires all federal firearms licensees to offer for sale gun storage and safety devices .

it also bans firearms transfers to , or possession by , most non - immigrants and those non - immigrants who have overstayed the terms of their temporary visa .

the treasury , postal and general government appropriations act ( p.l .

106-58 ) requires that background checks be conducted when former firearms owners seek to reacquire a firearm that they sold to a pawnshop .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) establishes a bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives by transferring the law enforcement functions , but not the revenue functions , of the former bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms from the department of the treasury to the department of justice .

the law enforcement officers safety act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-277 ) provides that qualified active and retired law enforcement officers may carry a concealed firearm .

this act supersedes state level prohibitions on concealed carry that would otherwise apply to law enforcement officers , but it does not override any federal laws .

nor does the act supersede or limit state laws that permit private persons or entities to prohibit or restrict the possession of concealed firearms on their property or prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on any state or local government property , installation , building , base , or park .

the protection of lawful commerce in arms act ( p.l .

109-92 ) prohibits certain types of lawsuits against firearms manufacturers and dealers to recover damages related to the criminal or unlawful use of their products ( firearms and ammunition ) by other persons .

this law also includes provisions that ( 1 ) increase penalties for using armor - piercing handgun ammunition in the commission of a crime of violence or drug trafficking , ( 2 ) require the attorney general to submit a report ( within two years of enactment ) on "armor - piercing" ammunition based on certain performance characteristics , including barrel length and amount of propellant ( gun powder ) , and ( 3 ) prohibits federally licensed gun dealers from transferring a handgun to an unlicensed person without also providing a secure storage or safety device .

the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-162 ) authorized to be appropriated for atf the following amounts: $924 million for fy2006 , $961 million for fy2007 , $999 million for fy2008 , and $1.039 billion for fy2009 .

the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-177 ) includes a provision that requires that the atf director be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .

the disaster recovery personal protection act of 2006 , which was included in the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l .

109-295 ) , amended the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

§5207 ) to prohibit federal officials from seizing or authorizing the seizure of any firearm from private persons during a major disaster or emergency if possession of that firearm was not already prohibited under federal or state law .

it also forbids the same officials from prohibiting the possession of any firearm that is not otherwise prohibited .

also , the law bans any prohibition on carrying firearms by persons who are otherwise permitted to legally carry such firearms because those persons are working under a federal agency , or under the control of an agency , providing disaster or emergency relief .

