enforcement of child support often results in custodial parents and noncustodial parentsbeing in an adversarial relationship .

from the perspective of the noncustodial parent it is often seenas an unbalanced relationship because the custodial parent is backed by the child supportenforcement ( cse ) agency and in many cases the "welfare" agency as well .

although the cseagency views itself as working for the state on behalf of dependent children , the custodial parent ineffect receives the benefits of federal / state intervention because the child is in her or his care .

thissituation is even more pronounced in the case of low - income custodial parents and children becausethey have a link to public welfare agencies .

thus , the custodial parent has access to a network offederal and state resources that are not available to the noncustodial parent .

during the last several years members of congress and others have acknowledged that the"best interests of the child" are generally served when both parents are part of the equation .

theyhave commented that many low - income noncustodial parents have low levels of education , poorwork histories , and significant barriers to work .

they have debated child support issues in terms of"dead broke" rather than "deadbeat" noncustodial parents and have remarked that responsibleparenthood involves both financial and emotional relationships with one's children .

some contendthat public policies are needed to support the father's role as nurturer , disciplinarian , mentor andmoral instructor .

 ( 1 ) thisnew federal / state governmental perspective is seen in the cse agency's funding of access andvisitation programs for noncustodial parents and in pending welfare reauthorization legislation ( h.r .

240 and s. 667 , 109th congress ) that would provide funding formarriage promotion and responsible fatherhood programs .

the pending welfare reauthorization legislation ( mentioned above ) contains incentives forstates to send more of the child support collected on behalf of custodial parents to the family itself,additional cse enforcement tools , funding for programs designed to promote marriage amonglow - income persons as a way to improve the economic well - being and development of children , andfunding for programs designed to help noncustodial fathers meet both their financial and emotionalresponsibilities to their children .

supporters of the welfare reauthorization legislation claim that itspassage will result in more noncustodial parents paying child support .

they contend thatnoncustodial parents who can afford to pay child support but who do not want to pay will not be ableto escape their duty because of the strong enforcement apparatus , and that noncustodial parents whocannot afford to pay will be offered services that may improve their financial ability to pay as wellas their willingness to pay .

the reader should note that this new more forgiving attitude toward noncustodial parents hasbrought with it a wariness among custodial parents .

some mothers contend that an emphasis on theimportance of fathers may lead to undervaluing single - parent families maintained by mothers - - thatservices for fathers may be at the expense of services for mothers - - and that the "pro - fatherhood"discourse might give fathers' rights groups additional leverage in challenging child support , childcustody , and visitation arrangements .

although noncustodial parents often find themselves at loggerheads with custodial parentsand the cse system with respect to paternity and child support , the situation is usually morecomplicated than deadbeat dad vs. dependent mom .

sometimes a noncustodial parent is really notthe father and sometimes noncustodial parents who are trying to meet their financial obligation totheir children have been burdened with a child support order that is too high .

in these situations,some maintain that legal services providers should do more to help alleviate the problem .

supportersof this approach maintain that providing legal services to noncustodial parents may result in childsupport payments becoming a more reliable source of income for custodial parents becausenoncustodial parents would have had greater access to the legal system and be more satisfied that"they had their day in court" and thereby be more amenable to fulfilling their child supportobligations .

the lsc is a private , non - profit , federally funded corporation that was established bycongress in 1974 .

part of the lsc's mission is to provide high quality legal assistance to those whootherwise would be unable to afford adequate legal representation and to assist in improvingopportunities for such persons .

the lsc is funded through congressional appropriations .

the lscdoes not provide legal services directly , but rather it provides grants to independent local legalservices programs selected through a competitive process .

the primary responsibility of the lscis to manage and oversee the congressionally appropriated federal funds that it distributes in the formof grants to local legal services providers that in turn provide civil legal assistance to low - incomeclients in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and five u.s. territories .

in fy2004 , the lscdistributed $316.6 million of its $335.3 million appropriation in the form of grants to 143 local legalservices programs .

the remaining funds were allocated for management and administration,information technology , and its office of the inspector general .

lsc funding accounts for about half of all funding in the united states for civil legal servicesfor the poor .

in 2004 , there were approximately 45 million persons who were potentially eligiblefor lsc - funded services , ( 2 ) but according to lsc surveys only about 20% of those eligible for and in need of services actuallyreceived services .

although low - income noncustodial parents who owe child support are among thepersons eligible for lsc - funded services , they aren't among the groups that have traditionally beenhelped by legal services programs and therefore may have a hard time accessing services that arealready in short supply .

the child support enforcement ( cse ) program ( title iv - d of the social security act ) wasenacted in january 1975 ( p.l .

93-647 ) .

the cse program is a federal / state program that promotesself - sufficiency of families in which one of the biological parents is living outside of the home byensuring that noncustodial parents meet their financial responsibility to their children .

the cseprogram provides seven major services on behalf of children: ( 1 ) parent location , ( 2 ) paternityestablishment , ( 3 ) establishment of child support orders , ( 4 ) review and modification of child supportorders , ( 5 ) collection of child support payments , ( 6 ) distribution of child support payments , and ( 7 ) establishment and enforcement of medical child support .

all 50 states , the district of columbia,guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands operate cse programs and are entitled to federalmatching funds .

while the federal government plays an important role in setting program standardsand policy , evaluating state performance , and providing technical assistance and training , states areresponsible for administering the cse program ( directly or through local cse agencies and familyor domestic courts ) .

given that the main purpose of the cse program is to act in the best interest of the child toobtain any financial support that a child is due , it usually is the case that the state and localgovernment along with the custodial parent are in an adversarial relationship with the noncustodialparent .

in many instances the cse agency collects owed child support via income withholding andno problems occur .

in other cases , especially cases in which the parents were never married,paternity and a child support order must be established before the cse agency can obtain childsupport on behalf of the custodial parent .

in such cases , paternity may be contested and the financialability of the noncustodial parent to pay a specific amount of child support may be questioned .

this section discusses some of the problems that noncustodial parents maintain that theyencounter ; namely: ( 1 ) false allegations of fatherhood , ( 2 ) child support obligations that are unfairand unreasonable , ( 3 ) high arrearages that are financially beyond their capability to pay , ( 4 ) incarceration because of unreasonable child support demands , ( 5 ) loss of the means to theirlivelihood ( eg , driver's license , professional license , passport ) because they fall behind in meetingtheir child support obligation , ( 6 ) poor relationships with their children , and ( 7 ) tenuous connectionto their families and with their community after serving time in jail or prison .

low - income noncustodial parents who owe child support have very few places to turn forassistance or support .

however , one potential source of aid for noncustodial parents who owe childsupport is legal services .

as mentioned earlier , the legal services corporation ( lsc ) is a private , non - profit , federallyfunded corporation established in 1974 by congress .

part of the lsc's mission is to provide highquality legal assistance to those who otherwise would be unable to afford adequate legalrepresentation and to assist in improving opportunities for such persons .

the lsc - funded programs do not handle criminal cases , nor do they accept fee - generatingcases that private attorneys are willing to accept on a contingency basis .

in addition , in 1996 a seriesof new limitations were placed upon activities in which lsc - funded programs may engage on behalfof their clients , even with non - lsc funds .

among them are prohibitions on class actions , challengesto welfare reform , collection of attorneys' fees , rule making , lobbying , litigation on behalf ofprisoners , representation in drug - related public housing evictions , and representation of certaincategories of aliens .

the legal services delivery system is based on several principles: local priorities , nationalaccountability , competition for grants , and a strong public - private partnership .

local programs areindependent entities , governed by boards of directors drawn from the local bar and clientcommunity .

all legal services programs must comply with laws enacted by congress and theimplementing regulations promulgated by the lsc .

lsc funding accounts for about half of all funding in the united states for civil legal servicesfor the poor .

 ( 20 ) thelsc does not provide legal services directly , but rather it provides grants to independent local legalservices programs selected through a competitive process .

in fy2004 , the lsc distributed $316.6million of its $335.3 million appropriation in the form of grants to 143 local legal services programs .

the remaining funds were allocated for management and administration ( $13.2 million ) ,information technology ( $2.9 million ) , and the lsc office of the inspector general ( $2.6 million ) .

in fy2004 , there were approximately 45 million persons who were potentially eligible forlsc - funded services .

data from the lsc suggest that only about 20% of persons eligible forlsc - funded services actually had access to those services when they needed them ( based ongeographic boundaries , service areas , funding , local priorities , etc. ) .

 ( 21 ) according to the lsc's2003-2004 annual report: despite lsc's current congressional support , the unmetlegal needs of america's poor remain staggering .

to qualify for lsc - funded assistance , anindividual's annual income cannot exceed $11,638 ; a family of four's cannot exceed $23,563 .

yetcurrent federal funding is clearly inadequate to serve the civil legal needs of the more than 45.2million poor americans eligible for lsc - funded legal assistance .

millions of eligible clients areforestalled from pursuing justice every year .

still millions more - - whose incomes are just above thefederal poverty threshold but who nonetheless cannot afford adequate legal representation - - areeffectively denied access to the u.s. civil justice system as well .

 ( 22 ) lsc grantees close about 1 million cases annually in addition to handling another 4 million legalservice "matters" ( such as helping self - represented ( i.e. , pro se ) litigants obtain the information theyneed to pursue their lawsuit , disseminating legal services materials in communities , referring clientsto appropriate services , providing mediation assistance , staffing courthouse help desks , etc. ) .

during 2004 , legal services attorneys closed 901,067 cases .

family issues such as childsupport , divorce , separation , and domestic violence were the substance of about 40% of caseshandled by legal services offices ; housing issues , including eviction cases , homeownership problems,and public housing assistance comprised about 25% of cases ; income maintenance issues , includingbenefit claims for veterans and senior citizens , and medicaid and social security disability claimsrepresented another 15% of cases ; and consumer , finance ( including bankruptcy and debt reliefassistance ) , and individual rights issues comprised about 20% of cases .

most of the cases handledby legal services providers are resolved through advice and referral .

only about 14% of cases wereresolved in court , primarily because they involved family law issues ( eg , protective orders , childsupport , etc. ) .

in which court action was required by state law .

as noted above , the lsc does not provide legal services directly .

rather , it funds local legalservices providers , which are referred to by the lsc as "grantees. .

grantees may include non - profitorganizations that have as a purpose the provision of legal assistance to eligible clients , privateattorneys , groups of private attorneys or law firms , state or local governments , and certain sub - stateregional planning and coordination agencies .

each local legal services program is headed by its ownboard of directors , of whom about 60% are lawyers admitted to a state bar and one - third are eligibleclients .

each local program must spend an amount equal to at least 12.5% of its basic grant toencourage participation by private attorneys in the delivery of legal services to low - income clients .

local programs establish their own eligibility criteria , which may not exceed 125% of the federalpoverty guidelines .

local programs hire staff , contract with local attorneys , and develop pro bonoprograms for the direct delivery of legal assistance to eligible clients .

these local programs providelegal assistance to individuals based on locally determined priorities that meet local communityconditions and needs .

thus , to a certain extent , it is up to noncustodial parents to advocate on their own behalf andto make the communities in which they live aware of the problems that they face with regard tocountering unjustified allegations of paternity , obtaining fair child support orders , meeting their childsupport obligations , getting child supports orders modified when they have a change in financialcircumstances , seeking custody or visitation rights , and re - establishing family and community ties .

with only an estimated 20% of eligible recipients receiving legal services ( when they need suchservices ) , low - income noncustodial parents must compete to be included as customers in a programthat does not have the resources to serve all who are eligible for its services .

legal assistance is generally advisable in matters as serious and complex as paternityestablishment and child support .

the outcome of such cases may result in significant redistributionof income from the noncustodial parent to the custodial parent and child for many years .

however,most low - income noncustodial parents cannot afford to hire an attorney to help deal with thesecomplicated matters .

for millions of americans , legal services represent their only way to access the justicesystem .

legal services' clients are very diverse , encompassing all races , ethnic groups , and ages .

they include families receiving public assistance , the working poor , veterans , family farmers,persons with disabilities , victims of domestic violence , and victims of natural disasters .

many ofthese persons were formerly middle class , and became poor because of age , unemployment , illness,or the breakup of a family .

lsc - funded programs are intended to provide individuals with the legalinformation they need to help themselves and instruct clients on both their rights and responsibilitiesunder the law .

lsc's help is intended to assist families to maintain their incomes , homes , healthbenefits , and ties to their children and their communities .

 ( 23 ) according to the lsc , about 70% of their clients are women,most with children , and another 10% are senior citizens .

 ( 24 ) legal services providers have the ability to help noncustodial parents in a number of ways .

they can provide information on the benefits and responsibilities of fatherhood before an allegedfather voluntarily acknowledges paternity .

they can counsel alleged fathers to contest paternity ifthe man does not believe that the child is his .

they can warn noncustodial parents of the negativeconsequences that often result from default judgments .

they can advise noncustodial parents of thebenefits of appearing in court at the appointed date and time to present their side of the story inpaternity and child support cases .

they can represent noncustodial parents in court , presentingevidence that counters the awarding of unreasonably high child support orders .

they candisseminate information encouraging noncustodial parents to seek a modification of the child supportorder if their financial circumstances change because of a loss of a job , illness / disability , jail orprison sentence , or additional dependents .

they can represent such persons in the modificationhearing .

they can advocate on their client's behalf to get driver's licenses , professional licenses , orpassports reinstated .

they can advise noncustodial parents of their rights regarding child custodyand visitation .

they can petition the court for custody or visitation rights on the noncustodialparent's behalf .

they can refer noncustodial parents to appropriate resources to help them meet theiremotional and financial responsibilities to their children .

they can help noncustodial parents getarrest or conviction records expunged .

the lsc has invested about $3 million over the last couple of years from its informationtechnology budget to provide that every state has a comprehensive legal services internet websitewhere clients can access important legal materials .

other information technology grants havesupported the creation of websites specifically designed to assist self - represented litigants by offeringdownloadable self - help materials , referrals to legal and social services providers , and other usefullinks .

 ( 25 ) recent efforts on the part of legal services programs to coordinate and improve clientoutreach and community legal education provide one way for noncustodial parents to gain assistancein resolving many of their child support issues .

just as divorce , paternity issues , child custody,visitation , eviction , etc. , are important issues for mothers who historically have received help fromlegal services , they also are pivotal for fathers as well .

