this report provides a description and status report on brazil's challenge to certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program under the rules of the world trade organization's ( wto's ) dispute settlement process in case ds267 .

the "brazil cotton case" had its wto origins in 2002 and has since evolved into a sprawling legal enterprise that is still ongoing as of 2011 .

readers interested in the current status of the dispute — including details of the implementation of a memorandum of understanding between the united states and brazil — should proceed directly to the report section entitled " recent action related to the wto brazil cotton case . .

the cotton industry is a major component of the u.s. agricultural sector .

from 1991 to 2010 u.s. cash receipts from cotton production averaged $4.3 billion per year , while export sales averaged nearly $3 billion .

cotton is grown across the southern tier of states stretching from virginia down through the carolinas and into georgia , then westward through a belt of contiguous states to california .

texas is the largest cotton - producing state , accounting for an average of 26% of u.s. production since 1990 .

in 2002 , when brazil first originated its wto dispute settlement case against u.s. cotton programs , 17 states reported cotton production valued at over $20 million .

the united states is the third - largest producer of cotton in the world , behind china and india , and the world's largest cotton exporter .

in the 1990s , u.s. exports accounted for 25% of world trade in cotton .

however , since 2000 the united states has accounted for an increasing share of world trade ( averaging over 37% ) .

u.s. exports as a share of domestic production have averaged over 70% since 2000 , up from a 40% average during the early 1990s , due in large part to a decline in domestic mill use .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the expanding u.s. prominence in global markets since 2000 , coupled with large u.s. subsidy levels directed considerable international attention to u.s. cotton program outlays .

in 2002 , brazil — a major cotton export competitor — expressed its growing concerns about u.s. cotton subsidies by initiating a wto dispute settlement case ( ds267 ) against certain features of the u.s. cotton program .

once initiated , a dispute settlement case follows a sequence of events designed to produce resolution of the dispute within a 12-15 month time frame .

however , the wto dispute settlement ( ds ) process that reviewed brazil's charges against the u.s. cotton program has extended well beyond the hypothetical 15-month time frame .

in this particular case , the initial wto panel review took 17 months from the establishment of the panel in march 2003 to its final ruling in september 2004 .

furthermore , substantial additional time has since been added to the dispute settlement process — first , for an appellate body review of the initial ruling on appeal , then for a wto compliance panel to review a dispute over u.s. compliance with the initial panel's ruling , and finally for an arbitrator to review a disagreement between brazil and the united states over brazil's proposed retaliation amounts .

see table 5 for a timeline of the dispute settlement case and related events .

with respect to the initial dispute settlement case , it was broadly written and touched on almost every aspect of u.s. commodity programs , although the focus was on the six principal claims described below along with the wto dispute settlement panel finding ( of september 8 , 2004 ) and appellate body ( ab ) ruling ( of march 3 , 2005 ) .

this section describes brazil's charges of noncompliance , the proposed retaliation , the beginning of wto arbitration over the size and nature of the proposed retaliation , and a ruling by a wto compliance panel reviewing whether the united states had fully complied with earlier recommendations .

following the wto arbitrator's august 31 , 2009 , ruling , brazil now had the approval to initiate sanctions against the united states .

the arbitrator's decisions were final and not subject to appeal , and brazil had complete freedom to decide which products would be subject to retaliatory hikes in import tariffs and which ip and services rights could be targeted by supplementary countermeasures .

however , before brazil could proceed with any retaliation , it first had to request the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) to authorize its retaliation request in an amount , and with respect to types of trade , consistent with these decisions .

following the circulation of the arbitrator's decisions on august 31 , 2009 , brazil accordingly submitted requests to the dsb to authorize the suspension of concessions or other obligations .

such approval is decided under reverse consensus , such that wto members would have to decide by consensus ( including brazil voting against itself ) to not allow brazil to proceed .

on november 19 , 2009 , the dsb agreed to grant brazil authorization to impose countermeasures consistent with the arbitrator's decisions .

wto dispute settlement rules did not require that brazil pursue its retaliation request or , if it did so , that it request authorization to retaliate by a given date .

other possible options included the negotiation of a settlement of the case before brazil were to impose retaliatory measures or , as suggested by some , a request by the united states for a ruling by a new compliance panel that the objectionable elements of the prohibited subsidy have been eliminated .

the united states has taken several steps to comply with the three major points identified under the april 2010 memorandum of understanding ( mou ) and the june 2010 framework agreement .

the arbitration ruling in favor of brazil's requested cross - retaliation countermeasure could raise the stakes in this particular dispute by potentially expanding retaliation into trips and the general agreement on trade in services .

the u.s. response to the wto cotton ruling is being watched closely by developing countries , particularly by a consortium of four african cotton - producing countries that has submitted its own proposal to the wto calling for a global agreement to end all production - related support for cotton growers of all wto - member countries .

trade experts have expressed concern that the panel findings could extend beyond cotton to other major field crops , particularly as concerns the potential limits on export credit guarantees .

some trade and market analysts , as well as legislators , have expressed concern that a broad finding against u.s. farm program provisions under the actionable subsidies ruling could necessitate legislative changes to the u.s. farm bill to bring existing program operations into compliance .

given the importance of cotton in the u.s. agricultural economy and the potential for wto - imposed limitations on u.s. cotton program operations , congress likely will be closely monitoring developments in the wto cotton case and the doha round of trade negotiations .

both the senate and house agriculture committees regularly hold hearings on agricultural trade negotiations .

in addition to congressional hearings , congress will likely be engaged in consultations with the administration on the bilateral trade negotiations as well as the doha round of wto trade negotiations .

such consultations will be a major vehicle for members to express their views on this dispute and on the negotiating issues it raises .

when confronted with a negative wto dispute settlement ruling , a country has essentially five options to choose from: eliminate the subsidy ; reduce the subsidy to diminish its adverse effect ; revise the program function to reduce the linkage between the subsidy and the adverse effect ( referred to as decoupling ) ; pay a mutually acceptable compensatory payment to offset the adverse effects of the subsidy ; or suffer the consequences of trade retaliation .

ultimately , congress is responsible for passing farm program legislation that complies with u.s. commitments in international trade agreements .

the united states would appear to have already complied with several of the ab's recommendation concerning "prohibited subsidies" through changes in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ; §3101 ( a ) ) by eliminating the step 2 , gsm - 103 , and scgp programs , and by removing the fee cap on gsm - 102 credit guarantees ( i.e. , by eliminating the "subsidy" component of export credit guarantees ) .

in addition , by the same 2008 farm bill provision congress requires that the secretary of agriculture , in carrying out the gsm - 102 program , "work with the industry to ensure , to the maximum extent practicable , that risk - based fees associated with the guarantees cover , but do not exceed , the operating costs and losses over the long - term. .

however , a more explicit definition of "long - term" such as a two - year period would perhaps provide a stronger signal to the secretary of agriculture in regard to operating the gsm - 102 program with no net losses .

also , some questions remain as to what extent the 2008 farm bill has addressed the adverse effects charge related to price - contingent subsidies .

instead of eliminating or reducing program triggers , the 2008 farm bill appears to offer higher levels of price and income support that potentially could aggravate the perception ( if not the reality ) of adverse effects in the marketplace .

several of the proposed changes are specifically relevant to the brazil cotton case , but also germane to the broader issue of program vulnerability to wto challenge .

for example , the enacted 2008 farm bill: extends the counter - cyclical payments ( ccp ) program and current marketing loan provisions ( §§1104 and 1201 of p.l .

110-246 ) ; raises both target prices and loan rates for several commodities , while only lowering ( marginally ) the target price for upland cotton ( §§1104 and 1202 ) ; offers producers the choice ( subject to a 30% reduction in marketing loan rates and in lieu of 100% of ccp and 20% of direct payments ) of a revenue - based support option under the average crop revenue election program ( acre , §1105 ) with potentially higher per - acre revenue guarantees for several crops than under the previous 2002 farm bill ; and creates a new cotton - user payment of 4 cents per pound ( §1207 ) .

this payment appears similar to the wto - illegal step 2 payment except that cotton from all origins ( not just domestic sources ) is eligible for the payment .

since the united states imports very little cotton , most payments would still likely go to domestically sourced cotton .

as a result , this subtle technical loophole might ultimately be subject to a wto challenge , but would not be part of the current wto cotton case .

finally , the 2008 farm bill does not address the issue surrounding the disqualification of direct payments from the wto's green box exclusion as decoupled payments due to the planting restriction on fruits , vegetables , and wild rice on program base acres .

instead , direct payments are extended with no change to the current planting restriction , except for a small pilot program on 75,000 acres in seven states ( §1107 ) .

this retention of the status quo has important wto implications for the ams case being brought against the united states by both canada and brazil .

the u.s. aggregate measure of support ( ams ) has exceeded , on at least two occasions , its total wto limit if direct payments are included in the ams calculation ( figure 4 ) .

additional uncertainty arises from the ongoing doha round of trade negotiations , where a successful conclusion could potentially mitigate or end brazil's interest in continuing its case against the u.s. farm programs .

both agriculture committees ( house and senate ) of the 112 th congress will likely continue to monitor developments in the wto cotton case and the doha negotiations , as well as the aftermath of the compliance panel's final ruling .

