it would be difficult for terrorists to attack a u.s. city using a nuclear weapon , but such anattack is plausible and would have catastrophic consequences .

a report of june 2004 by the nationalcommission on terrorist attacks upon the united states found that even though an attempt by alqaeda in 1994 to purchase uranium failed , "al qaeda continues to pursue its strategic objective ofobtaining a nuclear weapon. .

 ( 1 ) a book by the center for nonproliferation studies emphasizes theurgency of taking steps to reduce the risk that terrorists could obtain nuclear weapons ormaterials .

 ( 2 ) a may 2004report by harvard university's project on managing the atom finds that a nuclear attack "would beamong the most difficult types of attacks for terrorists to accomplish," but that with the necessaryfissile materials , "a capable and well - organized terrorist group plausibly could make , deliver , anddetonate at least a crude nuclear bomb capable of incinerating the heart of any major city in theworld. .

 ( 3 ) an earlier reportby the same group estimated the consequences of a ten - kiloton weapon ( two - thirds the yield of thehiroshima bomb ) detonated at grand central station in manhattan as over a half - million peoplekilled immediately , hundreds of thousands injured , the possibility ( depending on wind direction ) ofhaving to evacuate all of manhattan , much of lower manhattan permanently destroyed , direct costsof well over $1 trillion , indirect costs several times that , and the prospect for nationwide panic andeconomic chaos if terrorists subsequently claimed to have another bomb .

 ( 4 ) the latter two reports , and acompanion website , ( 5 ) provide detailed data on u.s. threat reduction programs and argue that there is an urgent need toaccelerate these programs .

this report divides the threat into two aspects , the acquisition of a bomb and its delivery toa target .

the former could involve obtaining a nuclear weapon , or obtaining fissile material andmaking it into a bomb .

delivery involves more common and less sophisticated skills to move theweapon covertly to its target .

by now , over three years after the attacks of september 11 , the components of the u.s. andglobal response have become clearer .

the response is often termed "layered defense," reflecting theidea that terrorists would have to proceed through many steps to acquire a nuclear weapon andsmuggle it into the united states , and that attempting to thwart them at each step has a higherlikelihood of success than trying to block one step only .

 ( 36 ) whether layered defense is an overarching strategy , as is the casein ballistic missile defense , or simply a name given to what would have happened anyway as manyagencies with different capabilities contribute in the ways each is able to , or some of both , is anothermatter .

in any event , many programs have been established to deal with nuclear terrorism since 9 / 11,and others created well before then have acquired new urgency .

the following six categories ofprograms are presented in the order in which they bear on a terrorist or rogue state effort to acquireand deliver a nuclear weapon .

threat reduction programs in the former sovietunion .

the soviet nuclear threat reduction act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-226 , title ii ) ,also known as the nunn - lugar amendment , authorized a department of defense ( dod ) programto assist in the destruction of soviet nuclear and other weapons .

the united states now funds threatreduction and nonproliferation programs through three agencies: dod runs the cooperative threatreduction program to secure and dismantle former soviet nuclear and other weapons ; thedepartment of energy ( doe ) runs several programs within its defense nuclear nonproliferationaccount , such as international nuclear materials protection and cooperation and elimination ofweapons - grade plutonium production , to secure nuclear weapons materials and knowledge ; and thedepartment of state runs such programs as science and technology centers in russia and ukraineto provide weapons scientists with grant funding or employment on nonweapons projects .

 ( 37 ) efforts to secure heu worldwide .

heu is usedin many research reactors around the world .

the united states and the soviet union provided thismaterial to many nations years ago .

as noted above , much is said to be poorly guarded .

it is aconcern because acquiring a suitable quantity of heu would be the most difficult step for terroristsintent on making a nuclear bomb .

efforts to secure some of this material have been ad hoc ratherthan part of a comprehensive plan .

for example , in 1994 project sapphire reportedly removed froma "poorly guarded warehouse" in kazakhstan enough heu to make 20-50 nuclear weapons andbrought it to the united states .

 ( 38 ) in august 2002 , project vinca reportedly removed enough heufor two nuclear weapons from a research reactor in serbia and flew it to russia , where it hadoriginated .

 ( 39 ) securingthe bomb asserts that the pace of securing fissile material has slowed since september 11 , 2001 , andsuggests a "global cleanout" of heu .

 ( 40 ) on may 26 , 2004 , responding to such concerns , secretary ofenergy spencer abraham announced a new global threat reduction initiative to securerussian - origin fresh heu by the end of 2005 ; to secure spent fuel of russian / soviet origin by 2010,and of u.s. origin within a decade ; to convert the cores of civilian research reactors using heu tobe able to use uranium with a concentration of uranium - 235 too low to be used in a nuclear weapon,and to try to identify and secure other nuclear and radiological materials that may pose a threat .

 ( 41 ) for this effort , secretaryabraham said , the united states plans to dedicate more than $450 million .

other doe personnelindicated that sum is the approximate cost to complete the program , that the funds would probablybe spent over more than 10 years , and that most of the funds would be for already - existingprograms .

 ( 42 ) there are also concerns about the security of any iranian and north korean heu , asdiscussed above , and pakistani heu .

a discussion of diplomatic efforts to secure such material goesbeyond the scope of this report .

 ( 43 ) control of former soviet and other borders .

while some programs discussed earlier seek to secure former soviet nuclear weapons and fissilematerials , doe's second line of defense ( sld ) and the state department's export control andrelated border security assistance ( exbs ) program provide assistance to russia and othercountries to prevent nuclear materials from being smuggled out through their borders .

doe statesthat sld "deploys radiation detection monitors at strategic transit and border crossings and at air andsea transshipment hubs. .

 ( 44 ) container security initiative .

csi was started injanuary 2002 by the former u.s. customs service , now a part of cbp in the department ofhomeland security ( dhs ) .

 ( 45 ) shipping containers account for 90 percent of all world cargo ; nearly 9 million are offloaded in u.s. seaports annually .

terrorists might attempt to ship a nuclearweapon to a u.s. port in a container and detonate it before the container was inspected .

accordingly,csi screens containers in overseas ports before they are loaded onto u.s. - bound ships .

csi wasoperational in 34 ports , with another 13 possible , both as of february 2005 .

 ( 46 ) participating ports haveu.s .

cbp agents who work with host country officers to decide which containers to target forinspection ; host country officers inspect suspicious containers using non - intrusive inspection devicessuch as gamma - ray imaging machines or using physical inspection .

a portion of doe's sldprogram , mega - ports , supports csi by equipping some foreign seaports that are part of csi withradiation detection equipment , and providing the necessary training , to "screen cargo for nuclear andradioactive materials that could be used in a weapon of mass destruction or a rdd ( dirty bomb ) ..." ( 47 ) proliferation security initiative .

psi began inmay 2003 ; by august 2004 , 16 nations had joined , ( 48 ) and in his february 2005 state of the union address , presidentbush said , "we are cooperating with 60 governments" in psi .

 ( 49 ) the participants seek tointerdict sea or air shipments of wmd or wmd - related materials to or by states "of proliferationconcern" trying to acquire or transfer such items .

shipments could be interdicted at ports , interritorial waters , on the high seas , or in national airspace .

according to press reports , the firstinterdiction under psi was of the german ship bbc china in october 2003 ; the seizure of itslibya - bound cargo , thousands of parts for special centrifuges of value for enriching uranium , mayhave been influential in convincing libya to abandon its wmd programs .

 ( 50 ) u.s. border security .

the final line of defensetries to keep terrorists from smuggling a nuclear weapon across u.s. borders .

it involves borderpatrols , barriers , remote sensors , radiation monitors , customs inspections , seaport security , and thelike , generally within the purview of cbp .

yet as noted in "weapon delivery," above , there aregreat difficulties in securing the many "points" through which people and goods may enter legally,and the thousands of miles of "lines," thinly - guarded stretches of coasts and land borders acrosswhich entry is illegal .

these difficulties illustrate the importance of the other defensive layers notedearlier in this section and show why it would be unwise to rely solely on border security .

supporting capabilities .

technology,intelligence , and forensics cut across and support the foregoing steps to keep terrorists or rogue statesfrom acquiring and delivering a nuclear weapon .

technology development .

the homeland securityact of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 , sec .

302 ) makes the dhs under secretary for science and technologyresponsible for "coordinating the federal government's civilian efforts to identify and developcountermeasures to" terrorist wmd threats .

dhs is charged with coordinating efforts by manyagencies , including doe's national nuclear security administration and the department ofcommerce's national institute of standards and technology , to develop technology for homelandsecurity .

dhs has proposed various technology programs and organizations forfy2005-fy2006 .

 ( 51 ) u.s. national laboratories ( including the three nuclear weapons labs , los alamos , livermore , andsandia ) , u.s. and foreign corporations , universities , and others have been conducting r&d for newtechnologies to detect smuggling of nuclear materials and weapons .

detection of heu and wgpuis difficult because , as noted , they are not highly radioactive .

 ( 52 ) various technologies arein use , ( 53 ) such asradiation portal monitors , which passively detect radiation emitted by a source , ( 54 ) and active imagingsystems , like the vehicle and cargo inspection system ( vacis ) , which operate like x - raymachines .

 ( 55 ) moreadvanced systems are being developed .

for example , livermore is developing aneutron - interrogation system to screen containers .

it bombards a container with neutrons , producingnuclear fissions in such material as heu and wgpu .

 ( 56 ) the fissions produce gamma rays with specific energy levelsunique to each substance , permitting identification .

detecting illegal movement across u.s. borders,in contrast , does not require detecting fissile material ; relevant technologies include surveillancesensors and data analysis software .

 ( 57 ) the fy2006 dhs budget includes the establishment of a new domestic nuclear detectionoffice ( dndo ) within dhs: the dndo will develop , acquire and support thedeployment and improvement of a domestic system to detect and report attempts to import,assemble , or transport a nuclear explosive device , fissile material or radiological material intendedfor illicit use .

 ( 58 ) intelligence .

the possibility that terrorists couldevade any of the layers described above necessitates an enhanced intelligence capability tocomplement other means of detecting movement of nuclear materials and warheads .

such acapability could also focus the efforts of particular defenses , whether alerting a russian facility thata smuggling plan was in the works or indicating that a particular cargo container might hold anuclear weapon .

improving and organizing intelligence for homeland security have been sharplydebated .

 ( 59 ) nuclear forensics .

the ability to glean informationfrom nuclear weapon debris and other radioactive material lies at the intersection of technology andintelligence .

during the cold war , the united states obtained much information by analyzing falloutfrom soviet nuclear weapon tests .

for example , analysis confirmed that the soviet union hadconducted its first atomic bomb test , and analysis of fallout from the first soviet hydrogen bomb testrevealed many details about that weapon's design .

 ( 60 ) even minute samples are of value .

 ( 61 ) with the currentmoratorium on nuclear testing , forensic studies are applied to verifying the safety of u.s. nuclearwarheads , detecting signs of nuclear proliferation , and thwarting illicit trafficking of nuclearmaterials .

 ( 62 ) in theevent of a terrorist nuclear attack , forensics might be able to identify the nation that originated thefissile material or weapon , and determine whether terrorists had fabricated the weapon on their ownor obtained it from a nation's stockpile .

this information would aid efforts to prevent furtherleakage .

the ability to attribute a weapon or material to a nation might also deter a nation fromproviding such items to terrorists by holding the prospect of a military response .

further , if aterrorist nuclear weapon were found , forensic analysis could contribute to an understanding of theweapon's design , which could help determine whether it could be moved and how best to disable it .

other issues that bear on nuclear terrorism include missile defense , export controls , andnuclear nonproliferation efforts more generally .

many organizations and other groups are involved,such as the u.n. , the international atomic energy agency , and the group of eight .

 ( 63 ) .

in combating nuclear terrorism , the standard for success for the united states is daunting - - zero nuclear detonations , which may require stopping every terrorist or rogue state attempt to acquireand deliver a nuclear weapon - - while a single nuclear detonation in the united states wouldconstitute a terrorist success .

measured against that binary standard , it is impossible to determinethe extent to which , or even if , the initiatives discussed above have increased u.s. security .

nonetheless , studies have shown many potential weaknesses in u.s. ability to thwart nuclearterrorism .

the main response of policymakers has been to strengthen , consolidate , coordinate , orinitiate a wide array of programs .

a government accountability office report , for example , notesa number of recommendations that it and congressionally chartered commissions have made fordefending against catastrophic threats .

 ( 64 ) categories of recommendations include "enhanced or clarified federal or state authority to manage a terrorist incidentinvolving weapons of mass destruction" "improvements to incident planning , management , and response capabilitiesfor dealing with a wmd terrorist incident" "better management and more resources for research and development oftechnologies to prevent or respond to terrorist wmd incidents" and "laws , cooperative agreements , and regulatory regimes to better control theprecursors to wmd. .

a report by the house policy committee makes a number of recommendations for addressingnuclear proliferation , including: "strengthen international regimes and controls to limit the legal spread ofproliferation - enabling technology. .

"expand flexible , responsive multilateral activities to find , disrupt , andeliminate networks and trafficking. .

"engage multi - and bi - lateral initiatives to quickly secure materials and keepexpertise off the market. .

"assure the credibility of consequences , as well as advantages of positivebehavior. .

"advance technical and analytic tools and improve human assets to detectproliferation activities , networks and materials. .

 ( 65 ) specific policy options available to counter nuclear terrorism include ( 1 ) accelerate thesafeguarding of russian fissile materials ; ( 2 ) broaden that effort to a global cleanout of heu , suchas at research reactors ; ( 3 ) expand csi to more ports ; ( 4 ) strengthen the coast guard , such asthrough its integrated deepwater systems program , which would , among other things , improve itsability to conduct interdictions for psi ; ( 66 ) and ( 5 ) strengthen capabilities to detect and disable terroristnuclear devices , such as nuclear incident response teams of doe and the environmentalprotection agency .

two books released in the summer of 2004 discuss policy options in detail .

 ( 67 ) .

congress funds programs to counter nuclear terrorism through several authorization andappropriations bills .

the annual national defense authorization act and department of defenseappropriations act fund dod cooperative threat reduction programs ; the annual national defenseauthorization act and energy and water development appropriations act fund doe defensenuclear nonproliferation and nuclear weapons programs .

regarding funding for dhs , bill referralpatterns for authorizations may shift based on the changed jurisdictions of the new homelandsecurity committees and other related committees , and the subcommittee structures to handle dhsappropriations are in flux , both as of early february 2005 .

other agencies , funded by other bills , alsoconduct r&d .

the fy2006 requests for cooperative threat reduction , defense nuclearnonproliferation , and dhs directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) are $415.5 million,$1,637.2 million , and $1,368.4 million , respectively .

 ( much of dhs s&t is for programs in threatareas other than nuclear. ) .

congress also holds oversight hearings , establishes specific legislativerequirements and restrictions on programs , and calls public attention to these issues .

other bills introduced in the 109th congress that bear on nuclear terrorism include thefollowing .

all entries show the latest major action as of february 10 , 2005 .

h.r .

173 ( millender - mcdonald ) .

anti - terrorism and port security act of2005 .

to prevent and respond to terrorism and crime at or through ports .

introduced january 4,2005 , and referred to the committees on the judiciary , transportation and infrastructure , ways andmeans , and homeland security .

h.r .

282 ( ros - lehtinen ) .

iran freedom support act .

to hold the currentregime in iran accountable for its threatening behavior and to support a transition to democracy iniran .

would codify sanctions related to wmd .

introduced january 6 , 2005 , and referred to thehouse committee on international relations .

h.r .

422 ( tauscher ) .

9-11 commission combating proliferationimplemen - tation act .

would , among other provisions , establish an office for combating theproliferation of wmd , request that russia form a similar office , authorize $100 million a year foraccelerating the removal or securing of fissile and radiological material ( pursuant to p.l .

108-375 ,ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fy2005 , section 3132 ) , and authorizefunds for cooperative threat reduction programs .

introduced january 26 , 2005 , and referred to thehouse committee on international relations .

s. 3 ( gregg ) protecting america in the war on terror act of 2005 .

amongother provisions , criminalizes the transport by vessel of radioactive or nuclear material .

introducedjanuary 24 , 2005 , and referred to the senate committee on finance .

s. 21 ( collins ) homeland security grant enhancement act of 2005 .

amongother provisions , would bar any commercial motor vehicle carrying municipal solid waste fromentering the united states until customs and border protection can screen such waste forradiological and nuclear weapons .

introduced january 25 , 2005 , and referred to the senatecommittee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

