medicare has a long - standing history of offering its beneficiaries managed care coveragethrough private plans as an alternative to the traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) program , in which apayment is made for each medicare - covered service provided to a beneficiary .

beginning in the1970s , private health plans were allowed to contract with medicare on a cost - reimbursement basis .

in 1982 , medicare's risk contract program was created , allowing private entities , mostly healthmaintenance organizations ( hmos ) , to contract with medicare .

then , in 1997 , congress passed the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba , p.l .

105-33 ) ,replacing the risk contract program with the medicare+choice ( m+c ) program .

the m+c programestablished a new payment structure , designed to achieve two major goals: ( 1 ) reduce spending , and ( 2 ) reduce the variation in payments across the country .

in general , the program made monthlypayments in advance to participating private health plans for each enrolled beneficiary in a paymentarea ( typically a county ) .

in exchange , the plans agreed to furnish all required medicare - covereditems and services , except hospice services , to each enrollee .

several legislative changes have beenenacted since 1999 , to address some of the issues arising from the passage of the bba .

 ( 1 ) most recently , congress made substantial changes to the m+c program with the passage ofthe medicare prescription drug , improvement and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l.108-173 ) .

the act creates the medicare advantage ( ma ) program to replace the m+c program and introducesseveral enhancements intended to increase the availability of private plans to medicare beneficiaries .

in addition to the immediate payment increases to plans , beginning in 2006 , the ma program willchange the payment structure for local plans and introduce regional plans that operate like preferredprovider organizations - - a popular option in the private health insurance market .

the ma programprovides financial incentives for plans to participate in this new regional option .

additionally , in2006 beneficiaries will have access to a medicare part d prescription drug plan whether they are inffs medicare or enrolled in medicare managed care .

 ( 2 ) finally , beginning in 2010 a limited number of geographic areaswill be selected to examine enhanced competition among local ma plans and competition betweenthose private plans and ffs medicare .

the medicare statute for the m+c program set the annual managed care per capita rate fora payment area ( for a contract in a calendar year ) at the highest of one of three amounts calculated for each county : a rate calculated as a blend of an area - specific ( local ) rate and a nationalrate , a minimum payment ( or floor ) rate , or a rate reflecting a minimum increase from the prior year's rate .

the revised law for the ma program added a fourth payment type so that beginning march2004 , ma plans are paid the highest of the floor , minimum percent increase , the blend , or a newamount .

the new payment amount is 100% of fee - for - service ( ffs ) payments made for personsenrolled in traditional medicare in the county .

beginning in 2005 , the law no longer allows mapayments to be annually updated by the floor or blend , although the increase that was applied to boththe floor and blend , the national growth percentage , is incorporated into the minimum increaseamount .

beginning in 2006 , the mma changes the payment structure for ma local plans byestablishing benchmarks .

in general , the benchmark amount is the maximum amount that the federalgovernment would be willing to pay to private plans in an area for the provision of requiredmedicare parts a and b benefits .

the benchmark amount for a local plan will be calculated byincreasing the previous year's payment rate by the minimum increase , or in certain years , ( 3 ) by the greater of the minimumincrease or 100% of the per capita ffs amount .

although many of the components of the ma payment structure are not in effect after 2004,each is described in more detail below , in part to provide an historical perspective and in part toprovide a better understanding of the effect of the mma on medicare managed care .

the majorfactors for determining medicare's annual local ma per capita rates are summarized in table 1 .

as noted above , between 1997 and 2003 , under the m+c program , each county rate was setat the highest amount calculated under three rules ( blend , minimum increase , and floor ) , and thenadjusted for budget neutrality .

in 2004 , plans were paid the highest amount calculated under fourrules , with 100% of ffs payments for persons enrolled in traditional medicare added to thecalculation .

figure 1 shows the distribution of payment types by year , since the beginning of them+c program .

because of the low national growth percentage in 1998 and 1999 , no county rate wasset by the blended - rate rule after applying the budget neutrality adjustments .

in 2000 , the nationalgrowth percentage was sufficiently large ( 5% ) , so that payments in 63% of counties were based onthe blended - rate rule .

however , the national growth percentage for 2001 was - 1.3% , as previouslydiscussed .

therefore , in 2001 , no county was paid using the blended - rate rule and about 72% of allcounty payments were set at the floor , with the remainder of counties receiving the minimum 3%increase .

similarly in 2002 , no county was paid using the blended - rate rule , and about 79% of allcounties had their payment set at the floor with the remainder of payments set at the minimumupdate of 2% .

for 2003 , all but six counties had their payments set at the minimum update of 2%,with the remaining six set at the higher floor payment ( $548 ) .

in 2004 about 26% of counties werepaid 100% of ffs , while most counties , about 67% , were paid the floor ; 4% were paid the minimumupdate and 3% received the blend .

in 2005 , the secretary chose to rebase payment rates , or in otherwords , allow the county rate to equal 100% of ffs if that rate was higher than the previous year'srate increased by the minimum percentage increase ( 6.6% in 2005 ) .

as a result , in 2005 , about 20%of county payment rates are based on the 100 percent of ffs payment rate , with the remaining 80%based on the minimum percentage increase .

in 2006 , the secretary will not rebase payment rates andall county rates will be based on the minimum percent increase ( 4.8% ) above the county's 2005 rate .

figure 1 .

rule used to determine county payment rates , by year , 1998-2006 calculations for selected 2004 county payment rates are shown in table 3 .

the table showsthe calculation under the four rules .

for the eight counties selected , two have their rate set using theminimum update ( los angeles , california ; dade , florida ; ) , two set at the floor amount ( hennepin,minnesota ; and fairfax , virginia ) , two set at the blended rate ( bristol bay , alaska and san benito,california ) and two set at 100% ffs ( lackawanna , pennsylvania and queens , new york ) .

startingin 2005 , county payment rates will be based on the minimum update rate , or , if larger , 100% of ffsin years when the secretary rebases payment rates .

the floor and blend payments will be eliminatedin 2005 .

table 3 .

calculation of monthly payment rates for selectedcounties , 2004 source : congressional research service ( crs ) analysis of cms data .

starting in 2006 , the ma program will allow plans to operate regionally .

maplans may serve a single region or multiple regions ( including all 26 regions ) as partof a new regional program .

the regional program is designed to encourage plans toserve areas they had not previously served , particularly rural areas .

regional planswill operate like preferred provider organizations - - a popular option in the privatehealth insurance market so that a plan participating in the new regional program will ( 1 ) have a network of providers who agree to a contractually specified reimbursementfor covered benefits , and ( 2 ) provide for reimbursement for all covered benefits,regardless of whether the benefits are provided within the network .

in addition , bothmedical savings account ( msa ) plans and private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plansmay serve one or more regions .

 ( 14 ) the secretary established 26 regions taking into account such factors as ( 1 ) an adequate number of eligible beneficiaries , ( 2 ) presence of existing commercial andfederal employees health benefits plans that may consider serving an ma region , ( 3 ) limiting the variation of payment rates within regions , and ( 4 ) preservation ofexisting patient flow in areas where beneficiaries have a tendency to seek careoutside of their state of residence .

table 5 shows the 26 ma regions , the number ofbeneficiaries in each region , the range of risk adjusted county - level ma rates in theregion , the difference between the highest and lowest risk adjusted county - level marate in each region , and an average risk adjusted region - level ma rate .

the numberof eligible beneficiaries in each ma region range from a high of about 4 million inregion 24 ( california ) , to a low of approximately 50 thousand in region 26 ( alaska ) .

the difference between the highest and lowest risk adjusted ma rate ineach region range from a high of $493 in region 17 ( texas ) to a low of $64 inregion 1 ( maine and new hampshire ) , region 21 ( arizona ) and region 25 ( hawaii ) .

because the secretary has the discretion to make adjustments to accountfor intra - regional variation , the spread of ma rates within a region might not pose asmuch of a risk to plans as it might otherwise have .

an ma regional plan may chooseto serve more than one region , or may serve the entire nation , but it can not segmentits service area to offer either different benefits or different cost - sharing requirementsto beneficiaries within the same region .

only the regional plans ( not local plans ) will be required to have both a singledeductible for parts a and b services and a catastrophic limit on expenditures .

thedeductible may be applied differently for in - network services and may be waived forpreventive or other items and services .

the law specifies that there be onecatastrophic limit for in - network required parts a and b services and another for allrequired parts a and b services , although the amount of the catastrophic limit is notspecified in the law .

table 5 .

medicare advantage regions,beneficiaries and per capita monthly payments for aged beneficiaries,2005 source : table created by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on cmsanalysis .

note : payment rates in this table are risk adjusted .

region level rates are adjustedusing average state aggregate risk scores multiplied by the weighted 2005 countyrates in each state .

payments to regional plans , like local plans , will also be based on abenchmark amount .

however , the calculation of regional benchmarks will bedifferent than the calculation of the local benchmarks .

for a region , the benchmarkfor part a ad b benefits is comprised of two components , one determined accordingto statute and one based on plan bids .

the regional statutory component is theweighted average of all the statutorily determined local payment rates in the region .

the weight for the statutory component is based on the percent of eligible individualsin the area , as opposed to enrollees .

 ( 15 ) the plan - bid component is the weighted averageof all the ma regional bids submitted in a region .

this weight is based onenrollment by plan .

similar to local plans , each regional plan will submit a bid toprovide coverage of all required benefits , but unlike the benchmark for local plans,the regional benchmark depends on all plan bids .

by incorporating the plan bid intothe calculation of the benchmark , the payments amount to any one plan thatparticipates in a region will depend on the bids submitted by other plans in theregion .

this introduces a new type of competition , not previously used indetermining medicare payments .

beginning in 2010 , the secretary will establish a program for the applicationof comparative cost adjustment ( cca ) in cca areas .

the six - year program willbegin january 1 , 2010 and end december 31 , 2015 .

the program is designed to testdirect competition among local ma plans , as well as competition between local maplans and fee - for - service medicare .

this program will only occur in a limited number of statutorily qualifyingareas in the country .

the secretary will select cca areas from among thosemetropolitan statistical areas ( msas ) , or such similar areas as the secretaryrecognizes , which meet the following requirements for the relevant reference month: ( 1 ) at least 25% of ma eligible individuals who reside in the msa were enrolled inan ma local plan ; and ( 2 ) before the beginning of 2010 , at least two ma local planswill be offered by different organizations in the msa during the annual coordinatedelection period , each meeting the current law minimum enrollment requirements fora plan .

the total number of cca areas will be the lesser of six msas or 25% of thenumber of msas meeting the requirements .

additionally , an ma local area ( acounty ) in an msa will be excluded from the cca area , if , in 2010 it does not offerat least two ma local plans , each offered by a different ma organization .

if an malocal area meets the requirement for 2010 it will continue to be included in the ccaarea for subsequent years , even if it no longer meets the requirements as long as thereis at least one ma local plan offered in the local area .

the benchmark for ma local plans in a cca area will be calculated using aformula that weights the ffs portion and a local plan portion , described below .

theffs portion is based on the projected ffs amount for the area , with certainadjustments for demographics and health status .

the local plan portion is based ona weighted average of bids for plans in the area .

for medicare beneficiaries in ffs , part b premiums in cca areas will beadjusted either up or down , depending on whether the ffs amount is more or lessthan the cca area benchmark .

if the ffs amount is greater than the benchmark,beneficiaries in traditional medicare ffs will pay a higher part b premium than otherffs beneficiaries in non - cca areas .

if the ffs amount is less than the benchmark,the part b premium for ffs beneficiaries will be reduced by 75% of the difference.these increases and decreases are subject to a 5% limit , that is , adjustments to partb premiums in cca areas cannot exceed 5% of the national part b premium.beneficiaries in traditional medicare ffs with incomes below 150% of poverty , whoqualify for low - income subsides under the medicare prescription drug program , willnot have their part b premium increased .

beginning in june 2004 , ma plans could begin offering medicare - endorseddrug discount cards , that were effective in july 2004 , to their own enrollees throughthe newly established drug discount card program under mma .

the cards canprovide discounts on drug prices even if the plan does not have a drug benefit , or ifthe plan benefit cap is reached .

beginning in 2006 , ma plans may , but are not required to , offer part dprescription drug coverage .

furthermore , enrollment in part d is voluntary and asa result , beneficiaries who chose to enroll in ma plans will not be required to enrollin an ma - prescription drug ( ma - pd ) plan .

however , the requirements placed onma plans could lead to a situation in which the only ma plans available in an areaare those offering prescription drug coverage .

at least one plan offered by an maorganization in an area is required to be an ma - pd plan , one that offers part dprescription drug coverage .

therefore , if only one organization offers an ma planin an area and it offers only one plan , that plan would have to be an ma - pd and thebeneficiary would have to enroll in part d in order to enroll in an ma plan .

in thissituation , a beneficiary who did not want to enroll in part d would have to receivemedicare services through traditional ffs medicare .

if an ma organization offersmore than one plan in an area , only one is required to provide part d prescriptiondrug coverage .

each organization in an area is subject to this standard , so that evenif there are multiple plans in an area , each organization must offer at least one planthat includes prescription drug coverage .

ma - pd plans will receive drug subsidies , for their enrollees .

maorganizations offering prescription drug coverage will receive a direct subsidy foreach enrollee in an ma - pd plan equal to the plan's risk adjusted standardized bidamount ( reduced by the base beneficiary premium ) .

the plan will also receive thereinsurance payment amount ( 21 ) for the federal share .

finally , an ma - pd planwill also receive reimbursement for premium and cost - sharing reduction for itsqualifying low - income enrollees .

beneficiaries who enroll in a plan offering part d , must pay the standard partd premium .

however , ma - pd plans offering a rebate , may use all or part of thatrebate as a credit toward the ma monthly prescription drug beneficiary premium .

the prescription drug programs offered through ma plans have the potentialto be very different than coverage offered to ffs beneficiaries , and as a result , costsand / or enrollment in ma plans could be affected .

plans might be able to decreasecosts or increase services , thus becoming a more attractive benefit , for the followingreasons: ( 1 ) ma plans that currently offer prescription drug coverage will have moreexperience working with medicare beneficiaries and may be more efficient ; ( 2 ) maplans could augment funds they already use for prescription drugs and offer moregenerous coverage than the standard benefit ; ( 3 ) ma plans could also transfer their"old" prescription drug money to offer other services ; and ( 4 ) ma plans cover partsa and b benefits and may therefore be able to realize some savings ( which could bepassed onto the beneficiary ) , such as reduced hospitalization , from medicare'sprescription drug coverage .

on the other hand , enrollment in ma plans coulddecrease if beneficiaries move from ma plans to ffs , once they can receiveprescription drug coverage without the restrictions of a more limited providernetwork .

the mma made many substantial changes to the medicare managed careprogram , ranging from increasing funds to creating a new regional program .

by2010 , a limited number of geographic areas will be selected to examine enhancedcompetition among local ma plans and competition between private plans and ffsmedicare .

these changes are designed to increase private plan participation inmedicare and thus provide more medicare beneficiaries with an alternative to ffscoverage .

the m+c program had difficulty meeting similar goals and the mmachanges were designed to address some of these problems .

as the major programchanges in ma will not take effect until 2006 , it will take a few years , at a minimum,to determine the success of these changes .

part of the success will depend onwhether private plans are receptive to providing services in accordance with thesenew statutes .

