border and transportation security ( bts ) is a pivotal function in protecting the american people from terrorists and their instruments of destruction .

the issue for congress is how to achieve desired levels of security , while not compromising other important values in the process .

in a series of three reports , a strategic approach to bts using a variety of frameworks to clarify objectives and help identify policy options is discussed .

this final report builds on the analysis presented in the first two reports , and explores possible new directions and policy options that spring directly from the analytical frameworks contained in those reports .

before doing so , however , it is useful to place this set of activities in the broader context of overall homeland security efforts and to review the development of congressional concern and policy approaches up to this point .

the task of providing border and transportation security is complex both because of its scale and possible conflicts with other important national goals .

the magnitude of the task is substantial — covering thousands of miles of land borders , millions of passengers , hundreds of airports and seaports , and millions of individual motor vehicles , rail cars , and cargo containers .

the first possible goal conflict springs from the demands of security confronting the need for facilitating the essential travel and trade that are at the heart of continued economic growth .

this reality leads to a redefinition of the task from one of pitting security vs. economic well - being to that of good border management .

good border management requires facilitating ( and even expediting ) the flow of desirable goods and people across our borders , while screening out dangerous people and material .

the process of doing that is made more manageable if the border is envisioned not merely as a physical boundary but rather as a flexible concept that allows for the possibility that the border begins at the point where goods or people commence their u.s. - bound journey .

the result of such a broader perspective is a significantly wider array of options for good border management .

a companion report presents several graphical images of how this process might be envisioned .

 ( see crs report rl32839 , border security: the complexity of the challenge , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

that report blends the geographic dimension of the problem with the challenge of screening people , goods , and documents .

it starts by identifying the paths that may be followed in moving from the source country to the united states , and then overlays the various points at which people , goods , and documents face the possibility of interception en route to the ultimate destination ( the final destination inside the united states ) .

the results are portrayed in figure 1 .

the figure should be viewed from left to right , moving from the foreign port of exit ( fpoe ) through a transit zone ( illustrating the case where some goods or people might move through one or more intermediate countries en route ) , to the domestic port of entry ( dpoe ) — the final destination in the united states .

in the process , exported goods may be handled by multiple intermediaries , people will follow several processes , and the necessary travel documents will pass through many hands .

while designed to illustrate the multiple points where bad things can happen , the illustration also suggests that the multiple points of vulnerability in the shipping or travel process can also be seen as opportunities for interception — and , if exploited , can actually increase the probability of interdiction of the bad things and bad people that we seek to intercept before they arrive at their intended targets .

the current programs designed to accomplish this interception are discussed more fully in the second report in this series: crs report rl32840 , border and transportation security: selected programs and policies , by lisa m. seghetti , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

these efforts can be summarized by using an analytical framework that highlights generic strategies that might be used to achieve greater border and transportation security: pushing the border outwards to intercept unwanted people or goods before they reach the united states ( as in the container security initiative and passenger pre - screening ) ; hardening the border through the use of technology ( eg , x - ray machines for examining cargo without opening the containers , radiation and explosives detectors , and unmanned aerial vehicles to monitor remote areas at the border ) ; making the border more accessible for legitimate trade and travel ( faster passage for trusted travelers and cargo conveyors ) ; strengthening the border inspection process through more effective use of intelligence ( terrorist screening data bases ) ; and multiplying effectiveness of interdiction programs through the engagement of other actors in the enforcement effort ( including engaging canada , mexico , state and local law enforcement resources , and the private sector ) .

the realization that multiple points of vulnerability might be turned into expanded opportunities for interdiction has given rise to the notion of a "layered" approach to security .

the basic idea of layering is that multiple and overlapping measures applied at key points in the border security environment could succeed where only more targeted measures might fail because of their rising expense , increasing conflict with other goals , or inability to cover all conceivable risks arising from opportunistic terrorist tactics .

the concept of a layered approach to border and transportation security is gaining currency in policy discussions .

the idea was cited in a security context in the so - called gore commission report on aviation safety and security in early 1997 .

the commission stated the belief that "aviation security should be a system of systems , layered , integrated , and working together to produce the highest levels of protection. .

an important pre - 9 / 11 reference to "layering" was found in the hart - rudman commission report in 2001 .

the commission stated: "we believe that homeland security can best be assured through a comprehensive strategy of 'layered defense' that focuses first on prevention , second on protection , and third on response...." this report discusses the concept of layered protection as applied specifically to border security , and offers a definition that is intended to translate the concept into something more concrete — with the goal of making it possible to be applied to actual programs and policy actions .

to pursue a layered approach to border and transportation security would mean applying some measures of security effort to each of the following points of vulnerability / opportunity: staff authentication — focusing on any staff involved with the transportation of people or shipment of goods ; passengers — screening anyone traveling on any of the conveyances of concern ; conveyances ( passenger or cargo ) — monitoring the vessel , car , truck , plane , train used in conveying travelers or goods — including concern for the physical security of the conveyance itself ; access control — implementing a system to achieve and maintain control of the physical space where the conveyances or cargo are either stored , staged , maintained , repaired , loaded , or inspected .

cargo and baggage — screening whatever is placed on the conveyance , including cargo , as well as baggage associated with passengers ; ports ( points of departure , transit , and entry ) — encompassing all kinds of ports ( airport , land port , sea port , rail yard / crossing ) , and involving physical security of the port itself , access control , and some kind of monitoring systems ; and security en route — maintaining the highest level of security throughout the system / between ports — reflecting that whatever security is achieved in the initial stages before or during the time when people or cargo leave the foreign port , must be maintained until the conveyance safely reaches the domestic port of entry and the intended recipient .

looking at each of these targets of vulnerability and seeing them as opportunities suggest some possibilities for further policy exploration .

the following are offered as brief illustrations of areas that might warrant further consideration based on the framework set out above .

in many cases , actions have already begun , and the option would relate to acceleration or enhancements .

in others , where new beginnings are envisioned , the options might entail further research or exploration .

however , it should be noted that action in any of these areas would need to be weighed against prevailing resource constraints and possible conflicts with other important societal goals ( such as facilitating the legitimate flow of people and goods , and avoiding infringements on civil liberties and rights ) .

with these qualifications , the following options might be explored as part of a layered approach to border and transportation security .

the goal is to find more effective ways to promote better border management .

this effort is complicated by the many potential goal conflicts that can arise in seeking greater security , while at the same time trying to pursue other important national goals like promoting economic growth , assuring freedom of movement to law - abiding citizens and allies , and protecting privacy and civil liberties .

pushing too hard on any one of these goals may make it too expensive , both in terms of resource costs , but also in losses imposed on other important social goals .

one possible path to facilitate this delicate balancing act is to pursue the "layered" approach recommended by the 9 / 11 commission and other bts analysts over the years .

such an approach would mitigate over - reliance on any one policy action , yet holds out the possibility of achieving a higher level of security cumulatively by spreading actions over many areas to enhance the odds of either interdicting or deterring terrorist activity wherever it may occur .

it also addresses the dilemma of terrorist opportunism , which afflicts preventive efforts that are more concentrated .

as fast as we secure one area through a concentration of resources , the terrorists have shown themselves to be remarkably adaptable in seeking other softer targets ( in effect , finding the weakest link in the defensive chain and attacking it , instead of the newly hardened target ) .

whether policymakers wish to follow the layering strategy discussed above , or pursue a more targeted approach , the options identified above may constitute a useful point of departure for possible actions to consider .

under any circumstances , the following criteria ( in the form of policy questions ) may be useful in evaluating how far to take any single action: what are the relative priorities for action in the near term ? .

does the action yield security benefits that outweigh possible social or economic costs ? .

is the step being taken in the least intrusive manner consistent with achieving the objective ? .

are incursions on privacy and civil liberties taken into account , minimized , and accompanied by appeals processes for any violations ? .

in what ways will the steps under consideration interact with others in the security process to provide higher cumulative security ? .

