the history of federal legislation significantly affecting banking , securities , capital markets , and financial services in general , may conveniently be divided into three chronological periods: civil war to new deal ; new deal era ; and 1956 to the present .

examination of these laws reveals that the increasing role of the federal government in overseeing and protecting financial services has been primarily in response to turmoil or financial distress in the economy .

for example , landmark legislation brought a greater federal presence into the financial arena to moderate the financial stress and adversity of the civil war , the financial panic of 1907 , the great depression of the 1930s , and the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s .

much of this legislation persists , albeit in amended form , and can be viewed as the foundation of the structure under which the financial services industry operates today .

pre - new deal legislation set up basic , continuing , entities , including the national banking system ; the federal reserve system ; and , in 1932 , the federal home loan bank system .

new deal era legislation is probably most striking for its rigid separation of banking , securities , and insurance businesses , and for setting up major parts of the federal financial safety net , particularly deposit insurance .

more recent legislation has permitted reintegration of these functions , allowing firms to compete across political boundaries , and in nontraditional businesses .

the overall aim has been to produce a more level competitive "playing field" and continue to maintain safety .

the effect has been generally to produce an increasingly more uniform structure of u.s. financial providers .

especially in the last two decades , laws have progressively "deregulated" new deal or earlier controls over geography , pricing , and products of banking and financial services providers .

the growing complexities of financial transactions have prompted financial services companies to maintain data bases containing large amounts of information on their individual customers , raising a potential for improper use .

this has prompted increasing federal regulation of customer financial information to protect customer privacy , deter criminal activity , and in the interest of national security .

the laws cited are those chosen for their historical significance , their present importance in the federal scheme of regulating financial services businesses , or their recent enactment .

12 u.s.c .

§§ 1841-1850 .

originally enacted in 1956 to cover any company controlling more than one bank , and amended in 1970 to extend to one - bank holding companies , this legislation subjects companies controlling banks to a scheme of regulation administered by the board of governors of the federal reserve system .

it prohibits such companies from engaging in certain non - banking activities .

it provides centralized regulation over mixing of banking and commerce that was intended to increase the safety , soundness and competitive position of operations that had previously been the subject of state regulation alone .

it became a template for financial modernization embodied in p.l .

106-102 , the gramm - leach - bliley act .

titles i and ii of p.l .

91-508 , including 12 u.s.c .

§§ 1829b , and 1951-1959 ; 31 u.s.c .

§§ 5311 et seq .

the bank secrecy act of 1970 and its major component , the currency and foreign transactions reporting act , 31 u.s.c .

§§ 5311 et seq. , require reports and records of transactions involving cash , negotiable instruments , or foreign currency and authorize the secretary of the treasury to prescribe regulations to ensure that covered entities maintain adequate records of transactions that have a high degree of usefulness in criminal , tax , or regulatory investigations or proceedings .

violations of the regulations are subject to civil and criminal penalties .

congress thus extended federal oversight of financial arrangements to individual transactions when in the national interest .

15 u. s.c. §§ 1681-1681v .

originally enacted in 1970 , this legislation regulates the credit reporting industry by prescribing standards that address information collected by businesses that provide information used to determine eligibility of consumers for credit , insurance , or employment .

it imposes requirements for accuracy , limits purposes for which such information may be disseminated , prescribes certain access rights , and includes civil penalties for its violation .

overall enforcement authority resides with the federal trade commission , but other federal agencies , including those that regulate financial institutions , are authorized to enforce the act with respect to persons under their jurisdiction .

consumer reporting agencies and users of information who willfully or negligently fail to comply with the act may be subject to civil liability .

12 u.s.c .

§§ 2901-2907 .

this legislation requires federal banking regulators , in connection with an examination of a depository institution ( bank , savings institution , or holding company for either ) , to assess the institution's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community , including low - and moderate - income neighborhoods , and to consider that assessment when the institution applies for a deposit facility ( branch , relocation of offices , change of corporate control such as merger and acquisition ) .

12 u.s.c .

§§ 3101-3108 .

this measure , as amended by the foreign bank supervision enhancement act of 1991 , 105 stat .

2286 , provides for the chartering and regulation of foreign bank operations in the united states , permitting federal or state chartering of foreign bank branches and agencies , and regulation by the board of governors of the federal reserve system .

103 stat .

183 ( p.l .

101-73 ) .

this omnibus legislation , consisting of 12 titles , restructured the deposit insurance system ; transformed the regulatory structure of savings associations by eliminating the federal home loan bank board ; reformed the federal home loan bank system , including eliminating the federal savings and loan insurance corporation ; prescribed rules for administering a depository institution in receivership or conservatorship ; and expanded civil and criminal enforcement authority for depository institution offenses .

105 stat .

2236 ( p.l .

102-242 ) .

this omnibus legislation provides expanded enforcement authority for federal banking regulators , including prompt corrective regulatory action to enforce capital standards on depository institutions to ensure institutional safety and soundness .

it has meant greater uniformity of chartering , regulation , and supervision of both commercial banks and savings associations .

it provides for greater federal supervision of state banks and state savings associations through the federal deposit insurance corporation .

108 stat .

2338 ( p.l .

103-328 ) .

this legislation provides the authority and sets the framework for bank holding companies to acquire banks outside their home states and for banks to acquire branches on an interstate basis .

it overrode long - standing state prohibitions against nationwide banking , which had already been weakening via regional interstate banking compacts .

113 stat .

1388 ( p.l .

106-102 ) .

this legislation authorizes financial holding companies and eliminates many state and federal barriers to affiliation among banks , securities firms , insurance companies , and other financial service providers .

it provides for functional regulation by activity and thus specifies , for example , conditions under which securities activities of banking organizations are regulated by securities regulators .

it sets the framework for insurance activities by banking organizations , prevents the creation of new "unitary" savings and loan holding companies mixing banking and commerce , modifies the membership criteria and capital structure of the federal home loan bank system , sets a framework for potentially establishing a national association of registered [insurance] agents and brokers , requires certain disclosures about automatic teller machine ( atm ) fees , establishes sunshine ( disclosure ) requirements for entities involving community reinvestment act contracts with banking organizations , and includes various banking regulatory reforms .

its privacy title mandates that financial institutions disclose their privacy policies ; requires them to protect the security and integrity of non - public personally identifiable information ; and criminalizes obtaining customer information of financial institutions by fraud .

p.l .

107-56 .

congress has designed this legislation to prevent terrorists and others from using the u.s. financial system anonymously to move funds obtained from or destined for illegal activity .

it authorizes and requires additional record keeping and reporting by financial institutions and closer scrutiny of accounts held for foreign banks and of private banking conducted for foreign persons .

it requires financial institutions to establish anti - money laundering programs and imposes various standards on informal money transmitting businesses .

it amends criminal anti - money laundering statutes and procedures for forfeitures in money laundering cases and requires further cooperation between financial institutions and government agencies in combating money laundering .

it thus increases federal scrutiny of individual financial transactions and extends it to certain previously unexamined domestic and international transmitters of money , when in the national interest .

p.l .

107-204 .

following the collapse of several major corporations , including enron corporation , congress acted to protect investors and improve the reliability of corporate disclosures required under the securities laws .

this legislation establishes the public company oversight board to regulate public accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies .

it prohibits such firms from providing other services to such companies contemporaneously with the audit .

it sets various corporate responsibility standards , including requirements that principal executive officers and principal financial officers ( ceos and cfos ) certify their publicly traded company's annual or quarterly report .

the legislation authorizes , and in some instances requires , the security and exchange commission ( sec ) to issue rules governing improperly influencing audits , disgorgement of executive compensation related to misconduct involving accounting restatements , attorney reporting of material violations of securities laws , and securities analyst conflicts of interests .

pursuant to this law , insiders may no longer trade their company's securities during pension fund blackout periods ; financial disclosure requirements are enhanced ; and there is increased authorization of appropriations for the sec .

it mandates various studies including a study of the involvement of investment banks and financial advisors in the scandals preceding the legislation and a report on enforcement actions .

also included are: whistle blower protections ; new federal criminal laws , including a proscription against alteration of documents ; various other enhancements of the tools to prosecute and punish securities fraud ; and an extension of the statute of limitations for private securities fraud actions .

p.l .

108-100 .

this legislation , known as the check 21 act , is aimed at facilitating greater efficiency in the use of electronic processing of checks and check truncation .

it permits the use of substitute checks by which a bank receiving a paper check may convert it to a form that may be processed electronically .

the substitute check , rather than the original check , will be retained by the paying bank and returned to any bank customer receiving cancelled checks .

the substitute check is defined to be a paper reproduction of an original paper check that contains an image of the front and back of the original check and that may be processed electronically .

the legislation requires banks converting a paper check into a substitute check and other banks handling such checks to warrant the accuracy of the images and the fact that the check has not previously been paid .

such a substitute check is declared to be the legal equivalent of the original check for all purposes and all persons .

the check 21 act includes indemnity and expedited recredit procedures to protect substitute check recipients .

it does not require any bank to create substitute checks or to accept checks electronically .

p.l .

108-159 .

this legislation contains extensive amendments to the fair credit reporting act that are aimed at improving the accuracy and transparency of the national credit reporting system and preventing identity theft and assisting victims .

it contains provisions enhancing consumer rights in situations involving alleged identity theft , credit scoring , and claims of inaccurate information .

it requires users of consumer reports to provide certain information to consumers who are offered credit on terms that are materially less favorable than the offers that the creditor makes to a substantial portion of its consumers .

under the legislation , state laws respecting the sharing of consumer report information among affiliated companies are permanently preempted ; such companies must provide consumers notice and an opt - out for sharing of such information if the receiving company uses the information for marketing purposes .

whether or not the information is used for marketing purposes , an opt - out must be provided consumers if the shared information contains anything other than experience or transaction information .

p.l .

109-172 , title ii , subtitle b , §§ 2101-2108 .

this legislation merges the bank insurance fund and the savings association insurance fund into the deposit insurance fund ( dif ) .

it increases deposit insurance coverage for certain retirement accounts to $250,000 .

it retains the $100,000 "standard maximum deposit insurance amount" of $100,000 , but provides a process whereby deposit insurance coverage may be adjusted for inflation at five - year intervals beginning in 2010 .

there is also a provision that provides per - participant coverage to employee benefit plan accounts , even if the depository institution at which the deposits are placed is not authorized to accept employee benefit plan deposits .

the legislation requires the fdic to set the designated reserve ratio within a range of 1.15% to 1.50% and declare dividends from the dif when the dif reserve ratio at the end of a calendar year equals or exceeds 1.35% .

the legislation grants the fdic board the discretion to price deposit insurance according to risk for all insured institutions regardless of the level of the reserve ratio .

