the appropriate size and role of the government is one of the most fundamental and enduring debates in american politics .

what role does the state play in economic activity ? .

how is the economy affected by government intervention ? .

many of the arguments surrounding the proper size of government are economic in nature , and these are discussed in this report .

government activity affects the economy in four ways: the government produces goods and services , including roads and national defense .

less than half of federal spending is devoted to the production of goods and services .

the government transfers income through both the tax system and outlays .

popular perception typically focuses on transfers across income classes through the progressive income tax system and means - tested benefits , referred to as vertical redistribution .

but vertical redistribution is dwarfed by horizontal redistribution , transfers unrelated to income class .

the largest beneficiaries of transfers are the elderly , through programs such as social security .

the government collects taxes , and that alters economic behavior .

for instance , taxes on labor change the incentives to work , while taxes on specific goods ( eg , gasoline ) change the incentive to consume and produce those goods .

the government regulates economic activity for a number of reasons , including environmental protection , workplace safety , and consumer protection .

the economic impact of regulation is probably the hardest and most contentious to measure of the four types of government economic activity .

before assessing how the government affects economic activity , it is necessary to agree upon how to measure the size of the government .

for a number of reasons , this exercise is less straightforward than it may seem .

the size of government can be expressed in a number of different units of measurement .

should the size of government be measured in dollars , on a per capita basis , by total employees , or as a percentage of gdp ? .

each measurement has its advantages , but some measurements have more shortcomings than others .

if measured in dollars , then those dollars should be adjusted for inflation .

the purpose of measurement is to gauge the resources at the government's disposal , and a dollar of tax revenue in 1946 would buy $11 of goods and services in 2009 because of inflation .

measuring the size of government by the number of employees is imprecise because the government can substitute capital for labor over time to accomplish the same tasks with fewer employees .

for example , the government's purchase of computers has rendered many clerical jobs obsolete .

the federal government can also pay workers in the private labor force through contracts and grants or allow state and local government workers to deliver federal programs in place of federal public servants .

one estimate puts the number of private and state and local government workers working for the federal government at more than seven times the size of the federal workforce .

comparisons over time that do not incorporate demographic change are arguably misleading because government spending per capita is more meaningful than total government spending: $458.4 billion in federal spending in 1946 amounted to $3,242 per person then , but would only finance $1,493 per person in 2009 .

but over long periods of time , because of the power of compounding , any level of government spending will appear to be insignificant unless it is expressed as a fraction of gross domestic product ( gdp ) ( a measurement that incorporates inflation and population growth ) .

in 1944 , at the height of world war ii , federal spending was about one - third of today's federal budget in constant ( inflation - adjusted ) dollars .

yet outlays in 1944 accounted for 43.7% of gdp , whereas the budget in 2008 accounted for a little more than half that ( 24.7% of gdp ) .

nevertheless , some argue that stating the size of government as a percentage of gdp understates increases in government spending in the short term , particularly in years when growth is high .

for example , those who claim that government spending increased sharply in 2000 point to the fact that it increased by 2.5% in constant dollars .

those who claim the increase was modest point to the fact that it fell by 0.2 percentage points of gdp .

because this report focuses on long - term trends , all measurements are made as a percentage of gdp .

the size of the government can be measured by expenditures ( outlays ) or revenues ( receipts ) .

5 at times when the budget deficit is large , the difference between the two measures is significant , as seen in figure 1 .

measured by receipts , the size of government in the post - war period peaked in 2000 .

measured by outlays , the size of government peaked in 1983 .

in 2000 , the peak year as measured by receipts , outlays were at their lowest level since 1966 .

government has grown since 2000 when measured by outlays , and shrunk measured by receipts .

there are two main reasons why outlays might be considered a better measure of the size of government than receipts .

first , receipts are more volatile than outlays and are only indirectly controlled by legislators .

they are particularly sensitive to economic conditions .

receipts did not peak in 2000 because of changes in the tax code , but because of the interaction between the tax code and the rapid growth in ( taxable ) income .

second , outlays and revenues can temporarily diverge because of budget deficits .

but eventually , the budget must be brought back into balance .

therefore , cutting taxes without corresponding spending cuts does not permanently reduce the size of government , and measuring the size of government by revenues gives the misleading impression that government is smaller than it is .

furthermore , although people often refer to the burden of high taxes , that burden cannot be avoided in the long run through deficits because deficits impose a burden that is every bit as real as taxes .

in other words , a given level of spending requires the resources of individual taxpayers , whether deficit financed or tax financed ; all that changes is the timing of its incidence .

although it is sometimes argued that deficits hold down the growth in spending for political reasons , deficits directly increase the outlays needed to maintain a fixed level of government services in the future by increasing interest payments on the national debt .

in other words , if spending is constant over time , a $1 tax cut today will lead to a tax increase of $1 plus compounded interest in the future .

this raises a further question: if interest payments are the direct result of deferring payments for past spending to the present , should they be included in comparisons of the size of government over time ? .

including net interest payments , as current practice does , makes the government appear to be larger following periods of large deficits relative to the period before the deficits .

excluding them gives a different budget picture: for example , high interest payments in the 1990s and 2000s obscure the fact that other outlays at the time were as small as they had been in the 1960s .

because this report focuses on long - term trends , it measures the size of government by spending .

when measured by outlays , the size of government followed an upward trend until 1983 , and followed a downward trend until 2000 .

outlays rose from 14.7% of gdp in 1947 to 23.5% in 1983 .

they then fell to 18.4% of gdp in 2000 , and have increased since .

outlays were below 20% of gdp from 1947 to 1974 ( with the exception of 1953 and 1968 ) , above 20% of gdp from 1975 to 1996 , and were below 20% of gdp from 1997 to 2002 , but have been above 20% of gdp again in 2006 and since 2008 .

a look at total spending masks large compositional changes in spending over the post - war period .

in a nutshell , the government's largest activity has gone from national defense in the 1960s to transfers to the elderly today .

defense spending peaked at 9.5% of gdp in 1968 , and then fell to 4.7% of gdp in 1978 .

it then rose to 6.2% of gdp in 1986 , before beginning a sharp decline to 3.0% of gdp in 2001 .

it began rising again and stood at 4.6% of gdp in 2009 .

at the same time , mandatory spending ( excluding net interest ) has risen from 4.9% of gdp in 1962 to 14.7% in 2009 .

in the long run , much of the growth in mandatory spending has been in programs for which the elderly are major beneficiaries .

non - defense discretionary spending , which includes spending on transportation , education , the environment , and numerous other government activities , grew from 3.4% of gdp in 1962 to 5.2% in 1980 .

it has been below 4% of gdp since 1984 , and stood at 4.1% of gdp in 2009 .

net interest on the publicly held national debt grew significantly in the 1980s and 1990s because of the government's budget deficits .

in the post - war period to the 1980s , it had always been below 2% of gdp ; in the 1980s and early 1990s , it exceeded 3% of gdp .

the surge in the deficit since 2008 has not led to a significant increase in net interest to date because of unusually low interest rates .

it is useful to remember that federal spending is overwhelmingly devoted to a handful of activities .

defense spending , social security , medicare , and medicaid accounted for nearly two - thirds of all federal outlays in 2009 .

thus , any proposal to reduce the government's size would be unlikely to make much of a dent in overall spending unless it reduced one or more of these programs .

government transfers and government purchases of goods and services have different and distinct effects on the economy .

economists draw a distinction between government outlays spent on goods and services ( purchased from the private sector or produced directly by the government ) and outlays that transfer resources from one set of private individuals ( taxpayers ) to another .

because a significant portion of government spending is devoted to government transfers to individuals , much of the revenue collected through taxation is ultimately spent by the private sector on private sector goods and services ( after it is transferred by the government ) .

government transfers do not employ u.s. capital and labor ( except to administer those transfers ) in the same way as government production of goods and services .

government transfers basically shift private sector spending from one group of private individuals to another .

by shifting income from its market allocation , government transfers still have an effect on the economy , however , because the transfers and taxes to finance them alter the incentives to work and save .

the merits of government transfers cannot typically be evaluated on the basis of economic efficiency alone , because they often pursue social goals .

by contrast , government production of goods and services falls comfortably within the framework of economic efficiency based on whether the spending addresses a market failure , as explained in the next section .

transfers can result in vertical redistribution , transfers among income classes , or horizontal redistribution , transfers unrelated to income class .

most transfers on the spending side of the budget result in horizontal redistribution .

for example , the largest portion of government transfers are directed to the elderly , notably through social security .

 ( social security contains an element of vertical redistribution in that the tax - benefit formula is more favorable as income declines , but its main function is horizontal redistribution. ) .

another large category of transfers is devoted to interest on the national debt , which represents a transfer from taxpayers to bondholders .

transfers also include net subsidies to government corporations , which are discussed below .

the largest portion of government production is directed to national defense .

the distinction between government transfers and government production of goods and services becomes important when making historical comparisons .

total federal outlays have remained in the range of 20% with a slow upward trend for most of the post - war period , but this masks large changes in the composition of federal outlays .

since the 1950s , outlays for federal production and transfers have moved in the opposite direction .

while government production was nearly three times as large as government transfers in the early 1950s , production is only half as large as transfers today .

measuring the size of government by receipts or outlays omits tax expenditures .

tax expenditures are defined in the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 ) as "revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or which provide a special credit , a preferential rate of tax , or a deferral of liability. .

they take many forms and cover many policy areas ; a senate budget committee compendium identifies 186 corporate or income tax expenditures in current law .

revenue loss attributable to these tax expenditures totaled $1.2 trillion in fy2008 .

this is larger than total discretionary spending ( defense and non - defense ) in fy2008 , yet tax expenditures do not show up directly on the outlay or revenue side of the budget .

table 1 lists the largest tax expenditures .

as a comparison , the tax expenditure for the deduction of mortgage interest is larger than the entire fy2008 appropriation for the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

economists would argue that , in many ways , tax expenditures are equivalent to government spending , and which is preferable depends on which is a more effective or efficient way of achieving any particular goal .

for example , a $1,000 child tax credit is equivalent to the government sending a check for $1,000 to parents who have eligible children and meet the credit's income requirements .

similarly , a tax deduction for mortgage interest for a taxpayer in the 33% marginal income tax bracket is equivalent to the government sending the taxpayer a check for 33 cents for every dollar of mortgage interest paid .

from a revenue perspective , the equivalence comes from the fact that marginal rates must be raised to the same extent to finance an expenditure whether it is a tax expenditure or an outlay .

because tax provisions are permanent ( unless they include an expiration date ) , however , revenue loss from specific expenditures may rise over time automatically without congressional action , unlike appropriated spending .

if this equivalence argument is correct , measures of the size of government that omit tax expenditures drastically underestimate its size .

measuring the size of government by receipts or outlays omits offsetting receipts and collections .

the outlay and revenue totals discussed here and in the federal budget are net measures , and do not include offsetting receipts and collections .

these are the income that the government receives , primarily from business - like activities ( many are user fees ) .

mostly , the offsetting receipts and collections go directly toward the provision of those activities for which they were collected , in some cases without appropriation .

these include receipts collected directly by the government for health care premiums through medicare , national park user fees , and proceeds from the sale of government resources .

they also include receipts collected by government corporations ( defined below ) such as the postal service , the export - import bank , and the federal deposit insurance corporation .

the receipts and collections are not included in revenues , and the outlays that they fund are subtracted from total outlays .

omb justifies the exclusion of offsetting receipts and collections from the budget on the grounds that "[t]he budget focuses on ... outlays and receipts that measure governmental activity rather than a combination of governmental and market activity. .

what should be realized is that even if offsetting collections and receipts are not included in the budget as revenues because they represent choices made in the marketplace ( i.e. , they are not compulsory like taxes ) , removing them from revenues also causes the activities that they finance to be removed from the outlay side of the budget .

some budget analysts argue that this keeps many of the financed activities outside the oversight and deliberation of the annual appropriation process .

regardless of whether offsetting receipts and collections finance "public goods" or ( government - provided ) "private goods," when thinking about the size of the government in relation to private economic activity , it may be sensible to include them , and they are not an insignificant sum .

in 2009 , offsetting collections and receipts totaled $424 billion , about 12% as large as outlays included in the budget .

table 2 lists the largest offsetting receipts and collections in 2008 .

to the extent that offsetting collections and receipts have grown over time , removing them from the budget arguably underestimates the growth in the size of government .

when considering government ' s influence on the economy , it is best to include government spending at the state and local level .

when state and local government spending is included , the decline in the size of the government since 1983 is smaller because of the corresponding increase in the size of state and local government .

state and local government outlays grew from 7.1% of gdp in 1950 to 9.8% in 1983 .

but unlike the federal government , state and local outlays have grown since 1983 , equaling 11.4% of gdp in 2009 .

the growth in state and local government is larger ( and the growth in the federal government is smaller ) if one includes federal grants to state and local governments , which have grown from 0.7% of gdp in 1950 to 3.8% of gdp in 2009 .

in contrast to the federal government , at the state and local level government purchases significantly exceeds government transfers .

should government corporations be included in discussions involving the size of government ? .

should government - sponsored enterprises be included ? .

government corporations are government agencies that provide market services and raise revenue that partly or fully cover their expenses .

the postal service , amtrak , and the federal deposit insurance corporation are prominent examples .

for the most part , their revenues and expenses occur outside of the budget .

surpluses are returned to the treasury and the corporation may receive appropriated subsidies or loans from general revenues .

the activities of these agencies are recorded in the federal budget only in - so - far as they receive subsidies or federal loans , or generate surpluses .

they do not have shareholders , and raise capital through the treasury's federal financing bank .

some raise capital independently of the government ; for example , the tennessee valley authority issues its own bonds .

in economic terms ( business decisions , budgets , products , and so on ) , these corporations may more closely resemble private businesses , and have little input from the executive branch or legislature in day - to - day decision making .

nevertheless , the organizations are part of the government , and not privately owned .

in that way , the major difference between them and the rest of the government is that they provide goods and services that are sold in the market , whereas typically the government provides non - market goods ( eg , education , defense , and highways ) .

sometimes the government corporations compete with private corporations ( eg , package delivery by the postal service ) , and sometimes they have a monopoly ( eg , letter delivery by the postal service ) .

government corporations account for about 1% of national income , a fraction that has stayed relatively constant over time .

in addition , there are "quasi - government" organizations with more distant ties to the government than government corporations , but distinct from the private sector .

these include rand , the smithsonian institution , and government sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , such as fannie mae and freddie mac .

what they have in common are legal characteristics that in some way link them to the government .

for example , the gses were federally chartered by the government and have special borrowing privileges from the u.s. government .

however , they are shareholder - owned corporations with management structures independent of the government and did not receive government appropriations ( although their ties to government increase the firms' market value. ) .

in 2008 , fannie mae and freddie mac were taken into conservatorship by the federal government and began to receive direct financial support .

to many critics , this outcome confirmed that quasi - governmental organizations should be viewed as fundamentally governmental in nature .

the focus on an annual cash flow budget neglects the fact that policy decisions made today can have long - run consequences that are not reflected in today ' s budget .

this can occur in a number of ways .

many recent tax cuts and spending programs are being phased in over a number of years .

for example , under p.l .

107-16 , signed into law in 2001 , the estate tax will not be eliminated until 2010 .

spending on multi - year projects can lead to implicit future spending commitments even if explicit commitments are not made .

for example , once a military hardware investment project begins , it may be highly impractical to stop funding the project before it has been completed .

nevertheless , defense spending , like all discretionary spending is assumed to grow at the rate of inflation in the budget baseline , and future budget totals are not adjusted for multi - year spending projects .

mandatory spending can increase with no change in law when the number of eligible beneficiaries increases .

the example of this phenomenon that dwarfs all others under current policy is entitlement spending on the aged .

under current policy , the retirement of the baby boomers and the increase in life expectancy are projected to cause spending on social security , medicare , and medicaid to increase from 7.4% of gdp in 2000 to 18.5% of gdp in 2050 .

while the spending increase will not occur until the future , the promises to increase spending have already been made .

these promises are not reflected in the current year budget , and unlike a private pension plan , the payroll taxes being collected from baby boomers while they work are not set aside to fund the future obligations they have secured under current law .

in all , one recent study estimated that the government's total future unfunded liabilities equaled $44.2 trillion in present value terms .

some budget analysts have argued that the budget should be measured using a different accounting method ( eg , accrual accounting ) so that liabilities incurred today are recorded in today's budget .

different accounting methods might tell a significantly different story about changes in the size of government over time .

the shortcoming of cash flow budgeting as a measure of size of government can be expressed in the question: does the more than doubling of elderly entitlement spending as a percentage of gdp projected under current policy really imply any growth in the size of government when the benefits any individual is entitled to remain the same ? .

economic conditions can temporarily alter the size of government .

in the absence of policy changes , economic conditions cause mandatory spending and revenue levels to automatically change , a phenomenon known as "automatic stabilizers. .

for example , when the economy enters a recession , benefits paid under certain mandatory spending programs such as unemployment insurance automatically rise and revenues automatically fall as taxable income falls .

cbo estimates that the recession automatically reduced revenues by $222 billion and increased outlays by $85 billion in 2009 .

changing economic conditions may also lead to policy changes that temporarily alter outlays or revenues .

in 2009 , economic stimulus legislation ( p.l .

111-5 ) was enacted that increased spending by $575 billion and decreased revenues by $212 billion over 10 years .

about 90% of the costs occur in the first three years .

the 2008 financial crisis led to the authorization of $700 billion for the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ; p.l .

110-343 ) and government conservatorship of fannie mae and freddie mac .

because of government accounting conventions , the ongoing budgetary costs of these actions were largely recorded in 2009 .

although this spending is scheduled to wind down as economic conditions improve , some commentators argue that government programs that are introduced on a temporary basis tend to ultimately result in permanent increases in government spending .

spending and tax revenue are not the only ways to think about the size of the government .

the government can arguably have a bigger ( smaller ) role in the economy without spending more ( less ) .

government regulation ( in the form of laws , regulations , or mandates ) undoubtedly has an economic impact every bit as real as spending or taxation , but the cost of regulation is difficult to quantify and is not measured overall by any official source .

recent policy debates on health care reform , financial regulatory reform , and offshore oil drilling illustrates that regulation can have a large influence over economic activity .

and yet to ignore it in discussions of the size of government could be misleading .

for example , consider a government proposal to reduce the consumption of a product ( gasoline , cigarettes , alcohol , and so on ) .

the government could reduce consumption by paying people not to use the product or paying them to use an alternative , which would be counted as an increase in government outlays .

the government could tax the product to reduce its use by making it more costly , which would be counted as an increase in government revenues .

or it could pass regulations forbidding or restricting its use , which would not show up on either side of the budget's ledger .

yet all three proposals could be crafted to have the exact same effect on the quantity of the good consumed .

how can policymakers determine the appropriate role of the government in the economy ? .

most economists judge the economic merit of any government program based on its effect on economic efficiency .

does larger government raise economic efficiency or lower efficiency ? .

the only overarching answer that can be offered is: it depends .

economic theory is clear that government intervention has the potential to improve efficiency when market failures exist , but is likely to reduce efficiency when markets are already "perfect," which is defined below .

in reality , government intervenes both in cases of market failure and in cases where markets are already operating relatively efficiently .

as a result , some government policies raise economic efficiency and some lower efficiency .

by no means are all spending decisions made by the government today justified on efficiency grounds .

if it were possible to isolate and eliminate all actions that lowered efficiency , economic welfare could hypothetically be improved by reducing the size of government .

likewise , one could identify areas where government intervention could improve currently uncorrected market failures and a larger government would theoretically improve economic efficiency .

before discussing what constitutes a market failure , it is useful to define economic efficiency , which differs from popular parlance .

as opposed to its popular usage , economic efficiency does not involve economic growth , wealth , or productivity .

in fact , there are examples where efficiency is at loggerheads with these goals .

generally , an outcome is economically efficient if the marginal cost of producing one more unit of a good is equivalent to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good .

when markets function perfectly , which is defined as a market with many buyers and sellers , no barriers to entry , perfect information , and the costs and benefits of the transaction are completely borne by the buyer and seller , an economically efficient outcome will occur and government intervention can only reduce efficiency .

when there are market failures , government intervention has the potential to improve efficiency by moving away from the economically inefficient outcome produced by the market .

although economic efficiency is easy to define theoretically , discord arises when applied to actual government policies .

typically , an efficiency - enhancing measure cannot be produced without being accompanied by efficiency - reducing side effects .

for example , without our criminal justice system markets could not operate , but a criminal justice system cannot be operated without taxes that are likely to take a efficiency - reducing form .

while there is a broad consensus that a tax - financed criminal justice system is efficiency - improving on net at some level , there is likely to be disagreement as to whether the benefit derived from a marginal increase in resources devoted to criminal justice from current levels would exceed the costs of a marginal increase in taxation to finance it .

furthermore , the democratic process is conducive to compromises that include a mixture of efficiency - enhancing and efficiency - reducing measures .

judging the balance between the two is unlikely to produce wide consensus .

economic theory can describe the economic benefits ( and costs ) of a broad policy approach , but cannot predict how the compromise that emerges from the legislative process will differ from the policy as originally conceived .

measuring efficiency gains and losses of any proposal is more difficult when other policies are also distorting a market .

 ( personal differences in opinion on these matters go a long way toward explaining the wide ideological diversity within the economics profession. ) .

arguments surrounding the size of government are often posed in terms of their effects on economic growth .

like the section on efficiency , this section argues that the effect of government spending on economic growth can only be judged on a case - by - case basis .

but more generally , the problem with using growth as a policy evaluation criterion is that it tells nothing about overall welfare , which includes non - economic benefits , such as quality of life .

unlike efficiency , economists view growth , at best , as one effect of a policy to be considered and not a goal in and of itself .

even in cases where the effect on growth is positive , society may be made worse off .

as a thought experiment , consider the effects of a mandatory 80-hour work week: it would be expected to increase economic growth , but society would be worse off .

nonetheless , since economic efficiency cannot be easily measured , growth will often be the best alternative criterion available .

the question of the relationship between the size of government and economic growth is of a long - term nature .

thus , it is useful to make a distinction between short - term fluctuations in growth due to the business cycle and the long - term , sustainable growth rate of the economy .

for that reason , arguments for or against larger government cannot be based on the ability of an increase in the budget deficit to increase aggregate spending in the economy in the short run .

notice that these short run effects are consistent with certain definitions of both larger government ( higher spending with constant taxes ) and smaller government ( constant spending with lower taxes ) .

long - term growth ( increases in output ) is caused by increases in the labor supply ( hours worked or number of workers ) , the physical capital stock , or productivity .

when the size of the labor force grows with the population , there would be no effect on per capita growth , however .

growth in the physical capital stock is made possible by national savings ( or borrowing from abroad ) .

for the size of the government to affect long - term growth , it must affect one of these three sources of growth .

all four types of government behavior ( spending , transfers , taxes , and regulation ) have the potential to influence these three sources of growth .

the government affects economic activity through four primary channels: government production of goods and services , transfer payments , taxation , and regulation .

measuring the size of government is not a straightforward exercise .

relying on annual federal outlays excludes several types of government intervention including state and local outlays , tax expenditures , government corporations , and offsetting receipts and collections ; as a result , the government appears to be smaller than it is in reality .

annual measures of government also neglect future unfunded liabilities implicit in current policy .

measuring the economic impact of regulation is difficult , and is not done comprehensively or consistently .

government intervention increases economic efficiency when it rectifies market failures and reduces efficiency when it distorts perfectly competitive markets .

political choices may lead to second - best outcomes , however , and some therefore argue that accepting market failures can be preferable to government intervention in some cases .

to be efficiency - enhancing , government spending must have greater benefits than only efficiency - reducing taxes that finance it .

likewise , tax cuts will only increase overall efficiency if they are financed by reductions in relatively less efficient spending or increases in relatively less efficient taxes .

in general , marginal tax reductions tend to be efficiency increasing , while many tax expenditures are efficiency decreasing .

deficit - financed tax cuts do not increase efficiency if they are financed by larger tax increases in the future .

not all government spending is created equally .

economists universally agree that some government spending , on a well - functioning legal system , for example , increases economic efficiency and growth .

agreement is nearly as universal that some government spending , on subsidies to industries , for example , reduces economic efficiency or growth .

in between are policies that are a jumble of efficiency - enhancing and efficiency - reducing provisions .

for this reason , no general conclusions can be drawn about the overall size of the government's effect on the economy .

it is conceivable that a very large government could devote all of its spending on efficiency - enhancing policies and a very small government could devote all of its spending on efficiency - reducing policies , or vice versa .

many policies that reduce economic efficiency or growth may meet social or non - economic goals ( equity , fairness , and so on ) that make them worthwhile .

currently , government transfers to individuals are nearly twice as large as government spending on goods and services , and the primary goal of most transfers is probably not economic efficiency .

government intervention increases ( decreases ) long - term growth with policies that foster ( hinder ) greater work effort , capital accumulation , and technological innovation .

economic growth is not a clear normative goal such as economic efficiency , however .

some growth - enhancing policy measures may reduce economic welfare .

in any case , economic growth has historically been stable over long periods of time , suggesting that market forces tend to be stronger than the growth effects of policy changes .

in sum , there is not an economic rationale for either "big" or "small" government , per se .

it is not so much the size of government as what government does with its spending , transfer , tax , and regulatory policies that affects economic efficiency and growth .

the financial crisis of 2008 led to a sharp but temporary increase in government outlays as a share of gdp .

because of government accounting conventions , the ongoing costs of tarp and government conservatorship of fannie mae and freddie mac were mostly counted in the 2009 budget .

fiscal stimulus legislation led to a significant increase in spending from 2009 to 2011 , with minimal effects after 2011 .

assuming these programs are allowed to expire as scheduled , spending will fall from its recent peak under current policy .

overall spending will not fall all the way back to pre - crisis levels , however , because it will be offset by growth in other spending , notably growth in net interest and entitlement spending as a result of the aging of society .

the increase in the government's influence on the economy through recent or proposed regulatory changes is more difficult to quantify .

