several federal programs support child care or related services , primarily for low - income working families .

in addition , the tax code includes provisions specifically targeted to assist families with child care expenses .

descriptions of those programs and tax provisions follow , as does table 1 , which shows funding ( or estimated revenue loss or obligations where applicable ) for the programs and tax provisions for the past five years .

in many cases , other congressional research service ( crs ) reports are referenced as sources for more detailed information about individual programs .

several programs were due for reauthorization in the 109 th congress ( i.e. , child care and development block grant and head start ) , but remained unauthorized at the end of the 109 th congress , whereas others ( tanf and mandatory child care funding ) were reauthorized in the second session .

readers should be aware that this report does not attempt to cover all issues connected with each of those reauthorizations .

following a lengthy appropriations process that included three continuing resolutions and consideration of two conference reports , a bill making appropriations for the departments of labor , hhs , and education ( h.r .

3010 ) was ultimately signed into law ( p.l .

109-149 ) on december 30 , 2005 .

table 2 shows how the funding levels included in the conference agreement ( and ultimately approved and signed into law ) , compare to the levels requested by the administration and approved in the house and senate versions of h.r .

3010 , discussed below .

an across - the - board rescission of 1% was applied to discretionary programs funded under p.l .

109-149 , and the numbers in the table reflect that .

on february 6 , 2006 , president bush released his budget request for fy2007 , which proposed to fund most , but not all , child care and related programs at the same levels provided in fy2006 .

the exceptions included the social services block grant , which he proposed be cut from $1.7 billion to $1.2 billion , and the even start program , which the administration proposed to eliminate .

table 3 provides the administration's proposed funding levels for child care and related programs compared to the levels approved in house and senate committees in 2006 .

note that the fy2007 appropriations process was still under way at the close of the 109 th congress , with funding being provided ( through february 15 , 2007 ) under a third continuing resolution ( p.l .

109-383 ) at the programs' fy2006 rate .

supplemental funding , like that provided to head start and ssbg to target needs arising from the 2005 gulf hurricanes , is not considered in determining the rate for fy2007 .

 ( see " fy2007 appropriations process ," later in this report ) .

the fy2007 appropriations process , still under way at the close of the 109 th congress , has consisted of a series of continuing resolutions , the third of which ( p.l .

109-383 ) is to provide funding through february 15 , 2007 , at the fy2006 annual rate .

the 2006 fiscal year concluded with congress failing to pass most of its appropriations bills for fy2007 , including a bill making appropriations for the departments of hhs , labor , and education .

therefore , in order to continue funding government operations into fy2007 , congress passed the first of three continuing resolutions ( cr ) , attaching it to the defense appropriations conference report ( h.rept .

109-676 ) , and it was signed into law ( p.l .

109-289 ) on september 29 , 2006 .

as of this writing , a third cr ( p.l .

109-383 ) provides funding through february 15 , 2007 , at programs' fy2006 rate .

 ( supplemental funding , like that provided to head start and ssbg to target needs arising from the 2005 gulf hurricanes , was not included in determining the fy2006 rate for the fy2007 appropriations. ) .

while neither the house nor senate passed a bill in the 109 th congress making fy2007 appropriations for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , their respective appropriations committees did pass bills .

the house committee reported h.r .

5647 ( h.rept .

109-515 ) on june 20 , 2006 , and the senate committee reported s. 3708 ( s.rept .

109-287 ) one month later .

the committees' proposed funding levels for child care and select related programs are shown in table 3 , alongside the funding levels requested by the president .

good start , grow smart: the bush administration's early childhood initiative , was first announced by the president in april of 2002 and has been reflected in budget proposals and program initiatives since that date .

not all the proposals have been adopted , however .

good start , grow smart focuses on three overall areas: ( 1 ) strengthening head start ; ( 2 ) partnering with states to improve early childhood education ; and ( 3 ) providing information to teachers , care givers , and parents .

in the president's fy2004 budget , he proposed to transfer the head start program to the department of education , as well as to provide states with the option to administer the program .

the head start reauthorization bill passed by the house during the 108 th congress ( h.r .

2210 ) did not include the proposal to transfer the program to ed , but did include provisions to allow a maximum of eight states to administer the program ( provided they meet designated requirements ) .

the head start reauthorization bills of this ( 109 th ) congress ( h.r .

2123 and s. 2206 ) emphasized increased coordination among early childhood programs , but neither proposed either a departmental transfer of the program or state demonstration projects .

the administration has moved ahead with two other efforts that are in keeping with the good start , grow smart initiative , but that did not require legislative changes to the head start act .

one is the strategic teacher education program , also known as project step , described by the head start bureau as "a comprehensive , multi - faceted , sequential professional development endeavor to ensure teachers use research - based strategies to implement early and emergent literacy. .

as part of this development , during summer and fall 2002 , 3,000 head start staff and 100 state child care administrators received 32 hours of training in strategies to support children's emerging literacy .

those who were trained are expected to serve as "mentor coaches" for staff within their respective head start programs .

the second effort is the development and implementation of a national reporting system that can be used to assess the effectiveness of head start programs in achieving successful outcomes for children in terms of school readiness—particularly the areas of literacy and number knowledge .

this national reporting system was implemented starting in the fall 2003 , and assesses head start 4- and 5-year - olds twice a year on educational performance measures—using indicators that were included in legislation as part of the 1998 reauthorization of head start .

following hurricane katrina , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) issued a series of information memoranda alerting head start grantees and state child care administrators to various efforts being made to assist their respective programs in helping children and families affected by hurricane katrina .

specifically , the head start bureau urged all its grantees to provide head start services to any displaced children and families in their communities as a result of the hurricane .

on september 12 , 2005 , hhs announced that $15 million was available for helping cover costs over a 30-day period .

grantees were instructed to treat any preschool - aged child whose family had been displaced from their home as income - eligible , with or without documentation .

the head start bureau anticipated that programs serving newly enrolled displaced children might struggle to meet certain head start regulations , and issued guidance for requesting waivers in those areas .

moreover , the bureau encouraged grantees to contact their regional federal offices with any concerns arising from serving evacuated families .

the regional offices were asked ( by hhs ) to collect data ( on a daily basis ) from their respective grantees regarding the number of evacuee children being served by their program ( s ) , and whether these children were new to head start , or , instead were previously enrolled in a head start program in the community from which they were displaced as a result of hurricane katrina .

for copies of documents prepared by hhs relating to head start's role in responding to children and families affected by hurricane katrina , as well as procedures for addressing damaged facilities , see the following website: http: / / www.headstartinfo.org / hurricane_rir.htm .

moreover , the defense department's appropriations act for fy2006 , signed into law ( p.l .

109-148 ) on december 30 , 2005 , included $90 million in additional funding for head start , to be used specifically for grantees serving children displaced by last year's gulf coast hurricanes , and to help with costs of renovating head start facilities that were affected by the storms .

those funds were not allocated according to the standard head start formula due to the targeted purpose of the funding .

the head start bureau took action to assess and address the needs of head start grantees in response to the hurricanes , collecting data for determining allocation of the $90 million .

the defense appropriations act also included ssbg funding in the amount of $550 million for use in covering expenses related to the consequences of last year's hurricanes in the gulf of mexico .

 ( expenses could potentially include child care costs. ) .

the defense appropriations act expanded the potential services for which the additional $550 million could be used , to include "health services ( including mental health services ) and for repair , renovation and construction of health facilities ( including mental health facilities ) . .

the allocation of funds was based on federal emergency management agency ( fema ) registrant data from hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma , with registrants from hurricane katrina receiving double - weighting .

the news release regarding the allocation of funds can be accessed at http: / / www.acf.dhhs.gov / programs / ocs / ssbg / hurricane_relief.html .

the bulk of the funds were allocated to the states of louisiana ( 40% ) , mississippi ( 23% ) , texas ( 16% ) , florida ( 10% ) , and alabama ( 5% ) .

a table showing all states' allocations can be accessed at http: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / news / press / 2006 / ssbg_funds.htm .

the child care bureau of hhs issued guidance regarding ways in which state child care administrators may use their child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) funds to help respond to needs resulting from the hurricane .

no additional emergency grant funds have been provided , but state administrators have been made aware of various options for their use of funds , for example , making funds previously reserved ( at a minimum 4% level ) for "quality activities" available for use in providing emergency child care for displaced families .

likewise , states are reminded that they may amend their state ccdbg plans to redefine eligibility conditions ( eg , redefine "working" ) or priority rules and broaden them to be more inclusive of displaced families .

for the full information memorandum sent to the state ccdbg lead agency administrators , see http: / / www.acf.dhhs.gov / programs / ccb / policy1 / current / im0503 / im0503.htm .

on july 11 , 2006 , hhs secretary leavitt granted waivers that lifted state matching requirements on a portion of child care funding , allowing louisiana , mississippi , and texas to access $60 million in federal funds without making the state matching contribution normally required of ccdf mandatory child care funds .

the authority for the waivers was provided in the emergency supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

109-148 ) .

as a result of the waivers , louisiana was eligible for $27 million ; mississippi , $2 million ; and texas , $31 million .

on march 15 , 2005 , the house education and workforce committee's subcommittee on 21 st century competitiveness held a hearing titled "welfare reform: reauthorization of work and child care. .

on september 27 , 2006 , the house education and workforce committee's subcommittee on education reform held a hearing titled "perspectives on early childhood home visitation programs. .

