the appointment of the chief justice of the united states is an infrequent event of majorsignificance in american politics .

the appointment of each justice to the supreme court issignificant because of the enormous judicial power that the court exercises as the highest appellatecourt in the federal judiciary .

the chief justice , like each of the court's other eight justices , castsone vote when the court rules on cases .

however , the chief justice also exercises a leadership roleand wields unique influence , both within the court itself and in the federal judiciary as a whole .

chief justice appointments occur infrequently , with only 16 individuals having served in thatposition since 1789 - - an average tenure of 13â½ years per chief justice .

 ( 1 ) on september 3 , 2005 , chief justice william h. rehnquist died , after having served almost19 years as chief justice .

 ( 2 ) he had been diagnosed with cancer in october 2004 and , although in ill health since then , hadmanaged to lead the court through its last term , which ended in late june 2005 .

his death cameabout two months after associate justice sandra day o'connor had announced her intention to retirefrom the court , ( 3 ) and onlya few days before the scheduled start of confirmation hearings , on september 6 , 2005 , for hernominated successor , john g. roberts , jr. , a u.s. appellate court judge .

on september 6 , presidentgeorge w. bush withdrew the roberts nomination for the o'connor seat and instead nominatedjudge roberts for chief justice .

 ( 4 ) at age 50 , judge roberts , if confirmed by the senate , wouldbecome the youngest chief justice at time of confirmation in more than 200 years .

 ( 5 ) out of respect for the latechief justice , whose funeral was held on september 7 , the senate judiciary committee postponedthe start of its hearings on judge roberts' nomination to be chief justice until september 12 .

following four days of hearings on the nomination , the judiciary committee on september 22approved judge roberts to be chief justice by a 13-5 vote .

that action sent the nomination to thefull senate , which is expected to vote on whether to confirm judge roberts on september 29 .

any supreme court nomination must be confirmed by the u.s. senate , which , in recentcongresses , has been embroiled in controversies over various of the president's nominations to thelower federal courts .

at times , senate democrats have accused president bush of using hisnominating power to appoint to the courts persons having controversial ideological agendas , and ofmaking judicial appointments during senate recesses in order to bypass the need for senateconfirmation .

 ( 6 ) senaterepublicans , in turn , have accused senate democrats of using their own ideological "litmus tests"to oppose certain judicial nominees and of making improper use of filibusters ( extended debate asa delaying tactic ) on the senate floor to block senate votes on circuit court nominees whom theyoppose .

 ( 7 ) against this backdrop , a supreme court vacancy can be seen by senators of both parties , atleast to some extent , in an ideological context .

many highly controversial decisions of the court inrecent years have been closely decided , by 5-4 votes , appearing to underscore a longstandingphilosophical or ideological divide in the court between its more "liberal" and "conservative"members .

depending on their judicial philosophy , future appointees to the court , senatorsrecognize , could have a potentially decisive impact on the court's ideological balance and , as well,on whether past rulings of the court will be upheld , modified , or overturned .

 ( 8 ) all other things being equal , the appointment of a chief justice , owing to the responsibilitiesof the office and its symbolic importance , is foremost among the appointments that a presidentmakes to the supreme court .

under any circumstances , it will command the attention of congress,especially the senate , which votes on whether to confirm judicial nominations .

even more attentionis expected in the current political environment , in light of the controversy that has recentlysurrounded the judicial appointment process and the importance that the president and senators ofboth parties have attached to upcoming supreme court appointments .

other factors , moreover , can further complicate the appointment of a chief justice .

theprocess , for instance , might become more contentious if the appointment of a new chief justice wereseen as affecting the ideological balance of the court , and thus galvanize opposition from senatorsunhappy with the implications of the appointment .

the process also might become morecomplicated if another supreme court appointment needs to be made at or around the same time asthe chief justice appointment .

this situation can arise , for instance , if a president nominates anassociate justice to be chief justice , or if ( as happened recently ) an associate justice stepped downat about the same time as a chief justice vacancy were created - - in either case , creating an associatejustice vacancy for the president to fill .

this report is intended to help show what is unique about the office and to shed light on theprocess by which a chief justice is appointed .

hence , an initial section reviews the vast range ofduties and responsibilities of the chief justice and the qualifications considered necessary for oneto perform effectively in that office .

a second section then examines the supreme courtappointment process , focusing on the appointment of chief justices .

at the end of this report , atable lists the names of all persons nominated for chief justice , from 1789 to the present , includingtheir nomination dates and , if confirmed by the senate , the dates of their confirmation , judicial oath,and end of service , as well as their ages at time of appointment and upon termination of service .

for a more detailed review of each stage in the supreme court appointment process , as itapplies to associate justice as well as chief justice nominees , see crs report rl31989 , supremecourt appointment process: roles of the president , judiciary committee , and senate .

on september 5 , 2005 , president george w. bush announced he would nominate u.s. courtof appeals judge john g. roberts , jr. , to succeed chief justice william h. rehnquist , who had diedtwo days earlier .

the president cited judge roberts' "extraordinary career," his "striking ability asa lawyer and his natural gifts as a leader. .

 ( 145 ) the death of chief justice rehnquist , the president observed,"leaves the center chair empty just four weeks left before the supreme court reconvenes. .

it is "inthe interest of the court and the country," the president continued , "to have a chief justice on thebench on the first full day of the fall term. .

 ( 146 ) judge roberts had been nominated by president bush earlier , on july 29 , 2005 , to succeedretiring associate justice sandra day o'connor .

 ( 147 ) five weeks later , the pre - hearings phase for that nominationwas approaching its end , ( 148 ) with the senate judiciary committee set to begin confirmationhearings for judge roberts on september 6 , the first day of the senate's return from its augustrecess .

the death of chief justice rehnquist on september 3 , 2005 , however , dramaticallytransformed the appointments equation for the supreme court , the president and the senate .

as aresult of the chief justice's passing , there were now two vacancies - - an immediate chief justicevacancy , and a prospective vacancy with the announced intention of justice o'connor to retire uponthe confirmation of her successor .

for president bush , the rehnquist vacancy provided a newopportunity , if the president wished - - to appoint judge roberts to a different seat on the court .

inthis vein , a newspaper reported in its september 5 morning editions that judge roberts was nowbeing considered by the bush white house for nomination to be chief justice: the idea of making roberts chief justice seems to havenatural appeal .

roberts , a former lawyer in the ronald reagan and george h.w .

bushadministrations who now serves as a judge on the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbiacircuit , was first interviewed by the white house in april not for o'connor's seat but in theexpectation that rehnquist would retire or die .

as a former rehnquist clerk , roberts could be expectedto continue in the same conservative course , and at 50 he would have a long tenure in the top slot .

after six weeks of media scrutiny , he is also a known commodity who has not generated strongopposition among senate democrats .

the mechanics of a switch would not be hard .

bushwould withdraw roberts's nomination as associate justice and then simultaneously nominate himas chief justice .

bush could then take his time choosing someone else to replace o'connor becauseshe has agreed to remain on the court until her successor's confirmation .

 ( 149 ) indeed , the very morning on which the above news report appeared , president bush wouldannounce his selection of judge roberts to be chief justice .

in doing so , the president alsoemphasized that , from his perspective , the senate was "well along in the process of consideringjudge roberts' qualifications. .

 ( 150 ) the next day , september 6 , 2005 , the chairman of thejudiciary committee , the committee's ranking democratic member , and senate leaders announceda new schedule for judge roberts' confirmation hearings , this time as nominee to be chief justice .

hearings on the nomination of judge roberts for chief justice were held by the judiciarycommittee on september 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 , ( 151 ) and on september 22 , the judiciary committee approved theroberts nomination by a vote of 13-5 , with three democrats on the committee joining all 10republicans in favor of judge roberts .

 ( 152 ) the committee action sent the nomination to the full senate,where a vote on confirmation is expected on september 29 .

in the full senate , members will evaluate judge roberts' fitness to be chief justiceaccording to their own criteria and concerns .

in large part , their concerns will mirror the traditionalconcerns of presidents with professional excellence , character , and leadership qualities in a chiefjustice nominee .

some senators , however , also will be concerned with the nominee's judicialphilosophy or views on constitutional issues and how , in their view , the appointment might affectthe court's future direction on major legal and constitutional questions .

it has been suggested , as noted earlier , that if a supreme court nominee were to provecontroversial , a filibuster against the nomination would be a possibility , unless senate rules weremodified to curtail the use of filibusters against judicial nominees .

under current senate rules , thenomination would fall short of confirmation if , in the event of a filibuster , three - fifths of the senate'sfull membership failed to vote in favor of closing debate .

as also noted earlier , an agreementreached on may 23 , 2005 , by a coalition of seven democratic and seven republican senators avertedwhat until then had seemed an imminent confrontation between the two parties over judicialfilibusters .

as part of that agreement , the coalition's democratic senators pledged not to lend theirsupport to filibusters against judicial nominations except under "extraordinary circumstances. .

inthe immediate aftermath of the judiciary committee's 13-5 approval of judge roberts on september22 , 2005 , there were no reports of plans to filibuster by any senators who had announced oppositionto the roberts nomination .

if and when the senate votes to close debate on the chief justice nomination , the next andultimate test for appointment will be the senate vote on whether to confirm .

a vote to confirmwould require a simple majority of senators present and voting .

if the vote of the majority is toconfirm , the confirmed nominee would then receive a commission from the president , officiallyappointing him to the court .

after receiving his commission , judge roberts would be sworn intooffice , becoming the 17th chief justice of the united states .

table 1 .

nominees for chief justice of the united states , 1789 to the present: dates of nomination , finalaction bythe senate or president , judicial oath and termination of service , and ages at times of appointment and termination of service sources : william d. bader and roy m. mersky , the first one hundred justices , ( buffalo: william s. hein & co. , inc. , 2004 ) ; artemus ward , deciding to leave , ( albany: state university of new york press , 2003 ) ; journal of the executive proceedings of the senate of the united states ofamerica ( various volumes ) ; the supreme court of the united states ( an undated pamphlet published by the united states supreme court ) ; and maevamarcus and james r. perry , editors , the documentary history of the supreme court of the united states , 1789-1800 ( new york: columbia universitypress , 1985 ) .

legend: name in bold - - was serving as associate justice at time of nomination to be chief justice .

name in italics - - had earlier served as associate justice , prior to , but not at , time of nomination to be chief justice .

name in bold italics - - had earlier served as chief justice .

