the 109 th congress has considered several immigration issues carried over from the 108 th congress , providing the impetus for the real id act of 2005 .

during the 108 th congress , a number of proposals were made to strengthen identification - document security and make more stringent requirements for alien admissibility and continuing presence within the united states .

immigration and identification - document security proposals were considered in the context of implementing recommendations of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) to improve homeland security , and some of these were enacted under the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 .

however , congress did not include all discussed proposals , certain document - security provisions being notable among them .

at the time that the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act was enacted , some congressional leaders reportedly agreed to revisit some of the dropped immigration and document - security proposals in the 109 th congress .

the real id act of 2005 was first introduced as h.r .

418 by representative james sensenbrenner on january 26 , 2005 , and passed the house , as amended , on february 10 , 2005 , on a vote of 261-161 .

house - passed h.r .

418 contained a number of provisions related to immigration reform and document security that were considered during congressional deliberations on the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act , but which were ultimately not included in the act's final version .

house - passed h.r .

418 also included some new proposals .

the text of house - passed h.r .

418 was subsequently added to h.r .

1268 , the emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 , which was introduced by representative jerry lewis on march 11 , 2005 , and passed the house , as amended , on march 16 , 2005 on a vote of 388-43 .

h.r .

1268 passed the senate on april 21 , 2005 , as amended , on a vote of 99-0 , but did not include the real id act provisions , and a conference was held to resolve differences between the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

1268 .

the conference report , h.rept .

109 - 72 , passed the house on a vote of 368-58 on may 5 , 2005 , and the senate on a vote of 100-0 on may 10 , 2005 .

the real id act , as amended , was enacted into law on may 11 , 2005 as p.l .

109 - 13 , division b .

the version of the real id act enacted into law contains most of the provisions found in house - passed version of h.r .

418 and the version of h.r .

1268 that originally passed the house .

however , some notable changes were made , including , inter alia , ( 1 ) removing provisions relating to the release of aliens in removal proceedings on bond ; ( 2 ) making asylum and withholding of removal eligibility and credibility standards less stringent than those proposed in earlier versions of the real id act ; ( 3 ) providing for limited judicial review of secretary of homeland security decisions to waive certain legal requirements to facilitate the construction of barriers at the borders ; ( 4 ) providing broader waiver authority to the secretary of state and secretary of homeland security regarding terrorist - related grounds for inadmissibility and removal ; and ( 5 ) modifying , and in some cases making more stringent , real id act provisions concerning minimum security standards for state - issued drivers' licenses and personal identification cards accepted for federal purposes this report analyzes the major provisions of the real id act of 2005 , as enacted .

it describes relevant law prior to passage of the real id act relating to immigration and document - security matters , and discusses how the real id act altered preexisting law .

the 9 / 11 commission report documented instances where terrorists had exploited the availability of humanitarian relief under immigration law .

although the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( aedpa ) and the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) amended asylum procedures to reduce fraudulent claims and limited judicial review of removal orders , provisions in the real id act again amend the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to further diminish the prospect of terrorists using the immigration system to their advantage .

section 102 of the iirira generally provides for construction and strengthening of barriers along u.s. land borders to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry and specifically provides for 14 miles of barriers and roads along the border near san diego , beginning at the pacific ocean and extending eastward .

iirira § 102 ( c ) provides for a waiver of the endangered species act of 1973 ( esa ) and the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) to the extent the attorney general determines is necessary to ensure expeditious construction of barriers and roads .

despite the waiver of specific laws , construction of the san diego area barriers has been delayed due to a dispute involving other laws .

california's coastal commission has prevented completion of the san diego barriers on the grounds that plans to fill a canyon in order to complete it are inconsistent with the california coastal management program , a state program approved pursuant to the federal coastal zone management act ( czma ) .

the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) within the department of homeland security believed that the requirements of § 102 ( c ) of the iirira and the czma could not be reconciled .

consequently , legislation was proposed and considered in the 108 th congress that would have waived either a broader range of specific environmental , conservation , and cultural laws or all laws .

also , reportedly the cbp has complied with a nepa requirement despite the waiver available to it .

the real id act provides additional waiver authority over laws that might impede the expeditious construction of barriers and roads along the border and also provides for limited judicial review of a waiver decision by the secretary of homeland security .

engaging in terror - related activity has strict consequences relative to an alien's ability to lawfully enter or remain in the united states .

the ina provides that aliens at any time engaged in specified terror - related activities , or indirectly supporting them in specified ways , cannot legally enter the united states .

also , aliens at any time engaged in terrorist activities are deportable if in the u.s. , but the terrorism grounds for deportation do not now extend to certain indirect support , such as representation of or membership in a terrorist organization .

the real id act , inter alia , ( 1 ) broadens the ina's definitions of "terrorist organization" and "engage in terrorist activity" ; ( 2 ) expands the grounds for inadmissibility based on support of terror - related activity ; and ( 3 ) makes the terror - related grounds for deportability identical to those for inadmissibility .

prior to the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , standards with respect to drivers' licenses and personal identification cards were determined on a state - by - state basis with no national standards in place .

even with the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , with the exception of what was specifically provided for by the legislation , a majority of the standards remained at the discretion of state and local governments .

the real id act contains a number of provisions relating to improved security for drivers' licenses and personal identification cards , as well as instructions for states that do not comply with its provisions .

the real id act also repeals certain overlapping and potentially conflicting provisions of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 .

title iii of the real id act is directed at improving border infrastructure and technology integration between state and federal agencies .

it requires dhs to conduct a study on u.s. border security vulnerabilities , establish a pilot program to test ground surveillance technologies on the northern and southern borders to enhance u.s. border security , and implement a plan to improve communications systems and information - sharing between federal , state , local , and tribal agencies on matters relating to border security .

dhs is also required to submit reports to congress regarding its implementation of these requirements .

section 301 of the real id act requires the under secretary of homeland security for border and transportation security , in consultation with the under secretary of homeland security for science and technology and the under secretary of homeland security for information analysis and infrastructure protection , to study the technology , equipment , and personnel needed by field offices of the bureau of customs and border protection to address security vulnerabilities within the united states , and conduct a follow - up study at least once every five years thereafter .

the under secretary of homeland security for border and transportation security is required to submit a report to congress of findings and conclusions from each study , along with legislative recommendations for addressing security vulnerabilities .

section 301 ( c ) authorizes necessary appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2011 to carry out recommendations from the first study .

the u.s. borders with mexico and canada are monitored in a variety of ways , including through the use of border patrol agents , video cameras , ground sensors , and aircraft .

pursuant to the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , a pilot program was established to test various advanced technologies — including sensors , video , and unmanned aerial vehicles — to improve surveillance along u.s. - canadian border .

section 302 of the real id act requires the department of homeland security to establish a pilot program to identify and test ground surveillance technologies to enhance border security .

the program covers both northern and southern border locations .

the real id act also requires dhs to submit a report to designated house and senate committees within a year of program implementation describing the program and recommending whether it should terminate , be made permanent , or be enhanced .

section 303 of the real id act requires the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with various federal , state , local , and tribal agencies , to develop and implement a plan to improve interagency communication systems and enhance information - sharing on matters related to border security on the federal , state , local , and tribal level .

dhs is required to submit a report to designated house and senate committees within a year of plan implementation that includes any recommendations that the secretary of homeland security found appropriate .

