this report examines congress' legislative authority with respect to the judicial branch .

while congress has broad power to regulate the structure , administration and jurisdiction of the courts , its powers are limited by precepts of due process , equal protection and separation of powers .

usually congressional regulation of the judicial branch is noncontroversial , but when congress proposes to use its powers in a manner designed to affect the outcome of pending or previously decided cases , constitutional issues can be raised .

for instance , congress has in recent years considered using or has exercised its authority in an attempt to affect the results in cases concerning a number of issues , including abortion , gay marriage , freedom of religion , "right to die" and prisoners' rights .

this report addresses the constitutional foundation of the federal courts , and the explicit and general authorities of congress to regulate the courts .

it then addresses congress' ability to limit the jurisdiction of the courts over particular constitutional issues , sometime referred to as "court - stripping. .

the report then analyzes congress' authority to limit the availability of certain judicial processes and remedies for constitutional litigants .

congressional power to legislate regarding specific judicial decisions is also discussed .

much of the material in the section on congressional power over court jurisdiction is also included in crs report rl32171 , limiting court jurisdiction over federal constitutional issues: " court - stripping " , by [author name scrubbed] .

allocation of court jurisdiction by congress is complicated by the presence of state court systems that can and in some cases do hold concurrent jurisdiction over cases involving questions of federal statutory and constitutional law .

thus , the power of congress over the federal courts is really the power to determine how federal cases are to be allocated among state courts , federal inferior courts , and the united states supreme court .

congress has significant authority to determine which of these various courts will adjudicate such cases , and the method by which this will occur .

for most purposes , the exercise of this power is relatively noncontroversial .

over the years , however , various proposals have been made to limit the jurisdiction of federal courts to hear cases in particular areas of law such as busing , abortion , prayer in school , and most recently , reciting the pledge of allegiance .

generally , proponents of these proposals are critical of specific decisions made by the federal courts in that particular substantive area , and the proposals are usually intended to express disagreement with decisions in those areas and / or to influence the results or applications of such cases .

several such proposals passed the house in the 108 th congress .

for instance , in july 2003 , an amendment was passed by the house to limit the use of funds to enforce a federal court decision regarding the pledge of allegiance .

then , in july 2004 , the house passed h.r .

3313 , the marriage protection act , which would have limited federal court jurisdiction over questions regarding the defense of marriage act .

finally , in september 2004 , the house passed h.r .

2028 , the pledge protection act , which was intended to limit the jurisdiction of the federal courts to hear cases regarding the pledge of allegiance .

these proposals are often referred to as "court - stripping" proposals , and some of these proposals may raise significant constitutional questions .

regulation of the procedures and remedies available to a litigant are clearly within congress' authority .

however , just as an exception or a regulation of jurisdiction can constrain the courts in the performance of their duties , so restrictions on judicial processes , such as the ability to afford injunctive relief , can equally constrain the courts .

while major interpretive differences have arisen between congress and the courts regarding the construction of these legislative enactments , the supreme court has never expressed any doubt that congress has the power to enact them .

the court has , however , always left open the possibility that congress might go too far .

for instance , in 1793 , for reasons lost to history , congress enacted a statute to prohibit the issuance of injunctions by federal courts to stay state court proceedings .

while construction of this statute has varied over the years , it remains as an indication that congress has the power to regulate such judicial process and remedies .

during this century , the propensity of the federal courts to issue injunctions to limit labor unions in disputes with management , led congress to adopt the norris - laguardia act , forbidding the issuance of injunctions in labor disputes except after compliance with a lengthy hearing and fact - finding process .

although earlier case law appeared to recognize a due process objection to such a restraint , the supreme court had no difficulty sustaining the constitutionality of the law in lauf v. e. g. shinner & co .

congress' power to confer , withhold , and restrict both jurisdiction and equity authority was also powerfully revealed in the cases arising from the emergency price control act of 1942 .

fearful that the price control program might be nullified by injunctions , congress provided for a special court in which persons could challenge the validity of price regulations issued by the government from which appeals from the court to the supreme court could be taken .

the constitutionality of the act was sustained in lockerty v. phillips , although those skeptical of the breadth of the law note that the court itself referred to the fact that it arose in "the exigencies of war. .

one modern example of congressional control over the processes of the federal courts is the prison litigation reform act ( plra ) of 1996 .

for the last 20 - 30 years , many prisons and jails in this country have been enjoined to make certain changes based on findings that the conditions of these institutions violated the constitutional rights of inmates .

many of these injunctions came as a result of consent decrees entered into between inmates and prison officials and endorsed by federal courts , so that relief was not necessarily tied to violations found .

many state officials and members of congress have complained of the breadth of relief granted by federal judges , as these injunctions often required expensive remedial actions .

the plra was designed to curb the discretion of the federal courts in these types of actions .

thus , the central requirement of the act was a provision that a court "shall not grant or approve any prospective relief unless the court finds that such relief is narrowly drawn , extends no further than necessary to correct the violation of the federal right , and is the least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation of the federal right. .

the most pointed provision of the plra in this context is the so - called "automatic stay" section , which states that a motion to terminate prospective relief "shall operate as a stay" of that relief during the period beginning 30 days after the filing of the motion ( extendable to up to 90 days for "good cause" ) and ending when the court rules on the motion .

in miller v. french , inmates attacked the constitutionality of the "automatic stay" provision , as a violation of separation of powers .

by a 5-to - 4 vote , the supreme court reversed .

the court held that the plra did not set aside a final judgment of a federal court , but rather it operated to change the underlying law and thus required the altering of the prospective relief issued under the old law .

secondly , the court noted that separation of powers did not prevent congress from changing applicable law and then imposing the consequences of the court's application of the new legal standard .

finally , the court held that the stay provision did not interfere with core judicial functions as it could not be determined whether the time limitations interfered with judicial functions through its relative brevity .

congress has a wide range of tools available to it to exercise its legislative authorities with respect to the judicial branch , and these powers may be used to alter almost all aspects of how the federal courts are organized and administered .

however , as with other constitutional authorities , these powers are subject to some constitutional limitations .

although the exact parameters of these limitations have not been established , it is likely the supreme court would impose limitations on congressional legislation that did not comply with dictates of due process , equal protection , and separation of powers .

