since hiv / aids was discovered in 1981 , more than 20 million people have lost their livesto the virus .

nearly 40 million people are currently living with hiv / aids , including nearly 2.2million children under the age of 15 .

ninety - five percent of those living with hiv / aids reside indeveloping countries .

sub - saharan africa remains the most affected continent with 1.9 million ofthe 2.2. million infected children .

 ( 1 ) a joint study conducted by the u.s. agency for internationaldevelopment ( usaid ) , the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) , and the joint united nationsprogram on hiv / aids ( unaids ) found that at the end of 2003 , 15 million children under the ageof 18 had lost one or both parents to aids , with 12.3. million of them found in sub - saharanafrica .

 ( 2 ) between 1990 and 2003 , sub - saharan africa's population of children orphaned by aidsincreased from less than 1 million to more than 12 million ( 3 ) .

due to the 10-year time lag between hiv infection and death,experts predict that without the availability of anti - retroviral medications orphan populations willcontinue to grow for at least two decades after a country has reached its peak hiv infection rate .

in uganda , for example , although the epidemic has been on a steady decline , from 14% in the late1980s to 4.1% in 2003 , the number of orphans under the age of 15 continued to climb for 10 yearsafter the country's infection rate peaked .

experts report that the number of orphans is only nowexpected to decline in the country , from 14.6% of ugandan children in 2001 to a projected 9.6% in2010 .

 ( 4 ) thailand , longhailed for having significantly reduced its hiv / aids rate , is still witnessing an increase in childrenorphaned by aids .

in 1995 , there were 63,000 children who had lost their parents to aids .

in 2001,the number increased to 289,000 , and in 2005 , an estimated 380,000 are expected to lose theirparents to aids .

 ( 5 ) the term "aids orphans" is used in the title of this report to facilitate recognition of theissue .

however , those that serve children affected by hiv / aids caution against the use of this termbecause they believe it further stigmatizes the children .

consequently , the terms "orphans andvulnerable children" ( ovc ) , "children affected by aids," and "aids - affected children" will beused hereafter to refer to "aids orphans. .

 ( 6 ) the growing population of children orphaned by hiv / aids is a concern , because had it notbeen for hiv / aids , the global percentage of orphans would be declining instead of increasing .

bythe end of 2003 , 43 million children ( 12% of all african children ) were orphaned in sub - saharanafrica , 12.3 million ( 32% of all african orphans ) of those were due to aids .

although asia had alower number of children orphaned by aids in 2001 , 1.8 million ( 2.8% of all orphans ) , it had amuch larger overall orphan population than sub - saharan africa , with 65 million orphans .

 ( 7 ) some have expressed concernthat asia's relatively large population hides its significant population with hiv / aids .

for example,although india had a seroprevalence .

 ( 8 ) rate of less than 1% at the end of 2003 , 5.1 million people wereliving with hiv / aids at that time .

 ( 9 ) this is almost as many people who had the virus in south africa ( 5.3 million ) at the end of 2003 , which had a seroprevalence rate of 21.5% .

 ( 10 ) children living in high seroprevalence areas may see a decline in access to education or inthe quality of education .

a 2000 study found that an hiv - infected teacher loses approximately sixmonths of professional working time before succumbing to the virus .

 ( 11 ) this has had a significantimpact on heavily affected countries such as kenya , where teachers are dying faster than they canbe trained and replaced .

kenya faces the loss of 6,570 teachers annually due to hiv / aids , whichtranslates to 18 teacher deaths per day .

 ( 12 ) in the central african republic , almost as many teachers diedof aids as retired between 1996 and 1998 .

as a result , nearly two - thirds of the schools have closeddue to staff shortages .

 ( 13 ) heavily affected communities produce lower crop yields due to a reduction in land use ( those whoare ill with aids are often too weak to farm ) , and a decline in the variety of crops grown .

theinfrequent use of fertilizers in the fields often results in a decline in soil fertility , increases in pestsand diseases , and a decline of external production outputs , including cash crops .

 ( 14 ) as a result , countriessignificantly impacted by hiv / aids have experienced a rise in child mortality and a decline in thegains made in child survival over the past decade .

for example , child mortality in kenya was 205per 1,000 in 1960 , and had fallen to 97 per 1,000 in 1990 .

however , due to hiv / aids the rateincreased to 122 per 1,000 in 2001 .

 ( 15 ) the majority of children orphaned or made vulnerable by hiv / aids are living with asurviving parent , or within their extended family ( often a grandparent ) .

an estimated 5% of childrenaffected by hiv / aids worldwide have no support and are living on the street or in residentialinstitutions .

although most children live with a caretaker , they face a number of challenges,including finding money for school fees , food , and clothing .

experts contend that effectiveresponses must strengthen the capacity of families and communities to continue providing care,protect the children , and to assist them in meeting their needs .

there are thousands of localizedefforts , many of them initiated by faith - based groups , to address the needs of children madevulnerable by aids .

proponents argue that supporting these "grassroots" efforts can be a highlycost - effective response , although additional mechanisms are needed to channel such resources .

theyfurther assert that additional resources are needed to expand the limited programs and to support thechildren who are on the street or in institutional care .

the plight of children affected by hiv / aids is gaining increased congressional attention,particularly through the enactment of p.l .

108-25 , the united states leadership against hiv / aids,tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 , which authorized 10% of global hiv / aids funds to be usedfor children orphaned or made vulnerable by the virus ( ovc ) .

in the 108th congress , there wasconsiderable debate on how the funds should be allocated .

many pointed out that activities relatedto children affected by hiv / aids should be streamlined .

some wanted to create a coordinator forchildren orphaned and affected by hiv / aids in the aids coordinator's office of the statedepartment .

still others argued that the scope of assistance should be expanded to include childrenwho are orphaned from other causes , as they are just as vulnerable as those orphaned by hiv / aids.in the 108th session , congress considered four bills that targeted children orphaned and affected byhiv / aids , though none made it to full conference .

in the 109th session , h.r .

1409 , assistance for orphans and other vulnerablechildren in developing countries act of 2005 , passed the house and senate on october 18 , 2005and october 25 , 2005 , respectively .

ultimately , the bill was enacted on november 8 , 2005 .

the act , p.l .

109-95 , authorized spending for orphan - related programs in fy2006 and fy2007 ; establisheda monitoring and evaluation system to measure the effectiveness of related assistance activities ; directed the appointment of a special advisor for assistance to orphans and vulnerable childrenwithin usaid ; and required an annual report on project implementation .

the continued increase in international hiv rates is proving devastating for governmentsheavily affected by hiv / aids , not only because their most productive populations are beingdecimated , but also because the future of these countries and their children is at risk .

governmentswith significant populations of children orphaned and made vulnerable by hiv / aids may be facedwith a range of issues , including surging street children populations , a rise in child labor , childprostitution and other forms of exploitative work , vulnerability to crime , militias and terroristorganizations , a growing population of uneducated and unskilled laborers ; and long - term foreign aiddependence .

this section will explore some of these challenges , and the implications that they haveon affected countries .

children affected by hiv / aids need support in a wide range of areas , including economic,material , emotional , and legal protection .

although a number of organizations seeks to meet theneeds of children orphaned and made vulnerable by hiv / aids , local communities continue to bethe primary loci of support for these children .

one usaid survey found that 74% of the timerelatives provided food for orphans and vulnerable children , and 19% of the time they relied on theirfriends for food .

religious groups were used the remainder of the time ( 7% ) , when needed .

 ( 60 ) .

most often when governments of industrialized countries consider strategies to address theneeds of children affected by hiv / aids , they begin by examining their foreign aid programs .

whileforeign assistance programs are an important part of the effort , there are a wide range of other issuesthat are often overlooked .

this section discusses a range of issues that impact efforts to helpchildren affected by hiv / aids , including how "aids orphans" are defined , how u.s. foreign aidprograms are implemented , and other related international initiatives .

due to the high level of stigma still associated with hiv / aids , many who work in thedevelopment community avoid using the term "aids orphans. .

the term , some argue , only servesto further stigmatize and separate the children from the others in the community .

those who offersupport to communities affected by hiv / aids have found that the early programs , which focusedspecifically on children whose parents died of aids , often missed other vulnerable children , suchas those who are at high risk of becoming orphaned by aids ( because their parents have hiv ) , thosewho live in households with children orphaned by aids , and those who may have been orphanedfrom other causes ( like war or disease ) are equally vulnerable .

additionally , in many communitiesit is often not known who has hiv / aids and who does not , due to struggling health careinfrastructures and minimal hiv / aids testing .

as a result , many of the assistance networks,including unicef , unaids , and usaid , develop programs that serve the needs of the mostvulnerable children in areas seriously affected by hiv / aids , many of whom are children orphanedby aids .

usaid's approach to assisting children orphaned and made vulnerable by hiv / aids hasposed a challenge for the u.s. congress .

usaid prefers not to create programs that exclusivelyserve children orphaned by hiv / aids .

representatives have stated that this approach would onlyserve to further isolate and stigmatize the children .

as a result , the agency supports the childrenthrough a number of interventions , which serve their needs , including educational support , schoolfeeding , and psychosocial support .

although this approach is one that is generally accepted amonginternational aid workers , it complicates congressional efforts to monitor spending per program .

p.l .

108-25 required that 10% of international hiv / aids funds be reserved for children orphanedand made vulnerable by hiv / aids .

p.l .

108-199 , the fy2004 consolidated appropriations,supported the language .

neither usaid nor the office of the global aids coordinator has beenable to detail exactly how much was spent on each program , such as school feeding , in large partbecause organizations implementing programs ( including usaid - supported programs ) use anintegrated approach .

the programs respond to the needs of the most vulnerable children where theywork , rather than only assisting those whose parents have received an hiv / aids diagnosis .

usaidofficials underscore that this approach is also important , as many people in the most affectedcountries die without an hiv / aids diagnosis .

therefore , if it were to restrict services to thosechildren whose parents have officially died of aids , it might not meet its fiscal targets .

finally,usaid reports that it often combines funds from different accounts to address the sundry needs oforphans and vulnerable children , including child survival and health fund , ( csh ) , hiv / aidsfunds for orphans and vulnerable children , title ii food for peace funds , and basic education funds .

education and poverty programs .

while fundingfor hiv / aids initiatives has dramatically increased in recent years , u.s. and international fundingfor other health programs , education and poverty - related programs have remained level anddecreased in some cases .

critics argue that this minimizes the effectiveness of hiv / aids programs,as many of the issues are interrelated .

during a congressional hearing on the u.s. foreign operationsappropriations , usaid administrator andrew natsios expressed concern that other programs suchas agriculture , which are vital in countering poverty and supporting health programs , are beingdecreased .

 ( 82 ) unicefestimates that over the past decade international education aid has fallen by 30% .

as a result , 65million girls and 56 million boys did not attend school in 2002 .

the highest concentration ofuneducated children resides in africa , also home of the highest number of children orphaned byhiv / aids .

in 2002 , the number of african children unable to attend school reportedly rose to 45million , up from 1990 levels of 41 million .

 ( 83 ) collaboration .

although there are manyprograms that address the various needs of orphans , as illustrated in this report , some argue that thereis not enough collaboration among aid organizations on the ground .

some programs exclusivelyaddress the material needs of orphans , while others focus on their psychosocial needs , still othersfocus on empowering women and girls .

advocates argue programs could be more effective if therewere greater collaboration in their planning and implementation .

usaid recognizes that the needsof orphans and vulnerable children are complex .

in response , usaid integrates various aspects ofits development programs to meet the needs of these children , rather than implement a singleprogram exclusively for them .

there has been an increasing amount of collaboration on the international level with usaid,unicef , unaids , who , and the other international organizations that address the needs oforphans and vulnerable children .

for example , the united nations general assembly specialsession ( ungass ) on hiv / aids developed a declaration of commitment on hiv / aids , to whichthe u.s. is a signatory .

 ( 84 ) part of this commitment is that national policies would bedeveloped by 2003 and implemented by 2005 , to build and strengthen government , community andfamily capacity to support children affected by hiv / aids .

at the regional level , there have beena number of meetings in africa that brought delegations together to agree on a common set of actionsand to measure progress towards them and the ungass goals .

additionally , in october 2003 , anumber of international ngos , faith - based institutions , governments , and other organizations metand agreed on a global strategic framework for the protection , care and support of orphans and otherchildren made vulnerable by hiv / aids at the first global partners forum for children orphanedand made vulnerable by hiv / aids .

this is a first step towards improving program effectiveness .

however , collaboration efforts at the national and local level are often minimal or non - existent,critics say .

as stated earlier , most of the needs of orphans and vulnerable children are met by theircommunities .

some argue that non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) that operate at the locallevel need greater support and must be included in planning and implementation efforts .

additionally , including local and national ngos may promote ownership and strengthens localcapacity .

advocates for children affected by hiv / aids point out that efforts to respond to their needsare not commensurate to the scale of the problem .

a number of options has been put forward toincrease the resources for aids - affected children .

some observes advocate establishing a czar fororphans and vulnerable children to oversee u.s. efforts and to galvanize the global effort .

otheranalysts propose creating a senior orphan and vulnerable children position within the aidscoordinator office .

still some say that the programs that address the needs of children should bestrengthened and better coordinated .

proponents of this position emphasize the importance ofintegrating the care , support , and treatment of hiv - infected children into hiv / aids treatmentprograms and those that prevent mother - to - child hiv - transmission .

the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , andmalaria .

the magnitude of the hiv / aids crisis in seriously affected countries isfar too large , varied , and interrelated for any single body to address unilaterally and adequately.those who believe that a productive response to this crisis requires greater cooperation point to theglobal fund as a model .

 ( 85 ) the global fund has at all levels representatives from the publicand private sectors .

at the planning level , its board of directors is comprised of sevenrepresentatives from donor and developing countries , and a representative each from anindustrialized country ngo , a developing country ngo , the private sector , and a contributingfoundation .

in the project design phase , the country coordinating mechanism ( ccm ) or "nationalconsensus group" develops project proposals .

the ccms in each country include representativesfrom the government , ngo community , private sector , people living with hiv / aids , tuberculosisand / or malaria , religious and faith - based groups , academics , and the united nations agencies .

thepractice of including all stakeholders in the planning and implementation of projects increases theireffectiveness and minimizes the likelihood of duplicating efforts , some claim .

the global fund was unable to spend $87.8 million of the u.s. contribution in fy2004 , asit did not receive sufficient matching funds .

p.l .

108-25 required that u.s. contributions for fiscalyears 2004 through 2008 not exceed 33% of contributions from all sources .

 ( 86 ) the fy2005 consolidatedappropriations provided $437.8 million to the global fund , including the $87.8 million .

the fundsremain subject to the same 33% limitation .

the total u.s. contribution through the end of fy2005has totaled more than $1.5 billion .

congress has consistently provided more than the administrationrequested .

the 33% requirement has caused a number of criticisms .

some believe that the unitedstates should give more money to the fund , as it has the structure and capability to use the moneyquickly .

some supporters of this idea also believe that the 33% requirement hinders the ability ofthe united states to give more .

this policy , advocates claim , causes other nations who believe theunited states has yet to give its fair share to hold back additional contributions .

critics of this viewpoint believe that the fiscal requirement encourages others to give more to the fund .

proponentsargue that the united states is already the largest donor to the fund , and should not be the primarycontributor .

furthermore some opponents of increasing u.s. contributions to the fund havequestioned the absorptive capacity of the global fund , stating that it is spending the money tooslowly .

 ( 87 ) by december2004 , the fund had only disbursed $860 million of the $3.3 billion paid .

 ( 88 ) anti - retroviral medication .

advocates argue thatif the most affected countries had greater access to anti - retroviral ( arv ) medication there would bea decrease in the number of new orphans and other vulnerable children .

due to the cost and otherfactors , only 12% of the 5.8 million people immediately needing aids treatment in developingcountries have access to treatment .

 ( 89 ) according to who , only 325,000 of those with access totreatment in developing countries ( 700,000 ) live in sub - saharan africa , where 25.4 million peopleare currently living with the virus .

 ( 90 ) preventing mother - to - child hiv transmission ( pmtct ) is a critical part to reducing thegrowing number of orphans and vulnerable children ( ovc ) in developing countries , particularly forcountries with high seroprevalence rates among pregnant women , including swaziland ( 39% ) ,botswana ( 32% ) , south africa ( 24% ) , kenya ( 22% ) , namibia ( 18% ) , zimbabwe ( 18% ) , and malawi ( 18% ) .

 ( 91 ) access tonevirapine , a relatively inexpensive single - dose drug that significantly reduces the hiv transmissionrate from mother to child , is virtually non - existent in many developing countries .

in 2003 , only anestimated 5% of pregnant women in africa had access to drugs to prevent mother - to - child hivtransmission , and only 8% globally were offered treatment .

 ( 92 ) it has been estimated that1,900 children are born with hiv every day in africa alone .

 ( 93 ) botswana , the first country in sub - saharan africa to develop a national anti - retroviraldistribution program , is the only developing country where nevirapine is readily available .

althoughit has a national distribution plan , there are barriers to widespread use of nevirapine and arvs,including stigma and capacity challenges .

at the end of 2002 , 34% of pregnant women had accessto nevirapine in botswana and 10,000 people were using arvs .

 ( 94 ) the capacity challengesremain a significant challenge for countries that face the hiv / aids epidemic , as many of them,including botswana have considerable shortages of health care workers .

the president of botswana,festus mogae , recently discussed this issue when he noted that botswana struggles with "braindrain," as skilled health care professionals leave the government or country for more lucrativesalaries .

 ( 95 ) botswana's slow arv distribution has strengthened critics arguments that widespread arvdistribution is not only hindered by high costs , but also by resource constraints .

some have statedthat health care infrastructures must first be strengthened before arv distribution could be morerapidly scaled up .

one area that has gained increasing attention is the shortage of trained africanhealth care workers to offer arv treatments .

a unaids report recently cited studies , whichestimated that between 19% and 53% of all government health employee deaths were caused byaids .

 ( 96 ) south africa , a country that formerly rejected the widespread use of nevirapine or other arvmedication , became the second country in sub - saharan africa to develop a national anti - retroviralprogram .

it announced in august 2003 that its health ministry would begin a national distributionprogram .

though the country already offered nevirapine in some areas to pregnant women andemergency aids medication to rape survivors , the country leadership came under heavy criticismfor not developing an effective national arv distribution plan .

the announced plan sought toestablish a service point in each district within one year , and to make anti - retroviral medicationavailable to all south africans and permanent residents at the municipal level within five years .

 ( 97 ) uganda became the third country in sub - saharan africa to develop a national anti - retroviralprogram .

it announced in december 2003 that its health ministry in partnership with usaid wouldlaunch a three - year program to provide anti - retroviral medication throughout the country .

thoughuganda has been hailed as an example of success for effectively bringing down its nationalseroprevalence rate , there are still more than 500,000 people living with hiv / aids in thecountry , ( 98 ) and nearlyone million ( 940,000 ) children orphaned due to hiv / aids .

 ( 99 ) the u.s. government has expanded its hiv / aids programs to include care and treatmentto people living with hiv / aids when congress passed p.l .

108-25 , the "u.s .

leadership againsthiv / aids , tuberculosis and malaria act of 2003. .

the law authorized the u.s. government tooffer arv to at least 500,000 individuals by the end of 2004 , and up to 2,000,000 by the end of2006 .

some have criticized the u.s. government , as observers complain that it is moving too slowlyto implement the treatment programs .

the office of the global aids coordinator reports that byseptember 2004 , the president's emergency plan had supported arv for 155,000 people .

 ( 100 ) analysts note that ifthe administration would work more closely with existing programs , greater results would beachieved .

congress has already moved to increase access to treatment in the 109th session .

h.r .

155 , mother - to - child transmission plus appropriations act for fiscal year 2005 ,introduced january 4 , 2005 , seeks to offer additional funding for mtct - plus programs .

implemented through the columbia university mailman school of public health , this programprovides treatment to the entire family , as opposed to only the child and / or mother .

h.r.155 appropriates $75 million for this effort in fy2005 .

access to arvs for children .

child advocates arecalling for more children to receive anti - retroviral therapy .

unaids estimates that only between15,000 and 20,000 children living with hiv / aids have access to treatment .

the organizationbelieves that 660,000 of the 2 million children living with the virus need immediate care .

until1990 , no antiretroviral ( arv ) drug was specifically tested or approved for pediatric use .

only threearvs are labeled for children under two , come in liquid form , and have who - approved genericversions available .

the pediatric arv drugs that are available are significantly more expensive thanadult versions - - branded pediatric arv drug formulations cost between 50% and 90% more thanadult versions .

 ( 101 ) it is particularly challenging to treat infants and young children , as they are unable to swallowpills .

this requires that they receive the drugs in liquid form , which has more stringent handling andstorage guidelines .

additionally , drug doses are based on children's changing weights and must berecalculated based on current weight or body surface area and then converted to the appropriatevolume based on the formulation strength .

this process requires greater human resources , therecalculation of dosages at each visit , and fully - trained doctors .

liquid treatments are not availablein all arvs , and the transition period from liquid to solid pills vary among medications .

whenliquid treatments are unavailable , providers would need to break adult tablets for lower doses orcrush pills into food or fluid .

proper dosage is hard to ensure using these methods .

the currentshortage of health care practitioners in many developing countries , particularly in sub - saharanafrica , has posed considerable challenges in treatment efforts among adults .

the more complexdemands and challenges of treating children has presented additional issues for affected countries .

insufficient supplies of hiv testing kits are also a considerable problem in many of the mostaffected countries .

for example , in 2004 , 35% of hiv - positive babies in nairobi , kenya , died bytheir second birthday .

the country had two specialized machines for detecting hiv in the country .

pediatric diagnostic equipment costs around $40,000 per unit in kenya , while the cost of testing achild is about $55 .

in its 2004 global report , unaids said 90,000 infants were exposed to hivby birth and breast - feeding every year , at least 46,000 of them were infected and 60% died beforetheir second birthday .

 ( 102 ) .

debt relief .

some argue that the huge debtburden of developing countries , particularly those severely affected by hiv / aids , hinders theirability to develop an effective response to hiv / aids .

proponents of heavier debt relief argue thatmany countries , including those receiving debt relief , spend more money on debt payments than onsocial services .

this money , they argue , could be used on other programs that are effective incombating the virus , such as supporting education and health infrastructures .

 ( 103 ) oxfam estimates thatof the 26 countries participating in the highly indebted poor countries ( hipc ) initiative , half arestill spending 15% or more of government revenues on debt repayments .

for example , zambia isspending 30% more on debt repayment than on health .

 ( 104 ) furthermore , hiv / aids is sinking these countries deeper intopoverty , making the debt repayments increasingly harder to pay .

there had been some congressional action on this issue in the 107th and 108th congresses .

h.r .

1567 , "debt cancellation for hiv / aids response act" in the 107th congress , andin the 108th congress h.r .

643 , "to urge reforms of the enhanced highly indebtedpoor countries ( hipc ) initiative," and h.r .

1376 , "to improve the hipc initiative"were introduced .

all three bills sought to expand debt relief efforts to countries heavily affected byhiv / aids .

similar legislation is expected to be introduced in the 109th session .

some areconcerned that debt reduction initiatives can be abused , and corruption will undermine debtreduction strategies .

furthermore , it has been argued that it is not debt repayments that are sinkingthese countries deeper into poverty but the lack of strong revenue sources .

if some of these countrieswould revise their economic and social policies there would be less of a need for debt relief , criticssay .

in an effort to limit the corruption and careless use of debt relief , international institutions , suchas the world bank and unaids , are working with countries to develop effective , transparent plansto incorporate hiv / aids efforts into debt reduction strategies .

 ( 105 ) agricultural subsidies .

countries heavilyaffected by hiv / aids need increased revenue to support crumbling health and educationinfrastructures , offer hiv / aids treatment , and develop comprehensive hiv / aids programs .

forexample , unicef recently reported that kenya would need $70 million per year to support 1.2million kenyan children affected by hiv / aids .

 ( 106 ) some argue that agricultural subsidies hinder the economic growth of countries like kenyathat are affected by hiv / aids , and consequently their ability to combat the epidemic .

it is estimatedthat in 70% of developing countries agriculture is the main source of revenue for families , as wellas the national economy .

 ( 107 ) however , some have said that agricultural subsidies preventfarmers in agriculture - based economies from exporting their products to global markets , becausetheir unsubsidized prices are higher than the below - market prices of subsidized agricultural goods .

the world bank recently reported that agricultural subsidies in industrialized countries total $311billion a year , with sugar subsidies that are nearly equivalent to all exports from all developingnations at $6.4 billion .

 ( 108 ) the bank estimated that if agricultural subsidies wereeliminated , agricultural and food exports from low and middle - income countries could rise by 24%,increasing rural income by about $60 billion .

 ( 109 ) some use the world bank report to argue that agriculturalsubsidies also undermine foreign aid efforts .

the report estimates that agricultural subsidies areabout six times the amount of all foreign aid ( 110 ) with u.s. subsidies to cotton growers totaling $3.9 billion in2003 , three times the amount of u.s. foreign aid to africa .

 ( 111 ) concurrently , criticsof agricultural subsidies are concerned that the subsidies also increase reliance on foreign aid,because subsidies encourage surplus production of agricultural goods that are ultimately exportedto poorer countries who are unable to produce domestic goods at a competitive price .

they assertthat , consequently , people living in agriculture - based economies have less income to purchase basicnecessities , including food , heightening reliance on foreign aid .

 ( 112 ) in an effort to address agricultural trade issues , members of the world trade organization ( wto ) agreed in doha , qatar , in 2001 , to lower tariffs and other barriers to free and fair agriculturaltrade .

the wto ministerial conference in cancãºn , mexico , was to follow - up the agreement anddevelop concrete plans to revise the trade laws .

 ( 113 ) however , talks collapsed when developing countries andindustrialized nations could not agree on several issues .

since no progress was made , agriculturaltariffs and subsidies remain .

the united states maintains that it will continue to work with countriesto develop strategies to gradually eliminate agricultural subsidies and other barriers to trade .

 ( 114 ) .

