the 12 banks ( the banks ) that make up the federal home loan bank ( fhlb ) system constitute one collective government - sponsored enterprise ( gse ) .

originally chartered by congress to provide liquidity to the nation's predominant lenders for home mortgage loans — savings and loan associations and savings banks — the banks have undergone a series of changes over the years as the nation's financial institutions have changed .

still a lender to lenders primarily for housing , the banks can now lend for many other purposes as well , and have special responsibilities for low - and moderate - income housing , for debts incurred by the federal government in handling deposit insurance crises of the 1980s , and for some community development projects .

the system as a whole has also grown to become essentially the same size as the other two housing - related gses , fannie mae and freddie mac .

congressional discussions surrounding fannie mae and freddie mac and their regulators now include the banks and could fold their overseer into a new single regulator for all three gses .

this report gives a short history and basic description of the federal home loan bank system , its responsibilities , and its ties to the government .

it also discusses issues affecting the banks and highlights the differences between the fhlb system and the other two housing - related gses .

some bank assets , such as derivatives and manufactured housing loans , have resulted in losses , in the same manner ( if not scale ) as fannie mae and freddie mac .

the banks have , in some cases , had to restate earnings , cut dividends , alter their capital structures , and change managements as a result .

most problems have related to accounting for derivatives generally used to hedge against interest rate movements that could erode the value of bank holdings of mortgages or liens on member mortgage portfolios and have had little cumulative effect .

the restatements had delayed some of the banks' registrations with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) .

in 2004 , the fhfb required all the banks to register at least one class of equity ( member stock ) with the sec , thus giving up their charter exemptions from registration .

as of april 11 , 2007 , each fhlb had submitted its form 10-k with the sec on time .

current combined financial reports for the fhlb system are now made available on the fhfb website .

because of their cooperative and collective structure , sec registration looks somewhat different from that of publicly held companies , but triggers the same disclosures as to the risks and financial details of the banks .

now that the banks have registered under the voluntary procedures , they are not permitted to de - register , and must file all appropriate disclosures and reports required by the sec .

they are also subject to fines and penalties for inaccurate or incomplete reporting under the securities laws , including the sarbanes - oxley act .

two other issues discussed among policy analysts concern risks attendant to joint and several liability , and the super lien .

the former ensures that the banks will come to each other's aid , should that be necessary , before the federal government would have to step in to take whatever actions it might deem necessary to prevent systemic losses to the banking or housing finance systems .

joint and several liability is a large part of why the banks are usually considered a single , collective gse rather than a collection of separate companies .

it also , however , creates some "moral hazard" in that any one bank may be encouraged to take risks that might have to be paid for in part by other banks — even though other banks may be unaware of any irregularity .

the super lien allows the banks to step into a failed member institution and claim assets to make itself whole before any other creditor , including the fdic .

the banks have not historically had to specify assets used as collateral until after a failure , leading to the opportunity to "cherry pick" the best assets remaining in a failed member institution and raising the costs to the fdic of resolving a failed bank or thrift .

a continuing issue affecting all gses concerns the possibilities of systemic risk that arise from the circumstance of having all bank debt treated by the financial markets as if it were federal agency debt .

because depository institutions , for which the federal government has clear safety responsibility , can hold agency debt without regard to limits on loans to a single lender , the possibility exists that a failure of the banks could trigger failures of commercial banks , savings associations , and credit unions that were overexposed to system debt .

such failures could in turn adversely affect the fdic and even the federal budget , and could have wide repercussions throughout the financial system .

on december 22 , 2006 , the fhfb adopted a new rule to limit the finances of federal home loan banks .

the rule limits the excess stock of member banks to 1% of the bank's assets .

the limit on excess stock , also known as voluntary stock , is meant to ensure that the banks remain appropriately capitalized , retain access to capital markets , and preserve safety and soundness .

because member banks have historically redeemed excess stock on presentation , the stock has some of the same characteristics of issuing new debt and raises some of the same issues of the government's implied guarantee and the possibility of systemic risk .

for the banks , while their reach is not as great as fannie mae or freddie mac , the implied guarantee presents the same problems as for the other gses .

because of the market perception that gses are too important for the government to allow any of them to fail , the gses have an incentive to take on greater risks , or to expand into areas that allow them to grow their businesses at the expense of companies not so favored .

this not only creates problems of competitiveness , but it also creates a macroeconomic problem of over - allocation of capital market credit into housing markets .

the allocation , intended for housing , is problematic in that it is an indirect way to provide shelter .

not only can part of the implied subsidy be retained by the gses , what they pass through can be wasted in the sense that lower prices for mortgages may be lost in higher prices for housing .

without very strong authorities , it can be difficult for regulators to control the activities of the gses ; as they grow in size and scope , so does the potential systemic threat to financial markets .

the slowdown in the housing market could negatively affect the fhlbs .

in addition to any delinquent loans that may be in the fhlb system , a general decline in house prices would reduce the value of the collateral that backs the banks making up the system .

declining collateral value hurts bank balance sheets even while the loans perform .

estimating the likely effect on the fhlb system is difficult because there has not been a national decline in house prices since the system was created , although regional house prices have declined .

refinancing represents another channel through which troubles in mortgage markets could affect the fhlbs .

large lenders with affiliates that are members of a regional fhlb could use the system to access liquidity to refinance troubled loans .

for example , the cost of borrowing funds to finance mortgage - backed securities increased in august 2007 .

mortgage lending generally decreased as expected ; however , the volume of fhlb advances to its members increased .

it is possible that these advances are being used to refinance troubled borrowers out of resetting loans and into the fhlb system .

on the one hand , refinances could help hold down foreclosure rates .

on the other hand , refinances could move loans likely to default from private investors to the fhlb system , which some believe has an implicit government guarantee .

the major issue before congress concerning the fhlb system is gse regulatory reform .

the proposed replacement of the current system regulator accompanies a basic move to restructure and strengthen regulation of fannie mae and freddie mac .

both h.r .

1427 and s. 1100 would fold the fhfb and the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) — the current regulator of fannie mae and freddie mac — into a single overseer for all three housing - related gses .

the federal housing finance reform act of 2007 , h.r .

1427 , sponsored by representative frank and others , passed the house on may 22 , 2007 , by 313-104 .

the bill would fold the fhfb and ofheo into a single regulator for all three housing - related gses , to be known as the federal housing finance agency .

in the senate , the federal housing enterprise regulatory act of 2007 , s. 1100 , sponsored by senator hagel and others , also sets up a new single regulator .

s. 1100 was referred to the senate banking committee on april 12 , 2007 , but no further action has been taken as of the date of this writing .

the major reason behind such legislation is the widely understood weakness in the powers and authorities granted to ofheo by congress .

legislation would grant greater power and independence to the new regulator than to ofheo , while nearly matching the authority and independence of the current fhfb .

unlike the current fhfb board , however , the new regulator would be a single agency director .

table 1 summarizes the differences , as they relate to combined supervision , between the gses ( as they are currently regulated ) .

some of the legislative discussion has also suggested that commercial bank - style regulatory controls and powers may be appropriate for a new gse regulator .

table 2 presents a comparison of the current authorities of bank regulators , ofheo , and the fhfb over their regulated financial institutions .

it summarizes the essential control mechanisms set forth in law , regulation , and practice to control risk , self - dealing , and certain other undesirable characteristics .

agency - to - agency variations exist , especially between ofheo , the fhfb , and the banking regulators .

the latter , however , strive for uniformity in their regulatory issuances , although they do not always achieve it and may apply "common" standards differently in examinations .

government - sponsored enterprises are "wholesale" nondepository institutions that are not supposed to make loans directly to the public .

table 2 thus omits multiple banking regulations intended only for "retail" banking institutions .

