on december 17 , 2003 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued proposed rules toaddress the effects of interstate transport of air pollutants on non - attainment of the national ambientair quality standards ( naaqs ) for fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) and ozone ( specifically , the 8-hourstandard ) .

 ( 1 ) the proposed interstate air quality ( iaq ) rule appeared in the federal register january30 , 2004 .

for pm 2.5 , the proposed rule finds that the interstate transport of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) andnitrogen oxides ( nox ) from 28 states and the district of columbia contributes significantly todownwind non - attainment ; for ozone , the proposed rule finds that interstate transport of nox from25 states and the district of columbia contributes significantly to downwind non - attainment of the8-hour standard .

to remedy the situation , the proposed rule generally follows the methodology epa employed in an earlier regulation that addressed interstate transport of ozone pollution , the nox sip call .

 ( 2 ) inthe nox sip call , epa found 21 states and the district of columbia significantly contributed to non - attainment of the 1-hour ozone naaqs .

 ( 3 ) to remedy thesituation , epa set statewide emissionsbudgets for nox emissions , and recommended that states achieve those budgets through "highlycost - effective" controls on electric generators and large industrial facilities under a regional cap andtrade program .

states are to implement controls by may 31 , 2004 .

with the iaq rule , epa proposes a region - wide emissions cap for nox and so 2 to be implemented in two phases - - 2010 and 2015 .

based on the methodology employed in the proposedrule , epa's estimates of emissions under the caps are provided in table 1 , along with percentreductions from the basecase .

epa's methodology determines the caps by applying "highly costeffective" pollution controls on electric generating units .

table 1 .

epa estimates of regional nox and so2 caps and percentage reduction ( million tons ) source: proposed interstate air quality rule ( 69 federal register 4566-4650 ) based on the cost - effectiveness methodology , each of the affected states is assigned a statewide "emissions budget. .

each covered state would be required to submit a revised state implementationplan ( sip ) identifying measures it intended to implement to achieve its emissions budget .

stateswould be free to choose whatever means they deemed appropriate , subject to epa approval .

however , epa strongly believes that the regional emissions cap can be most cost - effectivelyachieved through a regional cap - and - trade program focused on electric generators and intends onissuing a proposed cap - and - trade model program rule to encourage that option .

the 60 day public comment period for the proposed rule ends on march 30th .

with much of the public focus on the accompanying proposed mercury rule , theinterstate air quality rule has not received much attention .

however , ifpromulgated , the proposed rule would have far - reaching effects in terms ofeconomics , environmental impact , and policy .

in terms of economics , there are different perspectives at work .

the economic perspective embodied in the proposed rule may best be described as a cost - effectiveness approach .

cost curves areconstructed and compared with an eyetoward finding the most cost - effective reduction level - - the "knee" in the cost curve .

at this point , the proposed rule is maximizing the reductions achieved per dollarspent .

accordingly , the proposed rule sets its reduction targets in this vicinity .

toincrease the likelihood that reductions will be economically efficient , the proposedrule includes several market mechanisms , such as trading and banking , to encourageaffected parties to seek the most efficient solution to their compliance problem.likewise , deadlines are set with cost considerations in mind .

implementingenvironmental goals through market mechanisms , thereby allowing polluters tochoose their lowest cost abatement actions , represents a general elevation ofeconomic "efficiency" as the guiding principle of decision - making .

this focus ismore evident when one considers the interaction between the proposed interstate airquality rule with the proposed mercury rule .

a second economic perspective on setting reduction targets under the proposed rule would be to base it on cost - benefit analysis .

the difference between the costsand benefits of the proposed rule is an order of magnitude in favor of the benefits .

this number is based primarily on one benefit - - reduced premature fatalities amongadults resulting from reduced pm 2.5 .

 ( 39 ) other potential categories of benefits are notassessed .

 ( 40 ) if one were to adopt the classiceconomic perspective of setting themarginal cost of control at the marginal benefit received , it is highly likely that thereductions mandated by the proposed rule would be higher .

likewise , deadlinesmight be advanced to achieve the benefits quicker .

this approach of defining "highlycost - effective" reductions is not discussed in the proposed rule .

economics appearsto be defined in the proposed rule as costs to the electric utility industry .

alternativeperspectives are not addressed .

environmental impacts addressed by the proposed bill derive primarily from sulfur dioxide control .

the phase 1 nox requirements for electric generators aresimilar to those of the nox sip call .

ozone is not a focus , even to the point ofignoring the seasonal nature of the problem in favor of an annual reduction program .

as a result , the primary benefits of the proposed rule are from pm 2.5 compliance andavoidance of related so 2 - caused impacts such as regional haze .

the focus on so 2 is in line with epa's cost - benefit analysis that quantifies benefits mostly from so 2 control .

however , from the perspective of the proposed rule's environmental goal of addressing non - attainment of the pm 2.5 and ozone naaqs in downwind states , acomplementary focus on the characteristics of the ozone problem might seemappropriate .

in this case , refinement of the proposed rule with respect to ozonewould be necessary .

the nox sip call is a seasonal program because ozone is aseasonal problem .

if epa wishes to keep the annual nox program proposed in therule because of its pm 2.5 and regional haze advantages , a seasonal weighting factormight be considered to ensure greater nox reductions during the ozone season whileallowing greater emissions at other times of the year .

whether this would have apositive or negative effect on the overall cost - benefit of the rule can not bedetermined quantitatively as epa did not estimate many benefits of ozone reduction .

thus , while more focus on nox and consequently on ozone could make the proposedrule more effective , it is unclear if it would be more economically efficient .

from a policy standpoint , epa has presented the proposed interstate air quality rule and the accompanying proposed mercury rule as a "suite of integrated airactions" to reduce emissions of three pollutants - - so 2 , nox , and hg .

 ( 41 ) the twoproposed rules are integrated in such a way that the technologies reducing so 2 andnox emissions under the interstate air quality rule also reduce enough hg emissionsto meet the 2010 reduction requirements of the proposed mercury rule .

thiscombination of requirements and technology allows utilities to meet the requirementsof both rules without installing three different control technologies - - one for eachpollutant .

if the hg reduction were more stringent , utilities could be forced to installactivated carbon injection ( aci ) in addition to the fgd and scr technologiesassumed to be chosen under the proposed interstate air quality rule .

as epa doesnot provide a cost - benefit analysis of hg reductions , it is not possible toquantitatively determine whether this decision is economically efficient in terms ofpotential hg benefits foregone by the lower reduction requirement .

however , from the broader perspective of the interaction of the proposed rules with the underlying clean air act , there is a resulting lack of integration .

it is likelyto be argued that the proposed rule simply adds another layer on an already multi - layered cake called the clean airact .

adding a regionwide annual cap and tradeprogram on top a regulatory structure whose foundation is health - based nationalstandards that focus on the local concentration of pollutants in the ambient airpresents numerous difficulties .

as a result , there are multiple inconsistencies betweenthe proposed rule and other provisions of the clean air act .

these conflicts are notsurprising - - there is little epa can do to resolve them through regulation .

if theadministration's goal is to restructure caa compliance strategies toward market - oriented cap and trade programswithout creating more layers and conflicts , it ispossible a statutory solution will be necessary .

