a little over two years ago , the senate finance committee convened to hear testimony sparked by concern over the popular merck anti - inflammatory drug vioxx .

a few weeks before , merck had notified the food and drug administration ( fda ) that it was withdrawing vioxx from the market in response to recent study results indicating an increased risk of heart attacks and sudden cardiac deaths among the millions of patients who had been using vioxx since its introduction in 1999 .

senators wanted to find out what had gone wrong and what could be done to prevent it from happening again .

this was not the first time that this congress had reacted to news about dangers posed by drugs that had already reached the market .

earlier that year , the house committee on energy and commerce's subcommittee on oversight and investigations had held hearings because of controversy over the safety of antidepressants when prescribed to children .

in both cases , members were worried that neither the public nor fda were sufficiently informed by manufacturers — or , in the case of fda , sufficiently forthcoming — about risks occurring after the drugs had been first approved .

at the finance committee hearing , david graham , associate director for science and medicine in fda's office of drug safety , was asked whether these concerns were warranted in the case of vioxx .

he stated , "i would argue that the fda , as currently configured , is incapable of protecting america against another vioxx .

we are virtually defenseless. .

pressed to name other marketed drugs he thought troublesome , graham named five .

the february 2005 meeting of two fda advisory committees — coming three months after dr. graham's testimony to the senate finance committee and five months after merck withdrew vioxx from the market — also drew intense public attention .

after weighing the evidence on the safety and risk - to - benefit of vioxx and similar drugs , the committees unanimously asserted that the three cox - 2 inhibitors then holding fda approval for sale in the united states — vioxx , celebrex , and bextra — do increase the risk of heart attack and stroke .

illustrating the complexity of decisions that fda faces , a majority of the committee members , noting that the benefits of the drugs outweigh the risks for certain groups of people , therefore , recommended to fda that the agency permit the sale of these drugs — with , however , several severe limitations on advertising and strong warnings in consumer and clinician labeling about cardiovascular risk that is likely associated with dose and duration of use .

the furor surrounding dr. graham's testimony reawakened interest in a variety of regulatory issues that have surfaced periodically ever since the storm of protest over "filthy , decomposed or putrid" food and "worthless" medicines resulted in fda's creation during theodore roosevelt's presidency .

concerns about regulatory agencies' abilities to protect the public are not unique to fda or public health .

the life - and - death issues of medicine , however , strike most closely to home for many americans .

there has not been a decade since fda's creation without a highly publicized incident involving drug safety that has led to legislation expanding and strengthening fda's authority to protect the public .

examples include the scores of children killed by an untested antibiotic ( elixir of sulfanilamide ) marketed by a company in tennessee in 1937 ; the mistakes at a plant manufacturing polio vaccine in 1954 that actually caused 260 cases of polio and 11 deaths ; and , in 1962 , thalidomide , the sleeping pill that eventually resulted in the birth of at least 8,000 severely deformed babies and thousands of prenatal deaths , mostly in europe .

today , as the 110 th congress prepares to consider a variety of health issues , members still share concerns over drug safety and efficacy .

the agency most responsible for such issues is the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

in fy2006 , fda operated on a budget of $1.88 billion ( $1.49 billion in appropriated funds and $382 million from user fees ) , more than $6 per u.s. citizen .

with that money , fda was expected to oversee about $1 trillion of goods , which make up about one - quarter of all u.s. consumer spending .

congressional funding for fda has increased at about half the rate as that of industry user fees , established by congress as a way to defray the costs of hiring additional agency personnel so that drug approval review could be quicker .

even though the user fees account for somewhat less than 20% of the fda total , they made up 59% of fda's center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) fy2006 budget .

two regulatory frameworks exist for the review of prescription drugs .

first , fda reviews the safety and effectiveness of new drugs that manufacturers wish to market in the united states ; this process is called premarket approval or preapproval review .

once a drug has passed that threshold and is fda - approved , fda acts through its postmarket or post - approval regulatory procedures .

this report examines issues related to drug safety , specifically in the context of the regulatory process that congress and the fda have established for ensuring that drugs are safe and effective .

it includes a primer on drug approval: how drugs are approved and come to market , including fda's role in that process .

it also describes fda and industry roles once drugs are on the pharmacy shelves , the postmarket ( also called the post - approval ) period .

the report then moves on to a discussion of the problems in identifying and resolving the postmarketing safety and effectiveness issues that are raised most frequently in the debate .

finally , it outlines actions that a variety of analysts have suggested to improve the situation , both ones that fda could adopt on its own and others for which legislation would be necessary .

we now turn to a discussion of fda's role after a drug appears on the market .

first , we describe the current system .

then we present what critics have identified as problems — and the solutions they propose .

in the last few years , several authors — historians , clinicians , and editors — have published books about what they see as problems with government and industry's handling of drug safety issues .

these include marcia angell , the truth about the drug companies: how they deceive us and what to do about it ( new york: random house , 2004 ) ; jerry avorn , powerful medicines: the benefits , risks , and costs of prescription drugs ( new york: alfred a. knopf , 2004 ) ; and philip j. hilts , protecting america ' s health: the fda , business , and one hundred years of regulation ( new york: alfred a. knopf , 2003 ) .

also , an fda task force proposed sweeping changes in its 1999 report , creating a risk management framework: report to the fda commissioner from the task force on risk management , may 1999 , available at http: / / www.fda.gov / oc / tfrm / riskmanagement.pdf .

while these analysts are in broad agreement that fda's approach should be changed , they differ about what should be changed .

the rest of this report is organized around the six areas where most analysts view the problems in postmarketing surveillance , study , and regulatory action .

options listed in one section , however , might not be possible without those from other sections — especially "" fda budget . .

most difficult to categorize is the influence of industry .

to make the discussion manageable , this report limits the options listed under industry role to those that would diminish what some analysts consider inappropriate industry behavior .

the options aimed at increasing postmarket information , many of which involve expanding industry role , appear in the other procedure - defined sections .

that said , the six areas around which most recommendations revolve are: fda organization fda budget role of industry opportunities to use the drug approval process to enhance postmarket activities insufficient postmarket information lack of public access to available data some of the proposed changes lie within fda's legislative authority to implement .

others would require congressional action .

in table 1 , we provide a list of concerns , fda options , and congressional options .

no drug is completely safe .

in fact , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act even defines a prescription drug as one with "toxicity or other potentiality for harmful effect , or the method of its use , or the collateral measures necessary to its use , is not safe for use except under the supervision of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such drug. .

physicians have a responsibility to weigh benefits against risks when prescribing drugs .

to do so requires , in addition to their training and experience , available information .

many ethicists say that the public , too , must have enough information about risks to make up their own minds .

however , in - depth analysis is often required to assess a drug's full effects .

some question whether individuals or even their physicians can meaningfully interpret all relevant information .

the fda's task involves providing that in - depth analysis as it weighs benefits against risks .

for example , codeine provides pain relief but is addictive ; tamoxifen keeps breast cancer at bay for those who have had a single mastectomy , but can cause uterine cancer and blood clots ; ibuprofen relieves inflammation but can cause gastrointestinal distress ; and statins lower cholesterol but may weaken muscle fibers .

manufacturers and researchers should find new ways to diminish or mitigate risk .

furthermore , if a drug is not effective , there is no potential benefit to counterbalance even the smallest risk .

fda's advisory committees routinely tackle these tasks .

but the february 2005 joint advisory committee meeting made clear how hard it is to assess the unique and intertwined qualities of safety , benefit , and risk .

the committees heard patients testify that they would rather die than live without the cox - 2 inhibitor that allows them to function .

they heard highly trained researchers present analyses of a drug's risk and come up with different conclusions .

finally , they sat for three days surrounded by conversation and press releases carrying often sharply divergent views from drug companies , consumers , academic researchers , the media , members of congress , and the fda itself .

while few question that fda applies the necessary statutory , regulatory , and procedural requirements for premarket approval , there is broad criticism of its postmarket enforcement activities .

many observers maintain that the law does not provide sufficiently strong authority for fda to act .

in this 100 th year of the food and drug administration , congress is clearly poised to examine whether fda needs more legal authority to regulate the safety and effectiveness of drugs .

it could also examine how fda can better use the legal — and moral — authority it already has ( 1 ) to encourage and participate in developing , gathering , analyzing , and disseminating information ; ( 2 ) to act on that information when necessary ; and ( 3 ) by its powers to both offer incentives and enforce penalties — and by its own example — to encourage industry cooperation .

there is broad agreement about what problems hamper postmarket activity .

this paper has summarized what observers point to as possible solutions .

congress now has a much tougher job — picking the approaches that work best .

