since the 1980s , guatemala has been consolidating its transition from a centuries - long traditionof mostly autocratic rule toward representative government .

a democratic constitution was adoptedin 1985 , and a democratically - elected civilian government inaugurated in 1986 .

eighteen years later,democratic institutions remain fragile .

of all the conflicts that ravaged central america in the lastdecades of the 20th century , guatemala's conflict lasted the longest .

guatemala ended its 36-yearcivil war in 1996 , with the signing of the peace accords between the government and theguatemalan national revolutionary unity ( unidad revolucionaria nacional guatemalteca , urng ) ,a group created in 1982 from the merger of four left - wing guerrilla groups .

some of these groupswere inspired by the ideologies of the cuban and nicaraguan revolutions and by liberation theology .

some had bases in the highlands with a mostly indigenous population and incorporated the historicalgrievances of the mayans into their agendas for social and economic reform .

the accords not only ended the civil conflict , but constituted a blueprint for profound political , economic , and social change to address the conflict's root causes .

embracing 10 other agreementssigned from 1994 to 1996 , the accords call for a one - third reduction in the size and budget of themilitary ; major investments in health , education , and other basic services to reach the rural andindigenous poor ; and the full participation of the indigenous population in local and national decisionmaking .

they require fundamental changes in tax collection and government expenditures , andimproved financial management .

the accords also outline a profound restructuring of stateinstitutions , especially of the military , police , and judicial system , with the goal of endinggovernment security forces' impunity from prosecution and consolidating the rule of law .

former president alfonso portillo , of the guatemalan republican front ( frg ) , whose four - year term just expired , took office in january 2000 following elections generally regarded asfree and fair .

upon taking office , president portillo embraced the peace accords and declared themto be state policy for his administration .

portillo survived the revelation made by the guatemalanpress during the presidential campaign that he had fatally shot two men in mexico in 1982 , and hadbeen a fugitive from justice until a mexican judge declared the case inactive in 1995 .

portilloadmitted to having committed the murders , and said they were in self - defense .

 ( 1 ) he went on to winby a large margin in runoff elections , with some analysts concluding that voters had "overlookedportillo's personal background in exchange for his promises to rule in favor of rural peasants andworking - class guatemalans. .

 ( 2 ) portillo was widelycriticized for inadequate implementation of thepeace process , and increases in human rights violations , drug trafficking , and common crime .

hewas also criticized for allegedly extensive corruption in his administration .

transparencyinternational said guatemala was perceived as the 33rd most corrupt country out of 133 countries in2003 .

 ( 3 ) in the economic realm , growth slowed duringhis administration , and unemployment rose.although portillo initially reduced the government's deficit spending , reducing the budget by anaverage of 10% , he then resumed deficit spending .

oscar berger ( pronounced ber - shay ) , of the great national alliance ( gran alianza nacional , gana ) , a recently formed and fractious coalition of center - right parties , was inaugurated presidenton january 14 , 2004 .

berger's election ends the dual - party dominance of the pan and frg that hascharacterized guatemalan national politics in recent years .

berger has promised to make fulfillingthe peace accords a central theme of his administration .

he says signing a free - trade agreement withthe united states is a top priority and that he plans to stimulate the economy by encouraging privateinvestment .

while noting that insufficient enactment of peace accord reforms are mainly the responsibility of the government , the united nations verification mission in guatemala ( minugua ) states thatcivil society also bears responsibility for fulfilling the accords .

[guatemala requested a u.n. missionin 1994 in the guatemalan comprehensive agreement on human rights , the first of the peaceaccords , to verify human rights and compliance with the commitments of that agreement. .

in itsmay 2003 report , minugua criticized the organized private sector for systematically opposingefforts to increase taxes , preventing guatemala from reaching the minimum target set in the peaceaccords of a tax base equal to 12% of gross domestic product , and thereby limiting fundingavailable for key social ministries and institutions of justice .

guatemala has the largest population in central america: 12 million people .

approximatelyhalf the population is indigenous , with about 23 different ethno - linguistic groups .

the indigenouspopulation is economically and socially marginalized and subject to significant ethnic discrimination .

distribution of income and wealth remains highly skewed in guatemala .

according to a recentworld bank report , guatemala ranks among the more unequal countries of the world , with the top20% of the population accounting for 54% of total consumption .

indigenous people - - constitutingabout 50% of the population - - account for less than 25% of total income and consumption .

according to the world bank's recent poverty assessment of guatemala , past policies seeking to promote economic growth have resulted in the exclusion and impoverishment of the indigenouspopulation .

massive land expropriations , forced labor , and exclusion of the indigenous from theeducational system all served to develop coffee as guatemala's primary export crop yet inhibitdevelopment among the indigenous rural population .

by 1960 , guatemala had double the per capitagross domestic product ( gdp ) of neighboring honduras and nicaragua , but lower social indicators .

this remains the case today .

guatemala's per capita gdp is $3,630 , in the mid - range internationally .

its total gdp , $20.5 billion , is the largest in central america .

yet the world banksays data suggest that poverty is higher in guatemala than in other central american countries .

estimates of the portion of guatemala's population living in poverty vary: the u.s. statedepartment reports that 80% of guatemalans live in poverty , with two - thirds of that number livingin extreme poverty .

the world bank reports that 54% of the population lives in poverty , withindications that poverty has increased slightly in 2001-2002 .

 ( 9 ) poverty is highest in rural areas andamong the indigenous: 75% of all people living in the countryside live in poverty , and 25% in thiscategory live in extreme poverty .

poverty is significantly higher among indigenous people , 76% ofwhom are poor , in contrast to 41% of non - indigenous people .

guatemala's gdp for 2001 was $22 billion .

gdp growth rate was 3.3% in 2000 , 2.1% in 2001 , and 2.3% in 2002 .

low worldwide coffee prices contributed to guatemala's slowed growth over thelast couple of years .

despite the downturn in commodity prices , traditional exports such as coffeeand sugar continue to lead guatemala's economic growth .

over the last decade , non - traditionalexports , such as assembled clothing , winter fruits and vegetables , furniture , and cut flowers , havegrown dramatically .

tourism also has grown , though continued growth may depend on thegovernment's ability to address security issues .

problems limiting growth include illiteracy and lowlevels of education , high crime rates , and an inadequate capital market .

the 36-year civil war generated social and economic costs .

economic growth rates did not fall until the height of the conflict in the 1980s .

but cumulatively , from 1960 to 1996 , the war entailedsignificant loss of life , jobs , and productivity , and caused disruption , especially in the hard - hit ruralareas .

guatemala's social indicators continue to be among the worst in the hemisphere ; itsmalnutrition rates are among the worst in the world .

its infant mortality rate is 43 per 1,000 livebirths , and its under - 5 mortality rate is 58 per 1,000 children .

 ( 10 ) guatemala's illiteracy rate isextremely high: at 31% , only nicaragua and haiti have worse levels in latin america and thecaribbean .

the average level of schooling is an extremely low , 4.3 years ; among the poor it is lessthan two years .

schooling is lowest among women , indigenous people , and the rural poor .

as aresult of malnutrition , 44% of children under five years of age have stunted growth .

drought andlow coffee prices triggered a rural economic crisis beginning in 2001 , which has caused severemalnutrition among the rural poor .

throughout the peace accords , there are provisions seeking to reverse the historical exclusion of indigenous peoples and women .

in signing them , the guatemalan government agreed toimplement a more inclusive development strategy .

it also agreed to increase investment of thenational budget in education , health , and other social sectors in order to create more equitabledistribution of wealth , reduce poverty , improve living conditions of the poor , and increase access toeducation , health , and other social services .

implementation of the elements of the peace accords relating to improving the living conditions and the rights of indigenous people and women are far behind schedule , however .

accessto education , according to the inter - american commission on human rights , is "still far frombecoming a reality. .

the portillo administration outlined a poverty reduction strategy in 2002addressing most of those issues .

minugua reported in 2003 that there were slight improvementsin social spending in the national budget over the previous year but that the amounts allocated to keysocial ministries "remained extremely low in relation to the needs of the country. .

the indigenouspopulation and women continue to face limited opportunities and discrimination in the labor market .

according to the world bank's poverty assessment , "the indigenous appear limited tolower - paying jobs , primarily in agriculture," which , the report says , is "unlikely to serve as a majorvehicle for poverty reduction. .

other obstacles hindering social and economic advancement amongthe indigenous poor , which the report says the government still must address , are higher malnutritionrates , less coverage by basic utility services , wage discrimination , and discriminatory treatment bypublic officials and other service providers .

international donors and others have criticized guatemala for not increasing the tax base to the minimum target of 12% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) agreed upon in the peace accords .

ata may 2003 meeting of the consultative group for guatemala , donors told the guatemalangovernment it needed to increase its tax revenue , decrease spending on the armed forces , andincrease social spending as mandated in the accords .

the consultative group is made up of over20 donor countries and international organizations , including the u.s. , canadian , and japanesegovernments , the world bank , and the idb .

in its report prepared for that meeting , minugua saidthe organized private sector shares the responsibility for inadequate social budgets because itsystematically opposes efforts to increase taxes , thereby limiting funding available for key socialministries and institutions of justice .

president berger says signing a free - trade agreement with the united states is a top priority and that he plans to stimulate the economy by encouraging private investment .

his campaign wassupported by coffee and sugar producers , and several members of his cabinet are from the businesssector .

guatemala endured a 36-year civil war which ended in 1996 with the signing of the "accordfor a firm and lasting peace," signed by then - president alvaro arzu ( 1996-2000 ) ( 11 ) , and theguatemalan national revolutionary unity ( unidad revolucionaria nacional guatemalteca , urng ) .

the peace accords incorporated 10 other previously negotiated agreements , the first of which wasthe comprehensive agreement on human rights .

the latter was signed and became effective in1994 .

the peace accords established a historical clarification commission , commonly referred to as the truth commission , to investigate human rights violations and acts of violence that occurredduring the armed conflict from 1960 to 1996 .

in its 1999 report , "guatemala: memory of silence,"the commission reported that more than 200,000 people died or disappeared because of the armedconflict , and that over 80 % of the victims were indigenous mayans .

the commission concludedthat the systematic direction of criminal acts and human rights violations at the civilian mayanpopulation amounted to genocide .

the commission attributed responsibility for 93 % of theviolations to agents of the state , principally members of the army , and said that , "the majority ofhuman rights violations occurred with the knowledge or by order of the highest authorities of thestate. .

the commission concluded that , although much of the state's actions were taken in thename of counterinsurgency efforts , "the magnitude of the state's repressive response" was "totallydisproportionate to the military force of the insurgency...," and that the vast majority of the state'svictims were not guerrilla combatants , but civilians .

 ( 12 ) through that first peace accord in 1994 , the comprehensive agreement on human rights , guatemala requested a u.n. mission to verify human rights and compliance with the commitmentsof that agreement .

the united nations verification mission in guatemala ( minugua ) wasestablished in the country soon after , and regularly issues reports and recommendations based onits findings .

in the fall of 2003 , minugua was extended for another year .

it will now be supportedby a u.n. human rights commission , which the guatemalan government approved in december2003 .

on january 7 , 2004 , guatemala and the u.n. agreed to establish an "investigating committeeon illegal security corps and clandestine organizations," an agreement endorsed bythen - president - elect berger .

u.s. policy objectives in guatemala include strengthening democratic institutions andimplementation of the peace accords ; encouraging respect for human rights and the rule of law ; supporting broad - based economic growth , sustainable development , and mutually beneficial traderelations ; combating drug trafficking ; and supporting central american integration throughresolution of territorial disputes .

relations between guatemala and the united states havetraditionally been close , but strained at times by human rights and civil - military issues .

the bushadministration repeatedly expressed concerns over the failure of the portillo administration toimplement the peace accords , a perceived high level of government corruption , and lack ofcooperation in counter - narcotics efforts .

 ( 23 ) arriving for the new president's inauguration , floridagovernor jeb bush remarked , " ... we have confidence that we will work very closely with theadministration of oscar berger to forge a better future for the people of the united states andguatemala. .

p.l .

108-7 ( h.j.res .

2 ) the consolidated appropriations resolution for fy2003 .

in the foreign operationsappropriations act ( division e ) , title iii restricts military education and training for guatemala toexpanded international military education and training ( imet ) , meaning for civilian personnel only .

training funds for guatemala may only be provided through regular notification procedures of thecommittees on appropriations .

prohibits foreign military financing for guatemala .

title iv,sec.586 suggests that information relevant to the murders of sister barbara ann ford and otheramerican citizens in guatemala since december 1999 should be investigated and made public .

itgives the president a deadline of 45 days after the bill's enactment to order all federal agencies anddepartments to "expeditiously declassify and release to the victims' families" such information , anddirects all federal agencies and departments to use the discretion contained within existingprocedures on classification in support of releasing , rather than withholding , such information .

signed into law february 20 , 2003 .

p.l .

108-199 ( h.r .

2673 ) foreign operations appropriations act for fy2004 ( h.r .

2800 / s. 1426 ) , incorporated into omnibus appropriations act .

prohibits foreign military financing forguatemala .

restricts military education and training for guatemala to expanded internationalmilitary education and training ( imet ) , meaning for civilian personnel only .

training funds forguatemala may only be provided through regular notification procedures of the committees onappropriations .

prohibits reducing the number of usaid foreign service employees at each missionin latin america except as provided through notification to the committees on appropriations .

regarding usaid operations in guatemala , the conference report ( h.rept .

108-401 ) states thatmembers do not believe the strategy of substantial staffing reduction in guatemala ( and hondurasand nicaragua ) reflects the priorities of u.s. economic , trade , humanitarian , and immigrationpolicies with these countries .

the report states further that "guatemala specifically is struggling ina state of post - conflict polarization , and with the new january 2004 government , the managersstrongly believe that reducing assistance and staffing would limit the ability of the united states tobe responsive at this critical juncture in guatemala's history. .

noting the success of a nutritional drink in reducing malnutrition among guatemalan pre - schoolchildren , the report "encourages usaid to determine the feasibility of establishing a long - term childnutrition program targeted toward reducing severe malnutrition rates among central americanchildren. .

the conference report also notes that ( 1 ) the conference agreement does not include thesenate's earmark of $250,000 in economic support funds to support the commission to investigateillegal groups and clandestine security apparatus in guatemala , but congress strongly supports thiseffort "to investigate those responsible for the political violence and organized criminal activity thatcontinues to hamper guatemala's development and recommends that at least $250,000 be providedto the commission" in fy2004 ; ( 2 ) the conference agreement does not include the senate sectionthat would have directed all federal agencies and departments to use the discretion contained withinexisting procedures on classification in support of releasing , rather than withholding , informationon the murders of sister barbara ann ford and other american citizens in guatemala sincedecember 1999 .

but congress notes that in april 2003 the u.s. attorney general ordered heads ofu.s .

agencies to set forth a written plan for the review of any relevant information they had regardingthose cases for possible release to the victims' families and directs the attorney general to provideto the committees on appropriations , within 60 days of the bill's enactment , copies of the writtenplans and descriptions of the progress made in implementing them ; ( 3 ) the conference agreementdoes not include the senate section requiring the administration to report on the status of its strategyto address the international coffee crisis , but congress notes its concern about the report's delay andthat it expects it to be released in the near future .

conference agreement for omnibus vehicleapproved by house december 8 , 2003 , by senate january 22 , 2004 .

signed into law january 23,2004 .

h.r .

1300 ( davis ) the central american security act would amend the nicaraguan adjustment and centralamerican relief act to extend permanent resident status adjustment provisions to qualifyingsalvadoran , guatemalan , and honduran nationals and revise the application filing deadline .

introduced march 17 , 2003 , referred to the house subcommittee on immigration , border security,and claims may 5 .

h.r .

2534 ( lantos ) the human rights information act would promote human rights , democracy , and the rule oflaw by providing a process for executive agencies for declassifying on an expedited basis anddisclosing certain documents relating to human rights abuses in countries other than the unitedstates .

requires each federal agency to identify , review , and organize all human rights recordsregarding activities occurring in guatemala and honduras for declassification and public disclosure .

introduced june 19 , 2003 , referred to the subcommittee on technology , information policy,intergovernmental relations and the census july 2 .

s.res .

289 ( dorgan ) would express the sense of the senate that the president should renegotiate cafta provisionsrelating to access to the u.s. sugar market so that the central american signatories would have nogreater access than they currently have and that sugar should not be included in any bilateral orregional free trade agreement .

introduced and referred to senate committee on finance january 23,2004 .

