animal agriculture is a $100 billion per year industry in the united states .

livestock and poultry are raised on an estimated 1.3 million farms throughout the nation .

about 238,000 of these farms are considered animal feeding operations ( afo ) — agriculture enterprises where animals are kept and raised in confinement .

an estimated 95% of these are small businesses: most afos raise fewer than 300 animals .

very large afos , housing 300 or more animals such as cows ( or equivalent numbers of other animal species ) , are defined as concentrated animal feeding operations , or cafos .

for more than two decades , organizational changes within the industry to enhance economic efficiency have resulted in larger confined production facilities that often are geographically concentrated .

increased facility size , greater numbers of animals being raised at large feedlots , and regional concentration of livestock and poultry operations have , in turn , given rise to concerns over the management of animal wastes from these facilities and potential impacts on environmental quality .

from an environmental quality standpoint , much of the public and policy interest in animal agriculture has focused on impacts on water resources , because animal waste , if not properly managed , can adversely impact water quality through surface runoff and erosion , direct discharges to surface waters , spills and other dry - weather discharges , and leaching into soil and groundwater .

however , animal feeding operations can also result in emissions to the air of particles and gases such as ammonia , hydrogen sulfide , and volatile organic chemicals ( voc ) .

at issue today are questions about the contribution of afos to total air pollution and corresponding ecological and possible public health effects .

resolving those questions is hindered by a lack of adequate , accurate , scientifically credible data on air emissions from afos , data that are needed to gauge possible adverse impacts and subsequent implementation of control measures .

this report provides background on these issues .

it first reviews the types of air emissions from livestock and poultry operations and their human health and environmental impacts .

it then discusses provisions of several federal laws concerned with environmental impacts , beginning with the clean water act , because protecting water resources has been the primary regulatory focus regarding livestock and animal operations .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has authority to address afo air emissions under several laws — the clean air act ; the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , or superfund ) ; and the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) — which are discussed next .

questions about the applicability of these laws to livestock and poultry operations have been controversial in several arenas and have drawn congressional attention .

agricultural emissions of greenhouse gases that have been of interest in connection with proposals to address the global challenge of climate change are discussed .

studies by the national research council concerning air emissions are reviewed , as are relevant activities of the states and the u.s. department of agriculture .

finally , the report identifies a number of key research questions needed to characterize and evaluate animal agriculture emissions .

afos can affect air quality through emissions of gases ( ammonia and hydrogen sulfide ) , particulate matter ( pm ) , volatile organic compounds ( voc ) , hazardous air pollutants , microorganisms , and odor .

afos also produce gases ( carbon dioxide and methane ) that are associated with climate change .

the generation rates of odor , manure , gases , particulates , and other constituents vary with weather , time , animal species , type of housing , manure handling system , feed type , and management system ( storage , handling , and stabilization ) .

emission sources include barns , feedlot surfaces , manure storage and treatment units , silage piles , animal composting structures , and other smaller sources , but air emissions come mostly from the microbial breakdown of manure stored in pits or lagoons and spread on fields .

each emission source will have a different profile of substances emitted , with rates that fluctuate through the day and the year .

the sources , fate , and transport of afo emissions are illustrated in figure 1 .

the animal sector of agriculture has undergone major changes in the last several decades , a fact that has drawn the attention of policymakers and the public .

in the united states there are an estimated 238,000 animal feeding operations where livestock and poultry are confined , reared , and fed , according to the u.s. department of agriculture's 1997 census of agriculture .

organizational changes within the industry to enhance economic efficiency have resulted in larger confined production facilities that often are geographically concentrated .

the driving forces behind structural change in livestock and poultry production are no different than those that affect many other industries: technological innovation and economies of scale .

from 1982 to 1997 , the total number of u.s. operations with confined livestock fell by 27% .

at the same time , the number of animals raised at large feedlots ( generally confining 300 animals or more ) increased by 88% , and the number of large feedlots increased by more than 50% .

the traditional image of small farms , located in isolated , rural locales , has given way to very large farming operations , some on the scale of industrial activities .

increased facility size and regional concentration of livestock and poultry operations have , in turn , given rise to concerns over the management of animal wastes from these facilities and potential impacts on environmental quality .

agricultural operations often have been treated differently from other types of businesses under numerous federal and state laws .

in the area of environmental policy , one observer noted that agriculture is "virtually unregulated by the expansive body of environmental law that has developed in the united states in the past 30 years. .

some laws specifically exempt agriculture from regulatory provisions , and others are structured in such a way that farms are not subject to most , if not all , of the regulatory impact .

the clean water act ( cwa ) , for example , expressly exempts most agricultural operations from the law's requirements , while under the clean air act ( caa ) , most agricultural sources are not subject to that law's regulatory programs because the majority of them do not meet the caa's minimum emission quantity thresholds .

moreover , in implementing environmental laws , federal and state regulators have traditionally focused more effort on controlling the largest and most visible sources of pollution to the water , air , and land — factories , waste treatment plants , motor vehicles — than on smaller and more dispersed sources such as farms .

nevertheless , certain large animal feeding operations are subject to environmental regulation .

the primary regulatory focus on environmental impacts has been on protecting water resources and has occurred under the clean water act .

in addition , facilities that emit large quantities of air pollutants may be regulated under the clean air act .

some livestock operations may also be subject to the release reporting requirements of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( the superfund law ) and the emergency planning and community right - to - know act .

the following sections describe relevant provisions of these laws .

agriculture is both a source of several greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) and a "sink" for absorbing carbon dioxide , the most common ghg , thereby partly offsetting emissions .

agricultural activities contribute directly to emissions of ghgs through a variety of processes such as enteric fermentation in domestic livestock ( i.e. , digestion ) and manure management systems and practices .

non - livestock source categories in agriculture also emit greenhouse gases , including rice cultivation , agricultural soil management , and field burning of agricultural residues overall , however , agriculture is a comparatively modest source of u.s. ghg emissions: it accounts for approximately 8.3% of u.s. emissions , according to epa .

further , while agriculture's emissions are a small percentage overall , the two principal greenhouse gases emitted by this sector , methane ( ch 4 ) and nitrous oxide ( n 2 o ) , have greater potency , or ability to impact climate change by trapping heat in the atmosphere , relative to carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

between 1990 and 2014 , ch 4 emissions from all u.s. sources declined by 5.6% , and n 2 o emissions decreased by 0.7% .

during that same period , ch 4 emissions from u.s. agricultural activities increased by 10.1% , while n 2 o emissions increased by 5.9% .

as shown in table 3 , agricultural activities contributed 32.5% of all ch 4 emissions and 83.2% of all n 2 o emissions in the united states in 2014 .

livestock - related categories ( enteric fermentation and manure management , primarily from dairy cattle and swine ) were 30.9% of total u.s. ch 4 emissions , while various land management practices were the largest source of n 2 o emissions , or 78.9% of total n 2 o emissions .

the obama administration has taken a number of actions to develop national policies and strategies to address ghgs and climate change .

the 111 th congress considered legislation in this area: comprehensive climate and energy legislation passed the house in 2009 and was reported by a senate committee , but no comprehensive bill was enacted .

agriculture in general was a major part of these discussions , but so far the agriculture sector has been largely excluded from regulatory and legislative proposals .

during the time that epa was developing the revised clean water act cafo rules that it promulgated in 2003 ( discussed above ) , the issue of air emissions from cafos received some attention .

the clean water act requires epa to consider non - water quality environmental impacts , such as air emissions , when it sets effluent limitations and standards .

epa recognized that certain animal waste management practices can either increase or decrease emissions of ammonia and / or hydrogen sulfide and that some regulatory options intended to minimize water discharges ( such as anaerobic lagoons and waste storage ponds ) have the potential to result in higher air emissions than other options , due to volatilization of ammonia in the waste .

likewise , emissions of nitrous oxide are liberated from land application of animal waste on cropland when nitrogen applied to the soil undergoes nitrification and denitrification .

some environmental groups had urged epa to address or restrict feedlot air emissions as part of the water quality rule .

in the proposed rule and the 2003 final revised rule , epa generally evaluated air emissions impacts of the rule , but it said that insufficient data exist to fully analyze all possible compounds and the significance of air emissions from feedlot operations .

in part because of this lack of information , in 2001 epa asked the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academy of sciences to evaluate the current scientific knowledge base and approaches for estimating air emissions from afos .

epa asked the nrc to identify critical short - and long - term research needs and provide recommendations on the most promising science - based approaches for estimating and measuring emissions .

usda joined epa in the request for the study .

at the time , epa was under a court order to revise its water quality rules , and officials hoped that the nrc report would help assure that rules aimed at improving water quality would not have negative impacts on air emissions .

in an interim report released in 2002 , the nrc responded to several of the epa questions .

nitrogen emissions from production areas are substantial , the committee found , and control strategies aimed at decreasing emissions should be designed and implemented now .

it recommended developing improved approaches for estimating and measuring emissions of key air pollutants from afos and initiating long - term coordinated research by epa and usda with the goal of eliminating release of undesirable air emissions .

the committee said that implementation of feasible management practices that are designed to decrease emissions , such as incorporating manure into soil , should not be delayed while research on mitigation technologies proceeds .

this report focused particularly on the suitability of an approach for estimating air emissions from afos presented in a 2001 draft epa report .

in that report , epa attempted to develop a set of model farms , based on manure management systems typically used by large afos , and identify emissions factors that could be associated with each element of the model farm .

in the absence of actual data from extensive monitoring , epa hoped that emission factors could be applied to model farms to estimate annual mass emissions .

an emissions factor is a representative value that attempts to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the atmosphere with an activity associated with the release of the pollutant .

the emission factor approach is based on measuring emissions from a set of defined afos to obtain an average emission per unit ( per animal unit , or per production unit process , such as manure storage piles and lagoons , stall areas , and feed storage areas ) , then multiplying the emission factor by the number of units and period of time ( eg , annually ) .

the current method of estimating cow , chicken , swine , or any other livestock animal emissions is generally expressed in terms of emissions per head , per year .

using this method , facility emissions are directly proportional to the number of animals at the facility .

the nrc recognized that direct measurement of air emissions at all afos is not feasible .

however , it found that the model farm construct described by epa cannot be supported because of weaknesses in the data needed to implement it , which fail to consider variations in many factors ( geography , climate , management approaches ) that could affect annual amounts and temporal patterns of emissions from an individual afo .

alternatively , the nrc recommended that epa consider a more complex process - based approach to focus on activities that determine the movement of nutrients and other substances into , through , and out of each component of the farm enterprise .

the nrc expanded on these recommendations in its final report , issued in 2003 .

overall , it found that scientifically sound protocols for measuring air concentrations , emission rates , and fates are needed for the elements , compounds , and particulate matter associated with afos .

similarly , standardized methodology for odor measurement should be developed in the united states , the nrc said .

the report noted that emission factor approaches should be broadened to integrate animal and crop production systems both on and off the afo ( i.e. , imported feeds and exported manure ) in order to represent the full environmental effects of animal production systems .

such a systems analysis should include impacts of best management practices ( bmps ) aimed at mitigating afo air emissions on other parts of the entire system .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) manages a diverse range of programs involving food , forests , rural development , agricultural trade , and conservation of natural resources .

several usda agencies have conservation responsibilities that may involve livestock and their environmental effects .

for example , the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) provides technical assistance and information , as well as financial assistance , to landowners and agricultural producers to implement conservation systems and practices , such as developing comprehensive nutrient management plans to control afo runoff .

the agricultural research service ( ars ) is the in - house research agency of usda and conducts a wide range of research activities .

one of ars's national programs addresses climate change , soils , and emissions .

ars has supported projects to assess emissions from beef cattle feedlots , dairy operations , and poultry operations ; to evaluate swine wastewater treatment systems ; and to improve soil and water management practices in cropping and livestock systems .

ars has participated in climate change research to develop technologies and systems for reducing atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations emissions from agricultural sources .

in 2015 , ars initiated plans for research on managing emissions from livestock , including projects concerning emissions processes , pathways , and cost - effective mitigation strategies .

a second usda agency is the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) .

nifa uses extramural funding and works with government agencies and commodity and public organizations that conduct research and carry out extension and education programs to manage manure nutrients .

through its agriculture and food research initiative air quality program , nifa supports research activities to develop emissions data and improve management , control , and transport of odor , gasses , and particulate matter .

nifa also provides outreach to producers on transfer of technology and best practices to reduce pollutants and greenhouse gases .

usda cooperates with epa when issues concern both agriculture and the environment .

notably , the two collaborated on a unified national strategy for animal feeding operations , issued in 1999 , intended to minimize public health and environmental impacts of runoff from afos .

that strategy consisted of multiple elements and was based on a national performance expectation that all afo owners and operators would develop and implement site - specific comprehensive nutrient management plans by 2009 to protect water quality and public health .

the importance of relationships between air quality and agriculture has received increased recognition at usda in recent years .

one direct result was enactment of a provision in the federal agriculture improvement and reform act ( p.l .

104-127 ) , the 1996 farm bill , requiring usda to create an agricultural air quality task force .

one finding in section 391 of the statute stated that usda should lead efforts to determine accurate measures of agriculture's role in air pollution and in the development of cost - effective approaches to reduce pollution .

several provisions of the 2002 farm bill ( the farm security and rural investment act , p.l .

107-171 ) specifically addressed air quality issues in the context of usda conservation programs .

the agricultural air quality task force is an advisor to the secretary of agriculture .

its chairman is the chief of the nrcs , and its members represent usda , epa , industry , and basic and applied science .

it is charged with ensuring sound data quality and interpretation , so that policy recommendations made by federal or state agencies to address air pollution problems related to agriculture are based on accurate scientific findings , peer review , and economic feasibility .

in debates over controversial and complex public policy questions , stakeholders who hold differing perspectives at times may find little common ground .

sometimes the only point of agreement is the need for more and better research to resolve key questions — and each side hopes that research findings will support its own perspectives on the issues at hand .

with regard to questions about afo emissions and the possible need to implement control strategies , there is little dispute about the need for more research .

research on a wide range of topics currently is being supported by federal agencies , a number of individual states , academic institutions , and industry , but there is no apparent coordination or unified strategy .

the monitoring study that epa initiated as part of the air compliance agreement , discussed previously , was intended to answer some key questions .

however , in view of criticism of the study , doubts exist about the study's utility .

some critics of the air compliance agreement fault epa for planning only to measure emissions , but not also using the monitoring study as an opportunity to research mitigation techniques , as well as address health effects of air pollutants emitted by afos .

in its 2003 report , the national research council addressed these issues and recommended "substantial research efforts in both the short term and the long term. .

research in the short term ( four to five years ) , the nrc said , can significantly improve the capability of scientifically sound modeling approaches for measuring and estimating air emissions , especially for process - based modeling that the nrc recommends be developed by epa and usda .

a long - term research program ( 20-30 years ) that encompasses overall impacts of animal production on the environment can have substantial results in decreasing overall impacts on the environment , while sustaining production at a high level .

for the long term , coordinated research is needed to determine which emissions are most harmful to the environment and human health and to develop technologies to decrease their releases into the environment .

priority research needs identified by the nrc , usda's agricultural air quality task force , and others fall into two broad categories: fundamental research to estimate , measure , and characterize emissions ; and technology research ( including technology transfer ) .

foremost is the need to produce scientifically sound , standardized methodology as a basis for measuring and estimating gaseous and particulate emissions and odor , from afos on local , regional , and national scales .

the science for estimating air emissions from individual afos should be strengthened , along with models to understand the totality of afo processes , including dispersion , transformation , and deposition of emissions .

this information is needed in order to assess relationships between emissions , potential health indicators , and candidate regulatory and management programs .

the air emissions monitoring study undertaken as part of the air compliance agreement was completed in 2011 , and , based on that research , epa has begun development of emissions estimating methodologies for animal sectors .

a related concern is that much more needs to be understood about community - level impacts from exposure to afo emissions .

occupational health studies have documented adverse health effects among afo workers , such as acute and chronic respiratory diseases , but experts agree that occupational health risks cannot be extrapolated to community health risks .

peer reviewed studies of health impacts on residents in the vicinity of livestock operations are limited .

these studies suggest that afo air emissions may constitute a public health hazard , deserving of public health precautions as well as larger , well controlled , population - based studies to more fully ascertain adverse health outcomes and their impact on community health .

with regard to technology , there is a need to develop standardized measurement technologies for pollutants and odorous compounds emitted by afos and effective , practical , and economically feasible technologies to reduce and control odors and pollutants .

experts believe that there is a need to develop and evaluate innovative treatment processes for each of the major sources of afo emissions , confinement buildings , manure storage areas , and land application .

research further should include programs to provide for transfer of economically viable technologies to all producers .

in its 2003 report , the national research council observed that epa and usda have not devoted the necessary technical or financial resources to estimating air emissions and developing mitigation technologies , and it criticized both for failing to address this deficiency in defining high - priority research programs .

the report said , "each has pursued its regulatory and farm management programs under the assumption that the best currently available information can be used to implement its program goals. .

it concluded that a change in research priorities in both agencies is needed if air emissions are to be addressed with an adequate base of scientific information .

there appears to be wide agreement among stakeholder groups on the need for more research on a large number of related issues , but congressional interest in supporting or funding more federal participation in research activities is unclear .

prior to the 112 th congress , congressional attention to the issues discussed in this report had been limited , with the result that developments had proceeded largely by administrative and some judicial actions , not through legislative policymaking .

as described previously , one aspect that has attracted congressional interest is questions about the applicability of cercla and epcra to livestock and poultry operations .

that interest was apparent in the context of appropriations bills and in legislation in the 112 th congress to amend cercla to clarify that manure is not a hazardous substance .

similar legislation has not been introduced subsequently .

more broadly , congress has shown considerable interest in the impact of federal regulation , especially by epa , on the agriculture sector .

the senate and house committees on agriculture and other congressional committees have shown particular interest in epa's actions and have conducted oversight hearings on regulatory impacts — costs and administrative burdens of compliance with environmental and other requirements — on agriculture .

