on january 25 , 2009 , by a 61% to 39% vote , a new constitution promoting the rights of the indigenous majority and giving more control of the economy to the government was approved .

the referendum also set the limit for private land holdings at 5,000 hectares winning strong majority support ( 81% ) over the alternative of a 10,000-hectare limit .

however , the new landholding limit will not be applied retroactively .

on december 15 , 2008 , bolivia's duty - free access to u.s. markets was suspended .

president bush when announcing the suspension of bolivia's andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) designation cited bolivia's lack of cooperation with the united states on required counter - narcotics measures .

on november 10 , 2008 , bolivian officials delivered a formal request asking the u.s. government to extradite former president gonzalo sánchez de lozada to stand trial for civilian deaths that occurred when he ordered government security forces to respond to violent civilian protests in the fall of 2003 .

on november 1 , 2008 , bolivian president evo morales announced an indefinite suspension of u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) operations in bolivia after accusing some dea agents of espionage .

on october 21 , 2008 , after a multiparty congressional commission agreed to over 100 changes to the draft text passed by the constituent assembly in december 2007 , the bolivian congress ratified the new draft constitution and passed a law that will enable a referendum on that constitution to be held on january 25 , 2009 .

on october 16 , 2008 , president bush signed the andean trade promotion extension act ( h.r .

7222 ) into law .

as enacted , p.l .

110-436 extends andean trade preferences until december 31 , 2009 for colombia and peru , and until june 30 , 2009 for bolivia and ecuador .

on september 26 , 2008 , president bush directed the united states trade representative to publish a public notice proposing to suspend bolivia's andean trade promotion act ( atpa ) benefits because of the morales government's failure to cooperate in counternarcotics matters .

on september 16 , 2008 , president bush determined that bolivia had failed demonstrably to live up to its obligations under international narcotics agreements , but waived sanctions so that u.s. bilateral assistance programs could continue .

on september 15 , 2008 , chilean president michelle bachelet convened an emergency meeting of the presidents from the countries composing the newly - formed union of south american nations ( unasur ) to discuss the crisis in bolivia .

unasur issued a declaration expressing its full support for the morales government and offering to help mediate between the government and the opposition .

on september 11 , 2008 , the u.s. state department announced that it had declared bolivia's u.s .

ambassador , gustavo guzmán , persona non grata and asked him to leave the united states immediately .

on september 11 , 2008 , opposition protests turned violent , with at least 18 demonstrators killed during a shootout in pando , bolivia's northernmost department , the vast majority of whom were morales supporters .

according to the morales government , the attack on protesters was planned by pando's departmental prefect , leopoldo fernández .

in response , president morales called a state of emergency and sent troops in to restore order in the province whereupon fernández was arrested .

also on september 10 , 2008 , opposition protestors temporarily shut down a major natural gas pipeline near bolivia's border with argentina .

their actions interrupted bolivia's natural gas exports to argentina and brazil and caused millions of dollars in damages to the pipeline .

on september 10 , 2008 , president morales accused the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia , philip goldberg , of supporting opposition forces , declared him persona non grata , and expelled him from the country .

on september 6 , 2008 , in response to a national electoral court ruling that challenged the legality of his earlier decree calling for a constitutional referendum , president morales sent a bill to the bolivian congress seeking its approval to schedule a vote on the constitution and land reform .

he moved the proposed date of those referendums from december 7 , 2008 to january 25 , 2009 .

on september 3 , 2008 , opposition prefects issued a statement announcing roadblocks in five eastern provinces and threatening to interrupt gas supplies to argentina and brazil if president morales proceeded with his plans to hold a referendum on the constitution in december 2008 .

on august 28 , 2008 , president morales issued a decree scheduling a referendum on the constitution passed by the constituent assembly in late 2007 for december 7 , 2008 , a move that prompted widespread protests from the opposition .

on august 10 , 2008 , some 67% of bolivian voters reaffirmed their support for the government of evo morales in a national recall referendum .

of the eight prefects ( departmental governors ) that were also subject to a recall vote , four opposition prefects and two government - allied prefects were also approved with more than 50% of the vote .

two opposition prefects were voted out of office .

on june 24 , 2008 , coca growers unions in the chapare region of bolivia announced that they would no longer sign new aid agreements with the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

on june 9 , 2008 , a few thousand protesters surrounded the u.s. embassy in la paz demanding the extradition of former president gonzalo sánchez de lozada and his ex - defense minister .

the two have been charged in bolivia with responsibility for civilian deaths that occurred during protests in september and october 2003 .

after the protests , the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia philip goldberg was called back to washington for consultations on security issues .

throughout may and june 2008 , departmental referendums on whether to implement autonomy statutes were held in the four eastern provinces of santa cruz , beni , pando and tarija , despite the lack of congressional approval for them to be convened .

notwithstanding relatively high abstention rates , the statutes received strong popular support from those who voted in each of the referendums .

bolivia is a country rich in cultural diversity and natural resources , whose political and economic development have been stymied by chronic instability , extreme poverty , pervasive corruption , and deep ethnic and regional cleavages .

in 1825 , bolivia won its independence from spain , but then experienced frequent military coups and counter - coups until democratic civilian rule was established in 1982 .

as a result of the war of the pacific ( 1879-1883 ) with chile , bolivia lost part of its territory along the pacific coast and has no sovereign access to the ocean , a source of lingering resentment among bolivians .

bolivia does have preferential rights of access to the chilean ports of antofagasta and arica and the peruvian port of ilo .

as a result of the chaco war with paraguay ( 1932-1935 ) , bolivia lost access to the atlantic ocean by way of the paraguay river and significant territory .

bolivia is rich in natural resources , with the second - largest natural gas reserves in latin america after venezuela and significant mineral deposits , yet 64% of bolivians live in poverty and 35% earn less than $2 a day .

bolivia's population of 9.1 million people is among the most ethnically diverse in south america .

quechua and aymara are the two predominant indigenous groups who live largely in the altiplano and highland regions .

approximately 30% of the bolivian population are quechuan , 25% are aymaran , 30% are mestizo ( mixed ) , while 15% are of european origin .

bolivia has been a major producer of coca leaf , the main ingredient in the production of cocaine .

although coca leaf is legal in the country for traditional uses and is grown legally in some parts of the country , its cultivation for illegal purposes increased in the 1970s and 1980s .

cultivation levels have decreased to half of the levels of the 1990s in response to policies to eradicate illicit production , according to the u.s. state department .

these policies , and the way in which they have been implemented , have caused social unrest and economic hardship in the two main coca - growing regions .

one consequence has been the rise of coca growers' trade unions and an associated political party , the movement toward socialism ( mas ) .

bolivia pursued state - led economic policies during the 1970s and early 1980s .

in the mid - 1980s , however , external shocks , the collapse of tin prices , and higher interest rates combined with hyperinflation forced bolivian governments to adopt austerity measures .

bolivia was one of the first countries in latin america to implement an imf structural adjustment program .

in the 1990s , many state - owned corporations were privatized .

gross domestic product growth from 1990 to 2000 averaged 3.5% , but the economy remained highly dependent on foreign aid and had an extremely high debt / gdp ratio .

sluggish economic growth in 2001 and 2002 ( 1.2% and 2.5% , respectively ) fueled resentment that the benefits of globalization and free market economic policies were not reaching most of the population .

bolivia posted faster growth rates of roughly 4% in both 2004 and 2005 .

strong international demand for bolivian mining products and gas , as well as high tax revenues from the natural gas sector , fueled growth of about 4% in 2006 .

bolivia's gdp grew by close to 4% again in 2007 , despite significant flooding that damaged much of the country's agricultural production .

economic growth was driven by strong performance in the construction , financial services , manufacturing , and hydrocarbons sectors .

despite that growth , some 63% of bolivians live in poverty with 34.3% earning less than $2 a day .

future growth will likely be constrained by declining foreign investment and the country's high debt burden , among other things .

president morales opposes free market economic policies and supports more state involvement in economic policy - making and greater government spending on infrastructure , health , and education .

in june 2006 , the mas unveiled a five - year national development plan ( 2006-2010 ) calling for $6.9 billion in government investment complemented by $6 billion of private investment , particularly in the housing , infrastructure , and small business sectors .

the plan aims to increase gdp growth to 7.6% by 2010 , create 90,000 jobs annually and reduce the percentage of the population living in poverty to below 50% .

critics of the plan argue that it lacks a clear financing plan and is overly ambitious .

the morales government has also negotiated for further debt relief from the major international donors .

on july 1 , 2006 , the world bank announced that bolivia would receive a total of $1.8 billion in total debt relief under the multilateral debt relief initiative .

in march 2007 , the inter - american development bank ( idb ) agreed to cancel bolivia's $1 billion debt , along with the outstanding debt owed by guyana , honduras , nicaragua , and haiti .

with respect to trade , bolivia is a member of the andean community ( can ) , with peru , ecuador , and colombia .

the members of the andean community have requested an extension of trade benefits from the united states and started negotiating a free trade agreement with the european union .

the future of the can had been in question after venezuela suddenly quit the trading block in april 2006 because it opposed free trade agreements negotiations conducted by peru , ecuador , and colombia with the united states .

bolivia is also an associate member of mercosur , the trading block composed of brazil , argentina , uruguay , paraguay , and , as of july 2006 , venezuela .

in may 2006 , the morales government signed a trade and cooperation agreement with cuba and venezuela .

morales and the mas opposed the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) and have been critical of the type of bilateral and sub - regional trade agreements reached by other countries in latin america with the united states .

investors are concerned about the ad - hoc nature of the morales government's economic policy .

they are also worried about morales' stated goal of increasing state control over mining , energy , transport , and telecommunications .

inflation , which reached 12% in 2008 , has become a major challenge for the government to address .

some predict that the global financial crisis could reduce demand for bolivia's commodity exports and weaken remittance inflows from bolivians living abroad , thereby causing economic growth to slow in 2009 .

some maintain that the job losses and lost revenue resulting from the suspension of bolivia's atpa trade benefits is likely to dampen growth in some sectors .

estimates of job losses resulting from the loss of atpa benefits range from 12,000 to 50,000 .

while gdp growth was an estimated 6% in 2008 , several factors threaten to sharply decelerate growth in 2009 — weakening export markets , reduced investment , lower remittances , as mentioned above , and rising unemployment .

the most controversial components of the morales government's economic and social development plans remain its efforts to nationalize the natural gas sector , to industrialize the coca leaf for licit uses while using cooperative means to eradicate excess crops , and to enact large - scale land reform .

for some 20 years , u.s. relations with bolivia have centered largely on controlling the production of coca leaf and coca paste , much of which was usually shipped to colombia to be processed into cocaine .

in support of bolivia's counternarcotics efforts , the united states has provided significant interdiction and alternative development assistance , and has forgiven all of bolivia's debt for development assistance projects and most of the debt for food assistance .

bolivia , like peru , has been viewed by many as a counternarcotics success story , with joint air and riverine interdiction operations , successful eradication efforts , and some effective alternative development programs .

others , however , view the forced eradication as a social and political disaster that has fueled popular discontent and worsened bolivia's chronic instability .

prior to the december 2005 elections , most analysts predicted that a morales victory would complicate u.s. relations with bolivia .

although u.s. officials refrained from commenting publicly on their concerns about a possible morales victory for fear of inadvertently swaying bolivian support to his candidacy ( as occurred in 2002 ) , they expressed serious concerns about his position on the coca issue and his possible ties with cuba and venezuela .

after the election , u.s. state department officials congratulated evo morales but noted that "the quality of the relationship between the united states and bolivia will depend on what kind of policies they [morales and the mas government] pursue. .

some analysts predicted that evo morales would become another hugo chávez , an outspoken , anti - american , leftist leader .

others disagreed , predicting that the united states could use foreign aid and trade preferences to exert some influence over the morales government .

despite an initial openness to dialogue , u.s. - bolivian relations became tense soon after president morales took office .

u.s. officials expressed concerns about the morales government's commitment to combating illegal drugs , its ties with venezuela and cuba , and its nationalization of bolivia's natural gas industry .

in september 2006 , president bush expressed concern about the decline in bolivian counternarcotics cooperation that had occurred since morales took office .

in 2007 , there continued to be periodic friction in u.s. - bolivian relations .

in september 2007 , president bush expressed concern about the reported expansion of coca cultivation in bolivia that has occurred despite the morales government's eradication efforts .

tensions in u.s. - bolivian relations flared during the fall of 2007 as bolivian authorities ( including president morales ) complained that some u.s. assistance was going to support opposition groups seeking to undermine the mas government .

u.s. officials also expressed some concerns about the instability in bolivia surrounding the constitutional reform process .

in 2008 , u.s. - bolivian relations deteriorated from what analysts described as "tenuous" at best in the summer , to extremely tense by the fall .

bilateral relations took a turn for the worse in june 2008 , when the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia , philip goldberg , was called back to washington for consultations on security matters after protesters surrounded the u.s. embassy in la paz .

the protesters were demanding the extradition of former president gonzalo sánchez de lozada and his ex - defense minister carlos sanchez berzain who have been charged in bolivia with responsibility for civilian deaths that occurred during protests in the fall of 2003 .

the june protests occurred in response to berzain's announcement that he had received political asylum from the u.s. government .

also in june , coca growers unions in the chapare region of bolivia announced that they would no longer sign new aid agreements with usaid .

bilateral relations reached their lowest point in recent memory in mid - september 2008 , when president morales accused u.s .

ambassador goldberg of inappropriately supporting opposition forces , declared him persona non grata , and expelled him from the country .

within a day , the u.s. state department followed suit , expelling bolivia's u.s .

ambassador gustavo guzmán .

these ambassadorial expulsions were followed by president bush's september 16 , 2008 determination that bolivia had failed demonstrably to live up to its international narcotics commitments .

soon thereafter , a resolution was introduced ( h.res .

1483 ) in congress expressing outrage over the expulsion of u.s .

ambassadors to venezuela and bolivia , and calling for these countries to resume full counternarcotics cooperation with the united states .

on september 26 , 2008 , as a result of bolivia's "demonstrable failure to cooperate in counternarcotics matters over the past 12 months," president bush proposed to suspend bolivia's atpa trade benefits for the first time since the andean trade preference programs began in 1991 .

on december 15 , 2008 , the suspension of bolivia's benefits went into effect .

some analysts have asserted that the recent bush administration decisions regarding bolivia are meant to punish the morales government for expelling the u.s .

ambassador .

regardless of the reasoning behind them , most observers expect bilateral relations to remain tense , at least in the short to medium term .

the morales administration has speculated that the positive comments made by the obama state department spokesperson following the constitutional referendum might reflect a willingness to re - visit the relationship in the near future .

by the late 1990s , bolivia , like peru , was considered a counternarcotics success story and a close u.s. ally in the fight against illegal narcotics .

as aggressive coca eradication programs in bolivia resulted in significant reductions in illegal coca production , the bulk of u.s. concern ( and counternarcotics funding ) shifted to neighboring colombia .

at that time , some argued that bolivia's earlier significant gains in reducing illegal coca production could be threatened by any successes in controlling production in colombia through a "balloon effect," in which coca production shifts to other areas with less law enforcement presence .

those warnings appear to have some merit as , according to the state department , coca cultivation in bolivia increased 17% in 2003 , 6% in 2004 , and 8% in 2005 .

these findings , and the social discontent that has resulted from forced eradication , have prompted some critics to question the efficacy of existing counternarcotics programs in bolivia and across south america .

bush administration officials maintain that it is vital that governments in latin america continue to combat the cultivation of coca in order to help stem the flow of illicit narcotics to the united states .

many u.s. officials were seriously concerned that the level of drug cooperation from bolivia would lessen following the december 2005 election of evo morales .

morales was a coca growers union leader who had been extremely critical of u.s. drug policy .

at first , some u.s. officials expressed a willingness to engage in a dialogue with the morales government on how to fight drug processing and trafficking while allowing some level of coca cultivation for traditional uses .

this willingness has been replaced by increasing frustration on the part of the u.s. government with bolivia's counternarcotics efforts .

the state department found that the chapare agreement , rather than contributing to reductions in coca cultivation , actually "undercut the government of bolivia's commitment to its forced eradication policy and resulted in less eradication in 2005. .

u.s. officials are wary of president morales' december 2006 policy to allow more coca to be grown in order to satisfy demand for traditional coca usage and coca - based products for export .

the state department asserts that "many suspect [that traditional coca usage] has declined as bolivian society has urbanized. .

in september 2007 , president bush expressed concern about the expanded coca cultivation in bolivia that occurred in 2006 despite the morales government's eradication efforts .

figures from the united nations office of drugs and crime ( unodc ) showed that the area under coca cultivation in bolivia increased by 5% in 2007 ( as compared to a 27% increase in colombia ) .

however , u.s. figures cited during the release of the fy2008 state department report on major illicit drug producing countries showed a larger increase in coca cultivation in bolivia of some 14% in 2007 .

also during that report release , david johnson , u.s. assistance secretary of state for international narcotics and law enforcement affairs , asserted that "cocalero syndicates — endorsed by the government of bolivia — expelled usaid from the chapare region...and [and that] last week the u.s. drug enforcement administration was similarly expelled from the chapare. .

bolivian officials have since denied those assertions .

on september 16 , 2008 , president bush determined that bolivia , along with venezuela and burma , had failed demonstrably to live up to its obligations under international narcotics agreements , but waived sanctions so that u.s. bilateral assistance programs could continue .

for the past several years , bolivia has been among the largest recipients of u.s. foreign assistance in latin america .

however , assistance levels have been declining since fy2007 .

bolivia received $122.1 million in u.s. assistance in fy2007 , including $66 million in counternarcotics assistance through the andean counterdrug initiative account .

in fy2008 , bolivia received an estimated $99.5 million , including roughly $47.1 million in counternarcotics assistance .

the fy2009 request for bolivia is for $100.4 million , not including p.l .

110-480 title ii food aid .

a continuing resolution ( h.r .

2638 / p.l .

110-329 ) will provide funding for u.s. programs in bolivia at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 .

table 1 provides figures on u.s. counternarcotics aid to bolivia since fy2000 , including how funds have been broken down between interdiction / eradication and alternative development .

from fy2000 through fy2007 , bolivia received interdiction assistance as well as alternative development assistance through the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) .

beginning in fy2008 , the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) was renamed as the andean counterdrug program ( acp ) .

in addition , alternative development programs previously supported by andean counterdrug initiative funds shifted to the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

in the fy2009 budget request , funds for alternative development were shifted to the development assistance ( da ) account .

interdiction funding provides operational support for specialized counterdrug police and military units and is intended to improve data collection for law enforcement activities .

acp funds are also used to support increased interdiction of precursor chemicals and cocaine products .

they provide support for a u.s. - owned helicopter fleet and funding to maintain and purchase vehicles , riverine patrol boats , training and field equipment , and to construct and refurbish antiquated counternarcotics bases .

a small amount of acp funds is also used to fund voluntary eradication programs .

alternative development ( ad ) programs provide a range of assistance to help farmers as they stop relying solely on coca production and as their illicit crops are eradicated by law enforcement .

u.s. programs supporting ad in the chapare and yungas regions of bolivia have been linked to illicit coca eradication .

ad includes economic development in coca - growing areas , demand - reduction education programs , and the expansion of physical infrastructure .

for the past few years , usaid has been carrying out ad work in the chapare in municipalities where some of the mayors are former coca growers .

in june 2008 , however , chapare coca grower representatives announced that they would henceforth not sign any new ad agreements with usaid .

instead , usaid will focus its programs on the yungas region .

the united states extends special duty treatment to imports from bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru under the andean trade preference act ( atpa ; title ii of p.l .

102-182 ) which was enacted on december 4 , 1991 and was originally authorized for 10 years .

the purpose of atpa is to promote economic growth in the andean region and to encourage a shift away from dependence on illicit drugs by supporting legitimate economic activities .

atpa lapsed on december 4 , 2001 and was renewed and modified under the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( atpdea ; title xxxi of p.l .

107-210 ) on august 6 , 2002 .

atpdea renewed atpa trade preferences until december 31 , 2006 , with a retroactive date of december 4 , 2001 , and also expanded trade preferences to include additional products in the following categories: petroleum and petroleum products , textiles and apparel products , footwear , tuna in flexible containers , and others .

since that time , congress has approved short term extensions of atpa benefits .

on september 26 , 2008 , president bush directed the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to publish a public notice proposing to suspend bolivia's trade benefits because of the morales government's failure to cooperate in counternarcotics matters .

he reiterated his reasons for suspending bolivia's trade benefits when he signed the andean trade preference extension act ( h.r .

7222 / p.l .

110-436 ) into law on october 16 , 2008 .

p.l .

110-436 extends trade benefits for bolivia and ecuador through june 30 , 2009 and for colombia and peru through december 31 , 2009 .

a public hearing on the proposed suspension of bolivia's atpa benefits was held on october 23 , 2008 .

at that hearing , witnesses examined the effects of the atpa on bolivia's economy as a whole , as well as its impact on specific sectors of the bolivian economy .

in general terms , most experts predict that the overall effect on bolivia's economy if the atpa benefits were to be eliminated would likely be small because exports under this program account for a small percentage of bolivia's gdp .

despite having a small overall effect on the bolivian economy , bolivian officials have said that there are some 20,000 jobs , mainly in the textile and jewelry sectors , that would likely be lost without the atpa benefits .

while some argue that bolivia does not deserve to receive u.s. trade benefits because of its declining counternarcotics cooperation and recent expulsion of the u.s .

ambassador , others fear that the proposed suspension might result in more harm than good .

in a recent statement , representative eliot engel , chairman of the house subcommittee on the western hemisphere , predicted that a suspension of atpa benefits "would empower champions of anti - americanism and would make the united states less and less relevant in bolivia. .

on november 25 , 2008 , president bush announced his decision to suspend bolivia's atpa benefits effective december 15 .

the extent of job losses and lost export revenue resulting from the suspension remains unclear — as are the prospects for bolivia to be redesignated as a beneficiary country .

bolivia could also benefit from assistance from the millennium challenge account ( mca ) .

in december 2005 , bolivia submitted a compact proposal worth $598 million to the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) .

that initial proposal focused on linking raw material producers to small and medium - sized businesses who would then produce valued - added manufactured goods for export .

after taking office , the morales government decided to modify the compact proposal slightly and resubmit it to the mcc .

on september 21 , 2007 , the bolivian government submitted a second proposal to the mcc for consideration .

that proposal focused on improving road infrastructure in the historically isolated northern region of la paz , beni , and pando .

it also included a smaller project focusing on rural productive development .

in december 2007 , a visit by the mcc bolivia transaction team to bolivia was postponed due to unrest in the country surrounding the constituent assembly process .

on january 29 , 2008 , philip goldberg , then - u.s .

ambassador to bolivia , stated that the mcc dialogue process with bolivia has been put on hold for the time being .

in 2008 , the mcc continued to monitor developments in bolivia closely in order to determine when the proper political , economic , and social situation was in place to enable the dialogue process to move forward .

on december 10 , 2008 , the mcc board did not re - select bolivia for eligibility for an fy2009 compact .

between 1996 and 2004 , the implementation of forced eradication programs in bolivia had been accompanied by charges of human rights abuses committed by bolivian security forces .

in 2003 , violent clashes erupted between protesters and government troops in the chapare and the la paz departments that resulted in more than 80 deaths , prompting new allegations of abuses by security forces .

the state department's annual country reports on human rights practices covering 2004-2007 recognized improvements from 2003 , when it reported that serious problems existed with regard to deaths of protestors at the hand of security forces , the excessive use of force , extortion , torture , and improper arrests .

congress has also repeatedly expressed concern with human rights abuses in bolivia .

report language accompanying the foreign operations appropriations laws for fy2004 through fy2008 recognized the lack of progress in investigating and prosecuting human rights cases by bolivian authorities and urged the secretary of state to give higher priority to these issues .

the appropriations committee required the secretary of state to make a determination with regard to whether bolivian security forces are respecting human rights and cooperating with investigations and prosecutions of alleged violations and to submit a report to the committee substantiating the determination .

funding for fy2004 and fy2005 was not made contingent on the determination , but funding for fy2006 and fy2007 was contingent on that determination .

the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) includes provisions stipulating that aid to bolivian military and police be contingent upon the secretary's determination .

human rights organizations and the morales government believe that former president sánchez de lozada , who currently resides in the united states , should be held legally responsible for the civilian deaths that occurred in bolivia during september and october 2003 .

the 2003 protests were led by indigenous groups and workers concerned about the continuing economic marginalization of the poorer segments of society .

the protesters carried out strikes and road blockages that resulted in up to 80 deaths in confrontations with government troops .

in september 2007 , the bolivian supreme court issued a new extradition decree for the former president .

that extradition request was translated into english and sent to the u.s. state department on november 10 , 2008 .

a separate civil lawsuit was filed in the u.s. court system in september 2007 by human rights lawyers seeking compensatory damages for ten families of those killed in the protests .

a ruling on that case is expected to be delivered during the spring of 2009 .

