congressional concern about mercury in the environment has greatly increased in recent years due to emerging scientific evidence that exposure to low levels of mercury may harm the developing nervous systems of young children .

at higher levels of exposure , mercury is known to be a potent neurotoxin .

people in the united states are exposed to mercury primarily by eating large , predatory fish .

risks of health problems for people who consume mercury in fish have caused wide public concern and prompted the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the food and drug administration ( fda ) to issue consumer alerts , warning women of child - bearing age and young children to avoid certain fish altogether and to limit the number of meals for other fish .

numerous legislative proposals in the 109 th congress aim to reduce levels of mercury in the environment—in consumer products , in solid waste , in utility and other emission sources , and in surface water .

most of these proposals focus on sources of mercury emissions to air , because atmospheric mercury deposition accounts for most of the mercury in u.s. freshwater lakes and streams .

at least five proposals target emissions from coal - fired electric utilities , because they are thought to be the last remaining major uncontrolled source of mercury emissions .

these various proposals and a final regulation promulgated by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) on march 15 , 2005 , differ in how much and how soon emission reduction would be required , as well as in the extent to which reductions would be distributed geographically across the united states .

analysis of the competing policy proposals for reducing mercury emissions raises questions about the urgency of a need for emission controls , the likelihood that they will reduce mercury contamination of fish , and the possibility that overall reductions might be achieved at the expense of local "hot spots" of mercury contamination .

to answer such questions requires an understanding of the sources , fate , and toxicity of mercury in the environment—an understanding that is growing quickly as the results of numerous scientific studies are being reported .

this crs report provides background information about mercury , and summarizes recent scientific findings .

it discusses the sources ( i.e. , natural versus industrial , historic versus modern ) and chemical forms of mercury in the environment ; how mercury moves through the environment and concentrates in fish ( i.e. , the fate of mercury ) ; and the risks to human health and wildlife of mercury exposure through fish consumption .

each of these major sections of the report aims to summarize scientific evidence relevant to specific arguments and questions that have emerged in the policy context .

for example , the section on mercury in the environment addresses the question "are utility emissions deposited locally or regionally , or do they rise to merge with the global atmospheric mercury pool ? .

for information about specific regulatory proposals to reduce environmental mercury , see crs report rl32868 , mercury emissions from electric power plants: an analysis of epa ' s cap - and - trade regulations ; crs issue brief ib10137 , clean air act issues in the 109 th congress , both by [author name scrubbed] ; or crs report rl31908 , mercury in products and waste: legislative and regulatory activities to control mercury , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

mercury is a natural element , a silver - colored , shiny , liquid metal that is found in a variety of chemical forms in rocks , soil , water , air , plants , and animals .

sometimes mercury occurs in its elemental , relatively pure form , as a liquid or vapor , but more commonly mercury is found combined with other elements in various compounds , which may be inorganic ( eg , the mineral cinnabar , a combination of mercury and sulfur ) or organic ( eg , methylmercury ) .

natural forces move mercury through the environment , from air to soil to water , and back again .

volcanoes and deep sea vents release tons of mercury to the atmosphere and oceans .

mercury in the air falls to earth with dust , rain , and snow .

mercury evaporates from the oceans , leaves of plants , and other surfaces back into the air .

depending on geologic and meteorologic conditions , the relative amounts of mercury in the atmosphere , surface water , or soil may vary from one year , decade , century , or millennium to another .

during the past 500 years or so , human activities have released mercury from its relatively stable and water - insoluble form ( cinnabar ) in rocks and soil through mining , fossil fuel combustion , and other activities , and so have increased the portion of mercury that is actively cycling through the atmosphere , surface waters , plants , and animals as it changes chemical and physical form .

released mercury may enter the air , persist in the atmosphere and travel great distances or be deposited locally , dissolve in water droplets , settle back onto the land or water , re - enter the air ( i.e. , be re - emitted ) , be buried in lake or ocean sediments , or be taken into plants and animals .

the generally accepted estimate is that roughly three to five times as much mercury is mobilized today as was mobile before industrialization .

however , the author of one recent study argues that the mercury deposited from the atmosphere today is at least 10 times the amount of mercury that was being deposited 500 years ago .

in 1995 , about 1,913 metric tons ( roughly 2,104 u.s. tons ) of mercury were newly emitted globally as a result of stationary combustion , metal production , cement production , and waste disposal .

roughly another 514 metric tons ( 565 u.s. tons ) were emitted from other human sources , including chlor - alkali plants , gold production , and mercury uses .

thus , 2,427 metric tons ( 2,670 u.s. tons ) of mercury were released due to human activities in 1995 , according to recent estimates .

these and other mercury emissions from human activities ( past and present ) account for at least 50% and perhaps as much as 75% of current , annual , global mercury emissions from all sources ( including natural sources ) , but a large , unknown portion of those mercury emissions is due to past rather than current human activities , according to epa estimates .

the most recent estimates of global , natural mercury emissions range between roughly 1,600 and 3,200 metric tons ( 1,960 and 3,520 u.s. tons ) per year .

people have released mercury to the environment primarily through mining and smelting of minerals , burning of fossil fuels ( eg , coal , oil , and diesel fuel ) , use and disposal of mercury , certain industrial processes ( eg , chlorine production and cement production ) , and burning of municipal and medical wastes .

in some parts of the world such activities are increasing , but in the united states , annual mercury emissions are decreasing .

most of the largest and most direct sources of u.s. mercury releases to water and air have been eliminated .

among the remaining u.s. industrial sources , coal - fired electric utilities are the most important , accounting for about 40% of current u.s. mercury releases .

three estimates of u.s. national emissions are presented in table 1 .

the first two estimates were made by epa for the national emissions inventory .

crs added 12 tons of emissions from gold mines to the epa emission inventory that was conducted for 1995 , at the suggestion of epa .

epa was unaware of the emissions from that source at the time the inventory was conducted .

the "other" category encompasses emissions from various unidentified industries , including most iron and steel mills .

epa advised crs to note that there are some sources not accounted for in the 1999 epa inventory , such as iron and steel production using mercury - contaminated scrap , which probably accounts for 7-10 tons of emissions per year .

these emissions are not included in the "other" category .

epa also does not include mobile source emissions in its inventory , although these might be significant , because the agency is still developing an estimate .

since the time that epa completed its 1999 inventory , the medical waste incinerator rules promulgated under the clean air act have been fully implemented , which may have further reduced emissions from that source , and gold mining emissions have decreased due to a voluntary project .

chlorine production emissions also may have declined since the 1999 inventory , because some facilities closed , but one additional facility was identified and included in emission estimates by seigneur et al. , which appear in the third column .

these latter estimates were calculated by researchers with atmospheric & environmental research , inc. , and published in 2004 , but represent emissions in the year 1998 .

it is not clear why the seigneur estimates for 1998 emissions from waste incineration are so much larger than epa estimates for emissions from that category in 1999 .

seigneur included emissions from landfills and electric arc furnaces in the "other" category .

the electric power research institute ( epri ) provided the estimates used in that article for utility emissions .

both the epri calculations and the epa estimate for 1999 utility emissions were based on measurements of mercury content in coal and stack emissions that were collected for the year 1999 , in response to an information collection request issued by epa .

fish consumption also is the dominant pathway for wildlife exposure to methylmercury .

fish - eating predators in north america generally have relatively high concentrations of mercury .

toxic mercury levels have been found in individual mink , otters , loons , the florida panther , and other u.s. birds and wildlife .

however , it is not clear whether typical levels of environmental contamination are stressful for wildlife .

fish - eating birds annually eliminate much of their accumulated methylmercury when they form new feathers .

moreover , seabirds seem to be able to demethylate methylmercury , rendering it less toxic .

nevertheless , methylmercury exposure may harm sensitive species at levels found in certain local environments .

many scientists suspect that the immune system is weakened as a result of methylmercury exposure .

the most likely adverse impact on birds of methylmercury exposure is impaired ability to reproduce .

in common loons , which have been studied extensively , concentrations of mercury in blood correlate with mercury levels in the fish they eat .

mercury levels in loon blood increase from west to east in canada , with the highest levels being found in southeast canada .

a recent study of mercury in 577 loon eggs collected across eight u.s. states from alaska to maine found a similar trend of increasing mercury concentrations from west to east .

these blood and egg concentrations are consistent with the pattern of mercury deposition for north america ( i.e. , increasing from west to east ) .

a study reported in 2003 declining egg volume , but no effect on fertility , with increasing mercury concentrations in new england .

however , eggs were collected only if abandoned , which might have biased the results .

reduced egg laying has been associated with concentrations greater than 0.4 ppm methylmercury in prey fish .

mink and otter exposed over a long period of time to more than 1 ppm methylmercury in their diets exhibit classic signs of poisoning and may die .

higher concentrations cause earlier but similar health effects .

less than half that concentration is not lethal ; data are lacking for more subtle effects on mink of mercury exposure .

there are no field data indicating that the wildlife species most at risk ( because they eat fish ) currently are experiencing adverse health effects from mercury exposure .

current scientific knowledge can inform the debate about competing legislative and administrative proposals to reduce mercury emissions from utilities , but it cannot provide firm answers to all of the specific questions that have been raised .

neither can science resolve policy controversies that revolve around value judgments , for example , questions about how urgent the need is for utility emission controls .

however , recent scientific studies have provided potentially useful information for policy makers , about chemical changes to mercury emissions that may take place in the atmosphere ; rates of mercury deposition to , and re - emission from , the earth's surface ; the relationship between mercury emissions and mercury levels in freshwater fish in various specific ecosystems ; and the potential effects of low level , chronic exposure to methyl mercury through fish consumption .

scientific studies have clearly demonstrated that levels of mercury in the atmosphere and in deposits to earth have at least doubled and probably tripled due to human activities , even in places that are remote from human influence .

although most of the largest and most direct u.s. sources of mercury releases to water and air have been controlled , and levels of u.s. mercury deposition are declining , levels of mercury in fish continue to be a concern .

electric utilities are the only uncontrolled major stationary source of u.s. mercury emissions .

as a result , control of utility emissions might be the most direct step that could be taken to reduce mercury deposition in the united states .

however , there are uncertainties in chemistry and transport , leading to current debates among policy makers .

local and regional emissions from various sources have caused mercury deposition to increase as much as tenfold in some locations , indicating that there is a possibility that local "hot spots" of mercury contamination might persist , despite overall reductions in mercury emissions .

in sensitive experimental lakes and wetlands , when local and regional mercury emissions decreased , deposition decreased proportionately , and levels of methylmercury in freshwater fish dropped quickly .

this indicates that controls on mercury emissions from electric power plants ( particularly those plants with emissions that tend to be deposited locally ) could lead to substantial reductions in deposition at some nearby hot spots .

it remains to be determined whether there is a link between mercury emissions and mercury in ocean fish .

however , scientists have shown that significant quantities of emitted mercury are deposited in the oceans ; methylmercury is found in marine fish and predatory seabirds , sometimes at very high concentrations ; and sulfate - reducing bacteria are active in coastal sediments .

as yet unquantifiable but potentially significant risks from emissions exist , to people and wildlife locally , but also in areas distant from emission sources .

research continues to find evidence of subtle impacts on human health of low levels of methylmercury exposure , levels close to current levels of exposure for people who eat large amounts of certain large , predatory fish .

in considering the potential adverse effects of mercury , however , the potential nutritional benefits of eating fish that are not heavily contaminated by mercury should not be overlooked .

