al qaeda leaders and affiliates have conducted sophisticated public relations and media campaigns since the mid - 1990s using a series of faxed statements , audio recordings , video appearances , and internet postings .

terrorism analysts believe that these campaigns have been designed to elicit psychological reactions and communicate complex political messages to a global audience as well as to specific sub - populations in the islamic world , the united states , europe , and asia .

bin laden and his deputies have personally stated their belief in the importance of harnessing the power of international and regional media for al qaeda's benefit , and al qaeda's central leadership structure has featured a dedicated media and communications committee tasked with issuing reports and statements in support of the group's operations .

some officials and analysts believe that al qaeda's messages contain signals that inform and instruct operatives to prepare for and carry out new attacks .

bin laden has referred to his public statements as important primary sources for parties seeking to understand al qaeda's ideology and political demands .

through his public statements over the last ten years , bin laden has portrayed himself both as the leader of a consistent ideological movement and a strategic commander willing to tailor his violent messages and acts to respond to specific political circumstances and to influence specific audiences and events .

surveys of jihadist literature suggest that such a leadership role may remain elusive for bin laden and al zawahiri , particularly among ideologues and religious scholars who otherwise support jihadist activities and goals .

a study completed by the combating terrorism center at the u.s. military academy at west point in november 2006 concluded that "both men have had an enormous impact on the wider jihadi movement , but our data shows that they have had little to no impact on jihadi thinkers. .

global counterterrorism operations in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks appear to have limited bin laden's ability to provide command and control leadership to al qaeda operatives and affiliated groups .

bin laden's last confirmed messages were released in june and july 2006 , mourning the death of abu musab al zarqawi and calling on muslims to support the islamists in somalia .

in a january 2006 message , he proposed a temporary truce with the united states in exchange for a series of u.s. concessions .

it is unlikely , however , that bin laden could ensure a wholesale cessation of hostilities or that al qaeda supporters would abandon the strategic priorities reflected in their statements that have sanctioned , encouraged , and provided guidance for terrorist operations .

osama bin laden's longstanding threats to strike the united states came to fruition on september 11 , 2001 , and bin laden and others subsequently issued several statements confirming al qaeda's responsibility for the attacks on new york and washington .

following an established pattern , bin laden acknowledged his support for the hijackers and repeated his claim that strikes on american targets should be viewed by muslims and americans as a defensively motivated response to perceived american aggression in the islamic world .

statements attributed to bin laden and al zawahiri since 2001 have promised further attacks and sought to justify al qaeda's targeting of american and british civilians by arguing that western societies are morally corrupt , recent democratic reform and human rights initiatives are insincere or bankrupt , and american and british civilians should be held accountable for the policies of their democratically elected governments in the middle east that al qaeda finds objectionable or unjust .

statements from osama bin laden , ayman al zawahiri , the late abu musab al zarqawi , sayf al adl , and al qaeda affiliates in iraq display the uncompromising commitment of al qaeda's leaders and operational affiliates to a consistent ideological agenda focused on two sequential goals: the expulsion of foreign forces and influences from islamic societies and , ultimately , the creation of an islamic state ruled by sharia law .

the political prescriptions outlined in the statements are rooted in the islamic principle known as tawhid , or the principle of the absolute unity of god , and an identification of islam as an all - encompassing religious , political , and social system .

according to this perspective , islamic faith , adherence to islamic law , and implementation of conservative islamic social and political principles are synonymous .

throughout their statements , al qaeda founders and affiliates characterize as "infidels" those who do not share these beliefs , those who oppose the creation of an islamic state on the terms they describe , and those supporting existing governments and coalition activities in the islamic world .

al qaeda's diverse statements contain calculated variations in tone and content that address or appeal to various target audiences .

in his early statements , for example , osama bin laden adopted a pseudo - nationalist tone in directly addressing the population of saudi arabia and outlining ways that specific groups in saudi society could support al qaeda .

in his 2004 and 2006 statements addressed to the u.s. and european public , bin laden blended threats of violence with attempts to portray himself as a statesmanlike figure more palatable to western audiences and appealing to moderate muslims .

bin laden's earlier statements also addressed the american public in several instances that he since has characterized as attempts to explain his motives and outline steps the united states should have taken in order to avoid al qaeda attacks .

over time , the cornerstone of al qaeda leaders' religious and political rhetoric has remained consistent: muslims should view themselves as a single nation and unite to resist anti - islamic aggression on the basis of obligatory defensive jihad .

non - islamic government is unacceptable , and muslims should join al qaeda and other sympathetic groups and movements in opposing those seeking to establish secular democratic governments or maintain existing governments deemed to be insufficiently islamic .

bin laden has often coupled his "islamic - unity" rhetoric with litanies of anti - semitic statements , condemnations of israel , and allegations of u.s. complicity in the suffering of muslims worldwide .

in many pre - 9 / 11 statements , bin laden broadened his rhetorical outreach to appeal to non - arab muslims , especially those concerned with or engaged in conflicts in chechnya , bosnia , kashmir , and the philippines .

following september 11 , 2001 , bin laden has appealed directly to national groups on the front lines of robust counter - terrorism operations , particularly the populations of saudi arabia , pakistan , iraq , and the palestinian territories .

although bin laden's ideological rhetoric has remained relatively consistent , he and other al qaeda leaders have placed varying levels of emphasis on specific strategic objectives and tactics in their statements over the years .

in statements addressed to u.s. and european audiences , bin laden and others have outlined specific political demands that support an image of al qaeda as a pliable , pragmatic political actor .

nevertheless , al qaeda's operational record seems to indicate that its leaders' commitment to specific national causes and limited political objectives are rhetorical tools designed to elicit support for their broader ideological agenda of confrontation with the west and puritanical reform in the islamic world .

for example , bin laden's rhetorical treatment of the presence of u.s. troops in saudi arabia during the 1990s is largely inconsistent with al qaeda's ongoing terrorist operations there following the almost complete withdrawal of u.s. military forces from saudi arabia in september 2003 .

although only a small number of u.s. military personnel remain in saudi arabia , al qaeda affiliates have continued a violent campaign to topple the saudi government and have targeted non - u.s. civilians in numerous terrorist attacks .

in messages to regional audiences , bin laden and his deputies have characterized u.s. - led military operations in afghanistan and iraq as new provocations and "crusades" that justify ongoing attacks .

in his december 2004 statements , bin laden referred to the confrontation between the u.s. , its allies , and jihadist movements as "a war of destiny between infidelity and islam" and a "third world war," seemingly leaving little doubt about the scope or flexibility of al qaeda's strategic ambitions , grievances , and demands .

from a strategic perspective , statements from al zawahiri and others advocate for a phased struggle , in which the first goal is the expulsion of u.s. military forces and proximate goals include the overthrow of "corrupt" regional leaders , the creation of a sharia - ruled islamic state , military confrontation with israel , and conflict with shiite muslims .

overall , al qaeda leaders have displayed a pragmatic willingness to adapt the strategic and tactical content of their statements to changing circumstances while retaining a messianic commitment to their broader ideological agenda .

although bin laden's self - professed goal is to "move , incite , and mobilize the [islamic] nation" until it reaches a revolutionary "ignition point," al qaeda leaders' statements and al qaeda's attacks largely have failed to effectively mobilize widespread muslim support for their agenda thus far .

since late 2001 , however , public opinion polling and media monitoring in the middle east and broader islamic world indicate that dissatisfaction with the united states and its foreign policy has grown significantly within many muslim societies .

in light of this trend , al qaeda leaders' shift toward more explicitly political and ideological rhetoric seems to signal a direct attempt to broaden the movement's appeal , solicit greater financial and material support , and possibly inspire new and more systematically devastating attacks .

some experts have argued however , that the uncompromising , anti - democratic tone of some public statements by bin laden and al zawahiri may alienate muslims who oppose theocracy or who support secular or representative government .

the anti - shiite sectarian rhetoric of some al qaeda affiliates and the persistence of terrorist attacks that kill and maim sunni and shiite muslims in iraq also undermine al qaeda's appeal among some groups .

experience suggests that al qaeda's leaders believe that regular attempts to characterize al qaeda's actions as defensive and religiously sanctioned will increase tolerance of and support for their broader ideological program .

the identification of limited political objectives and the implication that their fulfilment will resolve broader grievances may generate broader appeal than the group's underlying ideological agenda .

osama bin laden's truce proposals addressed to citizens of the united states and its european allies illustrate this trend , but the proposals' validity has been questioned due to ongoing attacks and continuing threats .

overall , al qaeda leaders' statements from the mid - 1990s through the present indicate that they continue to see themselves and their followers as the vanguard of an international islamic movement primarily committed to ending u.s. "interference" in the affairs of islamic countries and supportive of efforts to recast islamic societies according to narrow interpretations of islam and islamic law .

public statements addressed to regional and international populations will likely continue to play a prominent role in al qaeda's efforts to achieve its goals .

