on december 8 , 2004 , the president signed into law p.l .

108-447 ( h.r .

4818 ) , the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act , within which foreign operations is included as division d. as enacted , the measure provides $19.64 billion for foreign operations after adjusting for a required 0.8% across - the - board rescission .

although this is $1.68 billion , or nearly 8% below the president's request , congress increased amounts passed earlier by the house ( $19.39 billion ) and the senate ( $19.61 billion ) .

the conference agreement is about $2.3 billion ( +13% ) more than the "regular" fy2004 foreign operations level , but far less than the $38.78 billion total appropriation in fy2004 that included $21.2 billion for iraq reconstruction and other supplemental needs .

for the "core" development and child survival accounts , including the global aids initiative , p.l .

108-447 provides $4.36 billion ( after adjusting for the 0.8% across - the - board rescission ) , about $675 million higher than fy2004 and $160 million more than the request .

within these totals , h.r .

4818 provides $2.28 billion for the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) ( after applying the rescission ) , roughly $80 million higher than the request and the house - passed level , but $139 million less than passed by the senate .

 ( funding for international hiv / aids included in other appropriation bills brings the total to $2.92 billion , $100 million more than the request. ) .

on family planning and reproductive heath matters , the conference on h.r .

4818 sets bilateral assistance at $441 million , between house and senate - passed amounts .

the bill includes $34 million for the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) , subject to the "kemp - kasten" conditions , but drops the senate language amending kemp - kasten that may have narrowed the grounds on which the administration could deny funding to the organization .

conferees also deleted the senate - proposed revision to the president's so - called "mexico city" conditions on bilateral family planning assistance in a way that may have reversed the policy restrictions .

for specific countries , p.l .

108-447 provides $404 million for relief and peace and security activities in sudan , $85 million for haiti , and $980 million for afghanistan .

the sudan amount is in addition to $95 million emergency funding for the darfur region approved by p.l .

108-287 , the fy2005 defense appropriation bill .

the largest reduction in the enacted appropriation falls on the millennium challenge account — reduced by $1 billion from the president's $2.5 billion request .

the final level , however is $250 million and $380 million than amounts recommended earlier by the house and senate , respectively , coming only after strong pressure from the white house .

the measure further reduces funding for the export - import bank , debt reduction , the peace corps , and multilateral development bank contributions , among other accounts .

the annual foreign operations appropriations bill is the primary legislative vehicle through which congress reviews and votes on the u.s. foreign assistance budget and influences major aspects of executive branch foreign policy making generally .

it contains the largest share — about two - thirds — of total international affairs spending by the united states .

the legislation funds all u.s. bilateral development assistance programs , managed mostly by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , together with several smaller independent foreign aid agencies , such as the peace corps and the inter - american and african development foundations .

foreign operations also includes resources for the two newest administration initiatives: the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) and the global aids initiative managed by the state department's hiv / aids coordinator .

most humanitarian aid activities are funded within foreign operations , including usaid's disaster / famine program and the state department's refugee relief support .

foreign operations includes separate accounts for aid programs in the former soviet union ( also referred to as the independent states account ) and central / eastern europe , activities that are jointly managed by usaid and the state department .

security assistance ( economic and military aid ) for israel and egypt is also part of the foreign operations spending measure , as are other security aid programs administered largely by the state department , in conjunction with usaid and the pentagon .

most recently , foreign operations has funded reconstruction programs in both afghanistan and iraq .

u.s. contributions to the world bank and other regional multilateral development banks , managed by the treasury department , and voluntary payments to international organizations , handled by the state department , are also funded in the foreign operations bill .

finally , the legislation includes appropriations for three export promotion agencies: the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , the export - import bank , and the trade and development agency .

for two decades , the foreign operations appropriations bill has been the principal legislative vehicle for congressional oversight of foreign affairs and for congressional involvement in foreign policy making .

congress has not enacted a comprehensive foreign aid authorization bill since 1985 , leaving most foreign assistance programs without regular authorizations originating from the legislative oversight committees .

as a result , foreign operations spending measures developed by the appropriations committees increasingly have expanded their scope beyond spending issues and played a major role in shaping , authorizing , and guiding both executive and congressional foreign aid and broader foreign policy initiatives .

it has been largely through foreign operations appropriations that the united states has modified aid policy and resource allocation priorities since the end of the cold war .

the legislation has also been the channel through which the president has utilized foreign aid as a tool in the global war on terrorism since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and launched afghan and iraqi reconstruction operations .

the appropriations measure has also been a key instrument used by congress to apply restrictions and conditions on administration management of foreign assistance , actions that have frequently resulted in executive - legislative clashes over presidential prerogatives in foreign policy making .

president bush submitted his fy2005 federal budget request to congress on february 2 , 2004 , including funding proposals for foreign operations appropriations programs .

house and senate appropriations committees held several hearings on the fy2005 request .

the house foreign operations subcommittee marked up its draft legislation on june 23 , followed by full committee approval on july 9 .

h.r .

4818 passed the house , amended , on july 15 .

the senate appropriations committee reported its bill , s. 2812 , on september 16 , which was debated and amended on september 23 .

the senate passed h.r .

4818 , after substituting the text of s. 2812 , as amended .

conferees reached agreement november 19 on the foreign operations measure , together with eight other pending appropriation bills for fy2005 .

h.r .

4818 , originally the foreign operations measure , became the vehicle for the omnibus consolidated appropriations act , 2005 .

foreign operations is included as division d of the act .

the president signed the measure on december 8 .

arguably , from the end of world war ii until the early 1990s , the underlying rationale for providing foreign aid was the same as that for all u.s. foreign policy — the defeat of communism .

u.s. aid programs were designed to promote economic development and policy reforms , in large part to create stability and reduce the attraction to communist ideology and to block soviet diplomatic links and military advances .

other security assistance activities provided defense equipment and training to american allies and friendly states , some of which faced soviet or soviet - proxy threats .

aid programs also were used to help the u.s. gain access to military bases around the world in order to forward deploy american forces .

foreign aid programs also supported a number of secondary u.s. policy goals , such as reducing high rates of population growth , promoting wider access to health care , expanding the availability of basic education in the developing world , advancing u.s. trade interests , and protecting the environment .

if these secondary goals were also achieved , u.s. aid programs could be promoted as delivering "more bang for the buck. .

with the end of the cold war , the united states launched expansive aid programs in russia and many eastern - bloc states that were previously those that u.s. assistance tried to combat .

while these and other new elements of american foreign aid emerged , no broad consensus developed over what should be the new overarching rationale for u.s. aid programs .

throughout the 1990s , policymakers and congress explored a number of alternative strategic frameworks around which to construct a revised foreign assistance policy rationale .

not only did a policy consensus fail to emerge , but efforts to overhaul the largely cold war - based foreign aid legislation also did not succeed .

during this period , the clinton administration emphasized the promotion of "sustainable development" as the new , post - cold war main strategy of those parts of the foreign aid program under the aegis of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

economic assistance supported six inter - related goals: achievement of broad - based , economic growth ; development of democratic systems ; stabilization of world population and protection of human health ; sustainable management of the environment ; building human capacity through education and training ; and meeting humanitarian needs .

early in the bush administration these goals were modified around three "strategic pillars" of 1 ) economic growth , agriculture , and trade ; 2 ) global health ; and 3 ) democracy , conflict prevention , and humanitarian assistance .

more recently , a usaid white paper on american foreign aid identified five "core" operational goals of u.s. foreign assistance: promoting transformational development , especially in the areas of governance , institutional capacity , and economic restructuring ; strengthening fragile states ; providing humanitarian assistance ; supporting u.s. geostrategic interests , particularly in countries such as iraq , afghanistan , pakistan , jordan , egypt , and israel ; and mitigating global and international ills , including hiv / aids .

perhaps the most defining change in u.s. foreign aid policy came following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks in the united states when american foreign assistance has taken on a more strategic sense of importance and has been cast frequently in terms of contributing to the global war on terrorism .

in september 2002 , president bush released his administration's national security strategy that established global development , for the first time , as the third "pillar" of u.s. national security , along with defense and diplomacy .

also in 2002 , executive branch foreign assistance budget justifications began to underscore the war on terrorism as the top foreign aid priority , highlighting amounts of u.s. assistance to about 30 "front - line" states in the terrorism war — countries that cooperated with the united states in the war on terrorism or faced terrorist threats themselves .

the substantial reconstruction programs in afghanistan and iraq — which total more in fy2004 than the combined budgets of all other aid programs — are also part of the emphasis on using foreign aid to combat terrorism .

at roughly the same time that fighting terrorism became the leading concern of american foreign aid , the bush administration announced other significant initiatives that have defined and strengthened two additional key foreign assistance goals: promoting economic growth and reducing poverty , and combating the global hiv / aids pandemic .

the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) is a new aid delivery concept , authorized by congress and established in early 2004 , that is intended to concentrate significantly higher amounts of u.s. resources in a few low - and low - middle income countries that have demonstrated a strong commitment to political , economic , and social reforms .

if fully funded , $5 billion will be available by fy2006 to support these "best development performers" in order to accelerate economic growth and lower the number of people living in absolute poverty .

addressing global health problems has further become a core u.s. aid objective in recent years .

congress created a separate appropriation account for child survival and health activities in the mid - 1990s and increased funding for international hiv / aids and other infectious disease programs .

president bush's announcement at his 2003 state of the union message of a five - year , $15 billion effort to combat aids , malaria , and tuberculosis has added greater emphasis to this primary foreign assistance objective .

beyond these recently emerging foreign aid goals , other prominent objectives that have continued since the early 1990s have included supporting peace in the middle east through assistance to israel , egypt , jordan , and the palestinians ; fostering democratization and stability for countries in crisis , such as bosnia , haiti , rwanda , kosovo , and liberia ; facilitating democratization and free market economies in central europe and the former soviet union ; suppressing international narcotics production and trafficking through assistance to colombia and other andean drug - producing countries ; and alleviating famine and mitigating refugee situations in places throughout the world .

as shown in the figure 1 , foreign operations funding levels , expressed in real terms taking into account the effects of inflation , have fluctuated widely over the past 29 years .

after peaking at over $34 billion in fy1985 ( constant fy2005 dollars ) , foreign operations appropriations began a period of decline to a low - point of $14.1 billion in fy1997 , with only a brief period of higher amounts in the early 1990s due to special supplementals for panama and nicaragua ( 1990 ) , countries affected by the gulf war ( 1991 ) , and the former soviet states ( 1993 ) .

arguing that declining international affairs resources seriously undermined u.s. foreign policy interests and limited the ability of american officials to influence overseas events , clinton administration officials and other outside groups vigorously campaigned to reverse the decade - long decline in the foreign policy budget .

foreign aid spending increased slightly in fy1998 , but beginning the following year and continuing to the present , foreign operations appropriations have trended upward due in large part to the approval of resources for special , and in some cases unanticipated foreign policy contingencies and new initiatives .

while funding for regular , continuing foreign aid programs also rose modestly during this period , supplemental spending for special activities , such as central american hurricane relief ( fy1999 ) , kosovo emergency assistance ( fy1999 ) , wye river / middle east peace accord support ( fy2000 ) , a counternarcotics initiative in colombia and the andean region ( fy2000 and fy2002-fy2004 ) , aid to the front line states in the war on terrorism and iraq - war related assistance ( fy2003-fy2004 ) , was chiefly responsible for the growth in foreign aid appropriations .

while foreign operations appropriations had been rising for five consecutive years , amounts approved in fy2003 and fy2004 reached unprecedented levels over the past 40 years .

regular appropriations approved in these two years were roughly on par with amounts of the previous few years .

but substantial supplementals of $7.5 billion and $21.2 billion , respectively , for assistance to the front line states in the war on terrorism and afghanistan and iraq reconstruction , have pushed spending upward .

the regular foreign operations bill , signed by the president on january 23 , 2004 , combined with an earlier iraq supplemental approved in november 2003 ( p.l .

108-106 ) and subsequent emergency relief for darfur , sudan ( p.l .

108-287 ) , brought fy2004 appropriations to $39.4 billion ( constant fy2005 dollars ) , the highest level , in real terms , since the early 1960s .

the enacted level for fy2005 of $19.74 billion , while less than the previous two years , is the largest foreign operations appropriation , in real terms , than all other years in over a decade .

moreover , the fy2005 total is likely to grow when congress considers supplemental funding for tsunami disaster relief and possibly additional iraq reconstruction needs .

supplemental resources for foreign operations programs , which in fy2004 exceeded regular foreign operations funding , have become a significant channel of funding for u.s. international activities .

due to the nature of rapidly changing overseas events and the emergence of unanticipated contingencies to which it is in the u.s. national interest to respond , it is not surprising that foreign aid and defense resources from time to time are the major reason for considering and approving supplemental spending outside the regular appropriation cycle .

supplementals have provided resources for such major foreign policy events as the camp david accords ( fy1979 ) , central america conflicts ( fy1983 ) , africa famine and a middle east economic downturn ( fy1985 ) , panama and nicaragua government transitions ( fy1990 ) , the gulf war ( fy1991 ) , and bosnia relief and reconstruction ( fy1996 ) .

but after a period of only one significant foreign aid supplemental in eight years , beginning in fy1999 congress has approved foreign operations supplemental appropriations exceeding $1 billion in each of the past six years .

relief for central american victims of hurricane mitch , kosovo refugees , and victims of the embassy bombings in kenya and tanzania in fy1999 totaled $1.6 billion , and was followed in fy2000 by a $1.1 billion supplemental , largely to fund the president's new counternarcotics initiative in colombia .

as part of a $40 billion emergency supplemental to fight terrorism enacted in september 2001 , president bush and congress allocated $1.4 billion for foreign aid activities in fy2001 and fy2002 .

another $1.15 billion supplemental cleared congress in fy2002 to augment afghan reconstruction efforts and assist other "front - line" states in the war on terrorism .

until fy2003 , these additional resources accounted for between 7% and 11% of total foreign operations spending .

the $7.5 billion iraq war supplemental for fy2003 , however , went well beyond these standards , representing nearly one - third of the fy2003 foreign operations budget , and was surpassed , as noted above , only by fy2004 supplemental appropriations , which more than doubled the foreign operations budget for the year .

while the foreign operations appropriations bill can include virtually any foreign policy issue of interest to congress , the annual debate usually focuses on several major policy and spending issues .

for fy2005 , substantial debate focused on the following .

overview crs report 98-916 .

foreign aid: an introductory overview of u.s. programs and policy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31959 , foreign assistance authorization act , fy2005 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32090 , fy2004 supplemental appropriations for iraq , afghanistan , and the global war on terrorism: military operations & reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report rl31687 , the millennium challenge account: congressional consideration of a new foreign aid initiative , by [author name scrubbed] .

foreign operations programs crs report rs20329 , african development bank and fund , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs issue brief ib10050 .

aids in africa , by raymond copson .

crs report rl32252 , aids orphans and vulnerable children ( ovc ) : problems , responses , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21437 , the asian development bank , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib88093 .

drug control: international policy and approaches , by raphael perl .

crs report 98-568 , export - import bank: background and legislative issues , by shayerah ilias .

crs report rl31712 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria: background , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33485 , u.s. international hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria spending: fy2004-fy2008 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32714 .

international disasters and humanitarian assistance: u.s .

governmental response , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30830 , international family planning: the " mexico city " policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30932 , microenterprise and u.s. foreign assistance , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report 98-567 , the overseas private investment corporation: background and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21168 , the peace corps: current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34317 , trafficking in persons: u.s. policy and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib96026 .

u.s. international population assistance: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31689 , u.s. international refugee assistance: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31433 , u.s .

global health priorities: usaid ' s global health fy2003 budget , by [author name scrubbed] .

country and regional issues crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32489 , africa: development issues and policy options , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs issue brief ib95052 .

africa: u.s. foreign assistance issues , by raymond copson .

crs report rl32337 , andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) and related funding programs: fy2005 assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21865 , assistance to afghan and iraqi women: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

crs report rl33479 , burma - u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32250 , colombia: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21686 , conditions on u.s. aid to serbia , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib93087 .

egypt - united states relations , by clyde mark .

crs report rl32407 .

the greater middle east initiative: an overview , by jeremy sharp .

crs report rl32294 , haiti: developments and u.s. policy since 1991 and current congressional concerns , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21751 , humanitarian crisis in haiti: 2004 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33376 , iraq ' s debt relief: procedure and potential implications for international debt relief , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib85066 .

israel: u.s. foreign assistance , by clyde mark .

crs issue brief ib93085 .

jordan: u.s. relations and bilateral issues , by alfred prados .

crs report rs21457 , the middle east partnership initiative: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21353 , new partnership for africa ' s development ( nepad ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20895 .

palestinians: u.s. assistance , by clyde mark .

crs report rl31759 , reconstruction assistance in afghanistan: goals , priorities , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib98043 .

sudan: humanitarian crisis , peace talks , terrorism and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22370 , u.s. foreign aid to the palestinians , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32260 , u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east: historical background , recent trends , and the fy2009 request , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32487 , u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31785 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21834 .

u.s. assistance to north korea: fact sheet , by mark manyin .

crs report rl31362 , u.s. foreign aid to east and south asia: selected recipients , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32260 , u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east: historical background , recent trends , and the fy2009 request , by [author name scrubbed] .

african development bank http: / / www.afdb.org / african development foundation http: / / www.adf.gov / asian development bank http: / / www.adb.org / crs current legislative issues: foreign affairs http: / / www.crs.gov / products / browse / is - foreignaffairs.shtml export - import bank http: / / www.exim.gov / global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria http: / / www.theglobalfund.org / en / inter - american development bank http: / / www.iadb.org / inter - american foundation http: / / www.iaf.gov / index / index_en.asp international fund for agricultural development http: / / www.ifad.org international monetary fund http: / / www.imf.org / overseas private investment corporation http: / / www.opic.gov / peace corps http: / / www.peacecorps.gov / trade and development agency http: / / www.tda.gov / united nations children's fund ( unicef ) http: / / www.unicef.org / united nations development program ( undp ) http: / / www.undp.org / united nations population fund ( unfpa ) http: / / www.unfpa.org / united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) http: / / www.unaids.org / en / default.asp u.s. agency for international development — home page http: / / www.usaid.gov / u.s. agency for international development — congressional budget justification http: / / www.usaid.gov / policy / budget / u.s. agency for international development — emergency situation reports http: / / www.usaid.gov / our_work / humanitarian_assistance / disaster_assistance / countries / fy2003_index.html u.s. agency for international development — foreign aid data ( "greenbook" ) http: / / qesdb.cdie.org / gbk / index.html u.s. department of state — home page http: / / www.state.gov / u.s. department of state — foreign operations budget justification , fy2004 http: / / www.state.gov / m / rm / rls / cbj / 2004 / u.s. department of state — international affairs budget request , fy2004 http: / / www.state.gov / m / rm / rls / iab / 2004 / u.s. department of state — international topics and issues http: / / www.state.gov / interntl / u.s. department of the treasury — office of international affairs http: / / www.ustreas.gov / offices / international - affairs / index.html world bank http: / / www.worldbank.org / world bank hipc website http: / / www.worldbank.org / hipc / .

