long - term international efforts to address future global climate change have had to struggle with significant country and region - specific differences in possible policy responses related to differing economic , technical , and political circumstances .

foremost among these regional differences is the divide between developed and less - developed nations in terms of contributions to current and future annual greenhouse gas emissions and the related possible global climate change .

how to treat in a fair way the implications of significantly different material standards of living between developed and developing countries is a key conflict arising in international negotiations to slow the growth of , or even to reduce , future global greenhouse gas emissions .

the conflict arises because any pressure to reduce emissions comes up against the increases in emissions likely to result from economic development and rising standards of living in developing economies — which contain a large share of the world's population .

this report explores what future world economic growth and development means for proposals to constrain total annual global greenhouse gas emissions .

this analytical exercise uses international data for the three country - specific variables that will determine future annual greenhouse gas emissions: population , per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) , and greenhouse gas emissions per million dollars of gdp ( intensity ) .

the analysis presents scenarios showing what levels of greenhouse gas emissions would be if the world population was at a benchmark per capita gdp comparable to several european nations that currently have the lowest greenhouse gas emissions per million dollars of gdp among all developed nations .

the paper analyzes a benchmark based on the interactions of economic activity , population , and greenhouse gas - emitting activities exemplified by the selected nations , but does not deal with the time involved to transition to the higher level of development .

the empirically - derived benchmark is an analytical construct designed to illustrate the dynamics involved in designing global greenhouse gas emissions goals ; the report does not present a set of projections or predictions .

the current international approach to controlling greenhouse gas emissions , as contained in the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) and the kyoto protocol , is to limit emissions of designated , developed nations ( listed in an annex i ) relative to a baseline of 1990 .

for the unfccc , the target was for annex i nations voluntarily to return emissions to 1990 levels ; there was no penalty for failure .

for the kyoto protocol , which amends the unfccc , the target is for annex i nations to hold 2008-2012 emissions to a specified percentage of the 1990 baseline ; sanctions for failure have not yet been defined .

this approach has a two - fold logic: ( 1 ) the annex i nations , having achieved development and having contributed the most to cumulative greenhouse gas emissions , are generally considered rich enough to make investments in controlling greenhouse gases ; and ( 2 ) the annex ii nations , undergoing development , are exempted from greenhouse gas emission limits so as not to constrain their opportunities to expand activities that may be essential to their economic growth .

the success of this approach is problematic .

except for the former soviet bloc countries , the unfccc voluntary targets generally were not achieved .

likewise , many signatories to the kyoto protocol are anticipated not to meet their targets ; and further , the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases , the united states , has refused to join .

finally , this approach , even if valid as a first step , could have little long - term effect on cumulative emissions , since it lacks long - term limits for any nation ; and leaving developing nations free to develop without greenhouse gas limits likely means that their emissions will , at some time in the future , exceed any diminution of emissions from developed nations .

to illustrate , if one were to assume that in 2000 all nations equaled the united states in per capita economic activity , then the global gdp would have been about $204 trillion ; at the u.s. greenhouse gas intensity of 195 , then global emissions would have been nearly 40 billion tons of carbon equivalents per year , compared to actual emissions of about 9.1 billion tons in 2000 .

so , are the twin objectives of holding down greenhouse gas emissions and of fostering economic growth compatible ? .

can one visualize a world in which all peoples achieve a comfortable standard of living without greenhouse gas emissions causing unacceptable global warming ? .

two alternative views of the situation avoid the conflict analyzed in this report .

first , the apparent conflict in objectives can be mooted if one concludes that greenhouse gases do not cause global warming .

for those who hold this position , growth can proceed without concern for emissions .

second , the apparent conflict might also be mooted if one concludes that economic activity can be delinked from fossil fuel energy use within an acceptable time period .

for those who believe that many opportunities exist to save energy at little or no cost with appropriate technical fixes , the conflict can be avoided — at least for some time — and economic development can proceed without increasing emissions rates ( and other societal benefits can also be achieved , such as reduced air pollution ) .

as shown by table 1 , eight nations combined a greenhouse gas intensity of less than 110 tons per million dollars gdp with per capita gdps of $23,490 or better .

while six of the eight are relatively small ( in terms of both geography and total gdp ) , the other two , italy and france , are among the top 15 nations in terms of both size of total economy and amount of greenhouse gases emitted .

this shows that substantial economies can rank low in greenhouse gas intensity and that such efficiency is not restricted to only small countries / economies .

from the perspective of global economic development , a benchmark of a per capita gdp of $23,500 — at the low end of the eight , falling between france and sweden — could be taken as a reasonable starting point for analysis .

with $23,500 as the parity gdp benchmark , the world's nations can be categorized into three groups: a "parity income group" defined as nations with per capita gdps of $23,500 plus or minus 10% ( $21,150 - $25,850 ) , an "above - parity gdp" group with gdps greater than $25,850 , and a "below - parity gdp" group with gdps lower than $21,150 ( see table 2 ) .

appendices a , b , and c provide additional data on these nations .

this parity benchmark of $23,500 is more than triple the actual world per capita gdp of $7,333 in 2000 , and is more than 5.5 times the "below - parity gdp" nations' per capita gdp of $4,120 in 2000 .

table 3 presents the shares of world population , gdp , and greenhouse gas emissions by each of the three parity - defined groups of nations .

it also shows average per capita emissions and intensity for the three groups ; for details on individual nations , see appendices a , b , and c. obviously , most of the world's population ( 87% ) lives in "below - parity gdp" nations , sharing about half the gdp ( 49% ) and emitting over half ( 60% ) of the greenhouse gases .

the "below - parity gdp" nations tend to be low per capita emitters , but relatively high intensity emitters .

the "above - parity gdp" and "parity - gdp" nations include just 13% of the world's population but account for about half the gdp ( 51% ) and produce 40% of the emissions ; and , with some significant exceptions , have relatively high per capita emissions .

also , while the "above - parity gdp" and "parity - gdp" nations include low intensity emitters , these categories also include some quite high intensity emitters .

it should be noted that the united states dominates the figures in the "above - parity gdp" category ( see appendix a ) .

of that category , the united states accounts for 79% of the population , 82% of the gdp and 85% of the emissions .

the unfccc and kyoto protocol define the emissions goal in terms of specific nations' emissions compared to an historic baseline .

per capita emissions and greenhouse gas intensity ( emissions per unit of economic activity ) have also been discussed as metrics for defining emissions goals .

in this analysis , we look at empirical benchmarks to define what appear to be currently feasible targets .

in 2000 , sweden and france combined intensities below 100 with per capita gdps near $23,500 ; they achieved per capita rates of emissions of 2.0 and 2.3 tons , respectively ( see table 1 ) .

if these per capita rates were combined with the parity gdp as a global target , what would the emissions implications be ? .

two scenarios are used to express the results of this analysis .

the first , called the global parity scenario , assumes the benchmark parity gdp of $23,500 , the benchmark greenhouse gas intensity of 100 , and the 2000 world population of 6 billion .

the second , called the parity with grandfathering scenario , makes the same assumptions as the global parity scenario , but maintains ( grandfathers ) higher - than - parity gdps ( and the associated emissions ) for those nations whose 2000 per capita gdps exceeded the benchmark of $23,500 .

the results are presented below .

the relationships of population , economic growth , and emissions as defined by equation 1 , have been used to evaluate diverse assumptions about each factor .

this analytical construct could be applied globally , to individual nations , or to groups of nations .

one can calculate the implications of different population levels , different economic development levels , different emissions goals , etc .

for analytic purposes , this report has treated the variables of equation 1 as an illustrative tool , not a prediction of future growth or distribution .

the analysis has compared scenarios to the 2000 situation .

in reality , economic development is and will be a continuing process , with nations exhibiting differing growth rates depending on starting points , resource endowments , institutional structures , and so on .

any attempt to translate the results and insights of this exercise into an enforceable agreement would extend beyond the issue of appropriate emission targets ( in whatever form ) to issues of implementation strategy and compliance timetables .

those considerations are beyond the scope of this paper .

however , the implications of differing growth rates could be analyzed by incorporating growth rates into equation 1 .

this would allow evaluation of policies that affect the rates of growth for the variables .

incorporating growth , equation 1 becomes: [equation 3] in which k p = population growth rate , k g = per capita growth rate , k i = intensity growth rate , and k e = emissions growth rate ; t = time , and e = a constant 2.71828 [the base of natural logarithms] the exponents of multiplicands are added , so ( k p + k g + k i ) = k e [equation 3 a ] if the sum of the three growth rate variables on the left is positive , emissions are rising ; if the sum is negative , emissions are declining .

obviously , if any one of the three variables on the left increases more than the sum of the other two decreases , emissions rise .

since population is rising globally and national and international efforts are fostering the development of "below - parity gdp" nations , intensity is the variable of focus for constraining emissions .

this analysis assumes a minimum standard of living of $23,500 per capita gdp ( in 2000 $purchasing power parity ) based on benchmark countries .

the analysis identifies the differing actual starting points of individual nations in terms of gdp , population , and greenhouse gas intensity , but not other factors such as their resource endowments , where the capital for development would come from , etc. , which mean that economic development occurs unevenly and dynamically over time .

in looking at the interaction of the countervailing forces of economic growth and constrained greenhouse gas emissions , these other factors will be important .

moreover , differing rates of economic growth among nations and the continuing economic growth among "above - parity gdp" nations makes any degree of achieving parity gdps and constraining emissions more complicated and raises the issue of maintaining above - parity gdps .

without grandfathering , parity implies some transfer of wealth from richer to poorer nations ( through emissions trading or other mechanisms ) , while accepting grandfathering implies higher emissions — or even further improvements in intensity .

 ( a world of a minimum $23,500 per capita gdp and constrained emissions is an analytic construct: it is not a prediction .

it is conceivable that a goal of a comfortable standard of living for everyone ( however defined ) will prove as difficult to achieve as the related goal of adequate nutrition for every person. ) .

over time , diverse forces and human choices will be affecting global economic activity and emissions of greenhouse gases .

some of these forces and choices will have the effect of increasing emissions , others will have the opposite effect .

population growth , currently about 1.2% per year , means that economic activity must grow just to keep per capita gdp constant .

if world population were to level off at , say , 9 billion ( a 50% increase over 2000 ) , then at annual per capita greenhouse emissions of 2 to 2.3 tons , total emissions would be 18 to 20.7 billion tons , or double those of 2000 .

economic growth must exceed population growth if per capita gdps are to grow .

but growth per se may not meet the distributional requirements to address poverty , i.e. , economic betterment of those at the bottom of the economic ladder .

greenhouse gas ( carbon ) intensity improved in many countries and globally between 1950 and 2000 ( see table 8 ) .

while those improvements were , overall , smaller than the rate of economic growth , the examples of a few nations , such as france and sweden , suggest that high - intensity nations could improve .

public policy initiatives at global and national levels are addressing all three forces .

on population , for example , u.n. programs regarding health , children , and family planning all impact population ; individual nations also have programs affecting population , some explicitly to encourage childbearing , others the opposite .

on economic development , the united nations has underway a set of programs to improve the standards of living of the world's poorest , including a goal to halve the number of persons living on less than one dollar per day by 2015 ; and many nations have or contribute to foreign aid programs to foster economic growth .

on greenhouse gas emissions , initiatives include actions under the unfccc and kyoto protocol , together with national programs to improve energy efficiency , to encourage energy conservation , to develop carbon sinks , and otherwise to reduce emissions of greenhouse gas emissions .

with international policies and programs to alleviate poverty and foster development , together with increasing population , this analysis indicates that the crux of any goal of constraining greenhouse gas emissions is the level of intensity .

this in turn implies substantial decoupling of energy use and economic activity — although not to an impossible level .

the analyzed level of 100 has been achieved by nations that rank in the top - 20 for both per capita gdp and total annual greenhouse gas emissions .

greenhouse gas intensity has been improving globally , and in many nations .

for 1990 to 2000 , the global carbon intensity declined about 13% ; for various nations , see table 8 .

but over the same decade , world population grew 13.7% and per capita gdp grew 30% , so emissions rose .

a goal of all nations equaling or bettering an intensity of 100 would represent a very substantial challenge for most nations .

some studies have suggested that improving intensity could be achieved at low cost — even in some cases at a profit .

but the assumption that many "no regrets" opportunities exist to reduce carbon emissions has not been borne out so far in practice , as evidenced by the failure of most countries to meet the unfccc goal ( and likely problems in meeting the kyoto protocol limits ) .

from a policy perspective , if constraining greenhouse gases were determined to be an appropriate action for all nations , the question would be the relationships of , and the relative efforts to be devoted to , international and domestic policies and programs that affect population ; economic growth and development ; and intensity .

at present , the first two are clearly demanding proportionately more attention and resources than intensity is .

the purpose of this analysis has been to give some tangible sense of a possible outcome from pursuing competing goals — economic growth and development versus constraining greenhouse gases — that are confounding efforts , such as the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) and the kyoto protocol , to address global climate change .

for some , the finding that one can construct an empirically based approach that achieves a standard of living for the existing population equal to that of several european nations while not increasing global greenhouse gas emissions by more than 60% will be optimistic .

however , this calculation ignores population growth , and assumes a level of intensity that may appear daunting to many .

for others , the emissions may appear unacceptable despite the improvement in intensity — which could imply even more aggressive improvements in intensity and / or constraints on economic growth .

for still others , worry about greenhouse gas emissions is misdirected .

appendix a .

"above - parity gdp" nations — 2000 per capita gdps greater than $25,850 appendix b .

"parity gdp" nations — 2000 per capita gdps $23,500 ± 10% ( $25,850 - $21,150 ) appendix c. "below - parity gdp" nations — 2000 per capita gdps smaller than $21,15 .

