for congressional policymakers , the merits of the decision to approve or disapprove thekc - 767 lease relate in part to examining the following questions: is there an urgent need to replace the oldest kc - 135s ? .

is the kc - 767 the best aircraft for the job ? .

what are the industrial base concerns ? .

given the uncertainties involved in this unusual acquisition mechanism , arethe costs projected by the air force the most authoritative ? .

what potential long term implications does this lease present in terms ofbudget and congressional oversight ? .

statutory authority for the air force to lease 100 767 tankers ( and alsoboeing 737 transport aircraft ) was provided in sections included in the fy2002 dodappropriations act ( p.l .

107-117 ) , the fy2002 supplemental ( p.l .

107-206 ) , thefy2003 dod appropriations act ( p.l .

107-248 ) , and the fy2003 dodauthorization act , ( p.l .

107-314 ) .

statutory language for the relevant sections arein italics below ) .

section 8159 , fy2002 dod appropriations act ( p.l .

107-117 ) section 8159 of the fy2002 dod appropriations act ( p.l .

107-117 ) authorizes the air force to undertake a lease of up to 100 boeing 767s in acommercial configuration , exempts the air force from standard requirements forlong - term leases , including providing funding for termination liability ( see section2401 and 2401 of title 10 below ) if the air force submits a report to congress onthe lease and wait thirty days .

sec .

8159 .

multi - yearaircraft lease pilot program .

 ( a ) the secretary of the air force may , fromfunds provided in this act or any future appropriations act , establish and makepayments on a multi - year pilot program for leasing general purpose boeing 767aircraft and boeing 737 aircraft in commercialconfiguration .

 ( b ) sections 2401 and 2401a oftitle 10 , united states code , shall not apply to any aircraft lease authorized by thissection .

 ( c ) under the aircraft lease pilotprogram authorized by this section: ( 1 ) the secretary mayinclude terms and conditionsin lease agreements that arecustomary in aircraft leases bya non - government lessor to anon - government lessee , butonly those that are notinconsistent with any of theterms and conditionsmandated herein .

 ( 2 ) the term of any individual lease agreement into which thesecretary enters under this section shall not exceed 10 years,inclusive of any options to renew or extend the initial lease term .

 ( 3 ) the secretary may provide for special payments in a lessor if thesecretary terminates or cancels the lease prior to the expiration of its term.such special payments shall not exceed an amount equal to the value of 1year's lease payment under the lease .

 ( 4 ) subchapter iv ofchapter 15 of title 31,united states codeshall apply to the leasetransactions under thissection , except that thelimitation in section1553 ( b ) ( 2 ) shall notapply .

 ( 5 ) the secretary shalllease aircraft underterms and conditionsconsistent with thissection and consistentwith the criteria for anoperating lease asdefined in ombcircular a - - 11 , as ineffect at the time of thelease .

 ( 6 ) lease arrangementsauthorized by this section may not commenceuntil: ( a ) thesecretarysubmits areport to thecongressionaldefensecommitteesoutlining theplans forimplementingthe pilotprogram .

thereport shalldescribe theterms andconditions ofproposedcontracts anddescribe theexpectedsavings , if any,comparingtotal costs,includingoperation,support,acquisition,and financing,of the lease,includingmodification,with theoutrightpurchase of theaircraft asmodified .

 ( b ) a period ofnot less than30 calendardays haselapsed aftersubmitting thereport .

 ( 7 ) not later than 1 year after the date on which the first aircraft isdelivered under this pilot program , and yearly thereafter on theanniversary of the first delivery , the secretary shall submit a reportto the congressional defense committees describing the status of thepilot program .

the report will be based on at least 6 months ofexperience in operating the pilotprogram .

 ( 8 ) the air force shallaccept delivery of theaircraft in a generalpurposeconfiguration .

 ( 9 ) at the conclusionof the lease term , eachaircraft obtainedunder that lease maybe returned to thecontractor in the sameconfiguration in whichthe aircraft wasdelivered .

 ( 10 ) the present valueof the total paymentsover the duration ofeach lease entered intounder this authorityshall not exceed 90percent of the fairmarket value of theaircraft obtainedunder that lease .

 ( d ) no lease entered into under this authority shall provide for - - ( 1 ) the modification ofthe general purposeaircraft from thecommercialconfiguration , unlessand until separateauthority for suchconversion is enactedand only to the extentbudget authority isprovided in advance inappropriations actsfor that purpose ; or ( 2 ) the purchase of theaircraft by , or the transfer of ownership to , the air force .

 ( e ) the authority granted to the secretary of the air force by this section isseparate from and in addition to , and shall not be construed to impair orotherwise affect , the authority of the secretary to procure transportation orenter into leases under a provision of law other than thissection .

 ( f ) the authority providedunder this section may be usedto lease not more than a totalof 100 boeing 767 aircraft and4 boeing 737 aircraft for thepurposes specifiedherein .

u.s. code , title 10l sections 2401 and 2401 ( a ) sections 2401 and 2401a of title 10 of the u.s. code , referred to in subsection ( b ) of section 8159 above , are laws that set forth the requirements and limitationsthat normally govern dod leases of aircraft and ships .

those requirements include: that the contract include a substantial termination liability ( defined in law ) ; that the lease be specifically authorized inlaw ; that a specific description of the terms of the contract beprovided to the defense committees and a period of 30 days of continuous session ofcongress elapse ; that the secretary of defense submit an analysis of the cost ofthe lease vs. the cost of a buy that has been evaluated by the director of the omb andthe secretary of the treasury , who must submit their evaluation to congress within45 days of when dod submits its analysis ; that the director of omb and the secretary of the treasurydevelop guidelines for determining when to lease and when to purchase ships andaircraft .

u.s. code , title 31 , chapter 15 , subchapter iv section 8159 states that subchapter iv of chapter 15 of title 31 applies to thelease except for section 1553 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

subchapter iv sets out the rules for theavailability of unobligated balances after the closing of accounts ( see below ) .

thelimit of 1% of the appropriation in section 1553 ( b ) ( 2 ) of title 31 that can be paid outdoes not apply to the lease , however .

section 1553 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) permits funds to be drawnfor the same purpose after the closure of an account for: obligations and adjustments to obligations that would have been properly chargeableto that account , both as to purpose and in amount , before closing and that are nototherwise chargeable to any current appropriation account of the agency may becharged to any current appropriation account of the agency available for the samepurpose .

fy2002 supplemental appropriations act , p.l 107-206 section 308 of p.l .

107-206 , the fy2002 supplemental appropriations actexempts the lease that is authorized in section 8159 above from the title 10 , section2533a , popularly known as the berry amendment , which requires that dod rely onu.s .

sources unless the secretary of defense determines that relying on u.s. sourceswould be inconsistent with the public interest ( title 10 , section 2533a ) .

sec .

308 .

during the current fiscal year and hereafter , section 2533a of title10 , united states code , shall not apply to any transaction entered into to acquire orsustain aircraft under the authority of section 81598 of the department of defenseappropriations act , 2002 ( division a of public law 107-117 ; 115 sta .

2284 ) .

report language in h. rept .

107-732 accompanying h.r .

5010 , the fy2002dod supplemental states: application of berry amendment to multi - year aircraft lease pilot program due to the special circumstances surrounding the multi - year aircraft lease pilotprogram authorized in fiscal year 2002 , congress enacted section 308 of p.l.107-206 to clarify berry amendment restrictions on the use of foreign sourcedspecialty metals in commercial aircraft to be leased under this program .

in this case,the congress concurred with the views expressed by air force officials that theunique financial and time - sensitive requirements of the aircraft lease arrangementand the administrative complexity involved in making berry amendmentdeterminations on a plane - by - plane basis for over 100 aircraft built under commercialpractices instead of under military acquisition procedures would add so much costand delay the entire program would be undermined .

enactment of section 308 wasintended to provide the opportunity to ensure that the air force would be able toeconomically procure air refueling tanker replacement aircraft necessary to thenational security while maintaining the overall integrity of the berry amendment forfuture application .

fy2003 dod appropriations act , p.l .

107-248 section 8117 of p.l .

107-248 , the fy2003 dod appropriations act amendssection 8159 to provide that: the air force can make annual lease payments in advancerather than at the end of the delivery period as is the standard practice ( see title 31,section 3324 ) ; and permits the air force to draw on available operation andmaintenance and procurement appropriations to fund the lease or the specialpayments for termination , thus exempting the air force from the requirement tobudget for special payments for termination ( see section 8159 ( c ) ( 3 ) .

multiyearprocurement is also granted an exemption from budgeting for termination liabilitywith language similar to that in paragraph ( g ) below ( see title 10 , section 2306 ( b ) ( f ) ) .

sec .

8117 .

section 8159 of the department of defense appropriations act,2002 ( division a of public law 107-117 ; 115 stat .

2284 ) is revised as follows: ( 1 ) in subsection ( c ) by inserting at the end of paragraph ( 1 ) the followingnew sentence: "notwithstanding the provisions of section 3324 of title 31,united states code , payment for the acquisition of leasehold interest underthis section may be made for each annual term up to one year in advance. .

 ( 2 ) by adding the following paragraph ( g ) : ( g ) notwithstanding any other provision of law , any payments required fora lease entered into under this section , or any payments made pursuant tosubsection ( c ) ( 3 ) above , may be made from appropriations available foroperation and maintenance or for lease or procurement of aircraft at the timethat the lease takes effect ; appropriations available for operation andmaintenance or for lease or procurement of aircraft at the time that thepayment is due ; or funds appropriated for those payment. .

fy2003 dod authorization act , p.l .

107-314 section 133 of p.l .

107-314 , the fy2003 dod authorization act amendssection 8159 to require that in addition to submitting the report required by section8159 , the secretary of the air force must get approval for the lease through either : authorization and appropriation of funds is provided bylaw ; or: dod request and receive approval from the four congressionaldefense committees for a new start reprogramming notification for funds to start thelease using standard reprogramming procedure .

sec .

133 .

leases for tanker aircraft under multiyearaircraft - lease pilot program .

the secretary of the air force may not enter into a lease for the acquisitionof tanker aircraft for the air force under section 8159 of the department ofdefense appropriations act , 2002 ( division a of public law 107-117 ; stat.2284 ; 10 u.s. c. 2401a note ) until - - ( 1 ) the secretary submits the report specified in subsection ( c ) ( 6 ) ofsuch section ; and ( 2 ) either - - ( a ) authorization and appropriation of funds necessary to enter intosuch lease are provided by law: or ( b ) a new start reprogramming notification for the funds necessaryto enter into such lease has been submitted in accordance withestablished procedures .

fy2000 defense appropriations act , p.l .

106-79 section 8133 of the fy2000 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

106-79 ) issomewhat similar to section 8159 above that permitted the air force to lease sixaircraft "for operational support purposes , including transportation of the combatantcommanders in chief," which are the u.s. military officers in charge of u.s. militaryforces operating in various regions of the world .

net present value ( npv ) analysis is a method of calculating and comparingcosts that takes into account the time value of money .

the time value of moneyrefers to the fact that a dollar available today ( i.e. , in the present ) is worth more thana dollar available in the future , because inflation reduces the purchasing power ofmoney over time , and because money available today can be invested to generate andreturn and grow over time .

npv analysis essentially adjusts the value of future sumsof money to account for the investment value of money over time .

both businesses and governments use npv analysis .

governments can usenpv analysis for comparing spending options that involve making payments indiffering years .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) instructs executivebranch agencies to use npv analysis in comparing the costs of leasing andprocurement options .

this guidance is provided in omb circular a - 94 , which setsforth guidelines for executive branch agencies to use in conducting benefit - costanalyses and evaluating federal programs .

 ( 150 ) sinceprocurement options usually involve making relatively large payments in the nearerterm while leasing options usually involve making a series of smaller payments overa longer period of time , omb officials and financial analysts elsewhere believe thatnpv analysis , by accounting for the time value of money , provides for amethodologically more fair comparison .

alternatives to npv analysis include nominal ( unadjusted ) analysis and real ( i.e. , inflation - adjusted ) analysis .

since procurement options usually involve makingrelatively large payments in the nearer term while leasing options usually involvemaking a series smaller payments over a longer period of time , nominal costcomparisons tend to be the least favorable to leasing options , real cost comparisonstend to be somewhat more favorable to leasing options , and npv cost comparisonstend to be the most favorable to leasing options .

to illustrate the differences between nominal , real , and npv costcomparisons , consider a simplified example involving hypothetical options forprocuring or leasing four airplanes .

for purposes of the example , assume that thefour planes have a total of procurement cost of $500 ( i.e. , they cost an average $125each to procure ) ; that under the procurement option , the planes would be purchasedusing two annual payments of $250 ; and that under the leasing option , the planeswould be leased for a period of five years , with annual lease payments of $108 peryear .

assume also that the anticipated rate of inflation during this five - year periodis 2% per year , and that the anticipated nominal rate of return on investments duringthis period is 5% per year ( i.e. , 3% per year more than the anticipated rate ofinflation ) .

what are the comparative costs of these two options ? .

in a nominal ( i.e. , unadjusted ) calculation , also called a then - year dollarcalculation , neither the effect of inflation on eroding purchasing power nor theinvestment value of money over time is taken into account , and the cost comparisonlooks like this: as can be seen in the table , when calculated this way , the lease option is $40more expensive than the procurement option .

in a real calculation , which adjusts the values of sums of money in futureyears to account for how inflation ( in this case , at 2% per year ) erodes the purchasingpower of those sums , the cost comparison looks like this: as can be seen in the table , when anticipated inflation is taken into account,the difference in cost between the two options is reduced from the $40 shown in thenominal calculation to $23.83 .

the entries in this table can be used to answerquestions such as: "what is the purchasing power , in today's prices , of $108 in year5 ? .

the answer is that , assuming a 2% annual rate of inflation , $108 in year 5 wouldpurchase $99.62 worth of goods in today's prices .

in an npv calculation , which adjusts the values of sums of money in futureyears to account for the investment value of money over time ( in this case , a 5%annual return on investment ) , the cost comparison looks like this: as can be seen in the table , when the investment value of money over timeis taken into account , the difference in cost between the two options is reduced fromthe $40 shown in the nominal calculation to $2.86 .

the entries in the npv table canbe used to answer questions such as: "what sum of money , if invested today at a 5%annual rate of return , would grow to a nominal total of $108 in year 5 ? .

the answeris that $88.85 , if invested today at a 5% rate of return , would grow to a nominal totalof $108 dollars by year 5 .

as shown in the table above , the npv of the procurement option is $488.10while the npv of the lease option is $490.96 .

what these npvs mean is thatspending $488.10 now ( i.e. , in the present ) is the same , from a financial point ofview , as spending $250 now and $250 next year , while spending $490.96 now is thesame , from a financial point of view , as spending $108 per year for the next fiveyears .

the annual rate of return on investment used in an npv analysis is called thediscount rate because this is the rate at which the value of future sums of money isadjusted downward ( i.e. , discounted ) .

discount rates can be expressed in nominalterms ( so as to include the annual inflation rate ) or in real terms ( so as to show therate of return above the anticipated inflation rate ) .

the example discussed here useda nominal discount rate of 5% , which was equivalent to a real discount rate of 3% ( i.e. , 5% minus the anticipated inflation rate of 2% ) .

the higher the discount rate , the greater the reduction in value over time .

consequently , a key factor in npv analysis is to choose the correct discountrate .

 ( 151 ) .

what is myp and how does it differ from annual contracting ? .

three key differences .

multi - year procurement ( myp ) , also called multi - year contracting , is a specialcontracting authority that congress approves for a few major dod procurementprograms .

the statute covering multi - year contracting for acquisition of property is10 u.s.c .

2306b .

 ( 153 ) key differences between annual contracting,which most dod procurement programs use , and myp include the number of yearsof purchases covered , authority for economic order quantity ( eoq ) purchases , andtermination liabilities .

contracts cover two to five years of plannedpurchases .

the principal difference between annualcontracting and myp concerns the number of years of purchases that can be coveredby a single contract .

under annual contracting , dod is permitted to sign a contractto purchase no more than a single year's purchase of a weapon or platform , and onlyafter congress has provided the necessary funding for that year's purchase .

undermyp , in contrast , dod is permitted sign a contract covering two to five year's ofplanned purchases of that weapon or platform , including the initial year's purchasethat congress has already funded and one to four additional years worth of plannedpurchases that will not be funded until congress passes the dod budgets for each ofthose future fiscal years .

as an example , consider a case in which dod plans to procure a total of 40airplanes during the five - year period fy2004-fy2008 in annual quantities of 4 , 10,10 , 10 , and 6 .

under annual contracting , following enactment of an fy2004 dodbudget that funds the procurement of the first 4 planes , dod could sign a contract topurchase those 4 planes .

a year later , following enactment of an fy2005 budget thatfunds the procurement of the next 10 planes , dod could sign a second contract topurchase those 10 planes .

and so on .

under myp , in contrast , following enactment of the fy2004 budget thatfunds the procurement of the first 4 planes , dod could sign a contract covering upto5 years of planned purchases ( all 40 planes ) , even though congress at this point hasfunded the procurement of only the first 4 planes .

authority for economic order quantity ( eoq ) purchases .

a second difference between annual contractingand myp is that programs approved for myp have the authority to make use ofeconomic order quantity ( eoq ) purchasing .

eoq authority , which is written into10 usc 2306b , permits programs using myp to make up - front batch purchases ofcertain components of all the weapons or platforms being procured under the mypcontract , so as to get better prices on those components from the subcontractors thatprovide them .

ordering components this way can be referred to as o rdering them in e conomic q uantities , which ( after some reversing of word order ) leads to theacronym eoq .

eoq purchases are a principal means by which myp contractingreduces costs compared to annual contracting , and programs approved for myp areexpected to take advantage of eoq purchases so as to generate these savings .

as an illustration using the example from above , if dod has been grantedauthority to sign a five - year myp covering the 40 planes planned forfy2004-fy2008 , dod might bundle together the 50 sets of landing gear intendedfor those planes and order them all together in fy2004 , the initial year of thecontract .

the fy2004 budget for the program consequently would include fundingsufficient to procure not only the first 4 planes , but 40 sets of landing gear as well .

in a detailed presentation of the fy2004 budget request for the program , the fundingfor the 40 sets of landing gear would appear as advanced procurement ( ap ) fundingin support of the myp , sometimes abbreviated as ap ( myp ) .

larger termination liability .

a thirdway in which myp differs from annual contracting is that myp contracts can featurelarger termination liabilities ( i.e. , cancellation penalties ) than annual contracts .

theselarger termination liabilities protect contractors from the financial consequences ofa decision by dod to change its mind in the middle of a multi - year procurement andnot procure the minimum number of units each year established in the myp contract .

specifically , the larger termination liability is intended to ensure that a contractor iscompensated for any investments in work force optimization and improvedproduction equipment that the contractor has made as a consequence of thegovernment's myp commitment , but which the contractor will no longer be able tofully exploit due to dod's change of mind .

the larger termination liability detersdod from changing its mind , giving the contractor confidence that dod will fulfillits myp commitment .

one similarity: full funding policy stillapplies .

one way in which myp does not differ from annualcontracting is that myp programs , like annually contracted programs , are subject tothe full funding policy regarding defense procurement .

obtaining myp authority fora program , in other words , does not exempt that program from the requirement tofully fund each year's worth of procurement .

the up - front eoq purchase in an mypprogram must also be fully funded .

thus , in the example above , the fy2004 budgetmust fully fund the 4 planes being procured that year as well as the 40 sets of landinggear being purchased under eoq authority .

no portion of the procurement cost ofthe 4 planes or the 40 sets of landing gear may be funded in a fiscal year afterfy2004 .

the fy2005 budget must fully fund the 10 planes to be procured infy2005 ( minus the cost of their landing gears , which were paid for in fy2004 ) , andno portion of their procurement cost may be funded in a fiscal year after fy2005 .

and so on .

 ( 154 ) how does use of myp reduce cost ? .

using myp generally reduces the procurement cost of the items coveredunder the myp contract in two ways .

one way , discussed above , is by reducing thecost of components that are procured up - front in large batches through the use of theeoq authority that comes with myp .

the second way that using myp generally reduces the procurement cost ofthe items covered under the myp contract is by giving the prime contractor theconfidence to make investments in work force optimization and improved productionequipment that the contractor would not be able to justify making in a situation ofannual contracting .

under annual contracting , the prime contractor faces someuncertainty about whether procurements planned for future years will actuallyhappen .

myp reduces that certainty and thus makes it less risky for the contractorto make investments in work force optimization and improved production equipmentthat can reduce unit production costs but would make economic sense for thecontractor ( i.e. , generate a sufficient return on investment for the contractor ) only ifthe contractor produces a certain minimum number of units over a period of severalyears .

investments in work force optimization can involve providing extra trainingto workers to improve their productivity , or keeping on the payroll highly productiveworkers who might be laid off after completing their portion of the work involved inproducing a single year's worth of production .

investments in improved productionequipment can involve purchasing new machine tools that make components morequickly , more accurately , or with less waste .

how much does use of myp reduce costs ? .

savings from use of myp vary from program to program , but typically , theycan reduce the combined procurement cost of the items being procured under themyp contract by 5% to 10% .

a significant share of this savings is achieved by usingthe eoq authority that comes with myp .

if an myp program uses a delayed ( andthus smaller ) eoq than would be typical for the program ( a possibility discussed inthe main body of this report ) , then the total savings in procurement costs achievedwould likely be smaller than the typical 5% to 10% .

why not use myp for all dod procurement programs ? .

if using myp can reduce the cost of a dod procurement program , why doescongress grant authority only sparingly , for a few dod programs ? .

one reason is thatcongress as a general practice prefers to avoid taking actions that commit futurecongresses to a particular course of action , which is sometimes called "tying thehands" of future congresses .

permitting the use of myp on a program effectivelyties the hands of future congresses with respect to that program by committing futurecongresses to procuring a certain minimum number of units over a period of severalyears .

in addition to tying the hands of future congresses , myp , by effectivelylocking a program into place for several years , reduces the dod's and congress'options for making adjustments ( particularly downward adjustments ) to the dodbudget to respond to changing military needs or budgetary circumstances .

dod andcongress usually cannot make substantial downward adjustments to myp programsunless they are prepared to incur the sizeable termination liability costs that can bewritten into myp contracts .

as a result , any changes that dod or congress mightneed to make to the dod budget to respond to changing circumstances will now fallmore heavily on the non - myp programs in the dod budget .

the larger the numberof dod programs that are approved for myp , the more heavily the remainingnon - myp programs might have to bear the burden of any downward adjustment inthe dod budget .

shifting all dod procurement programs , or many of them , to mypwould eliminate or significantly reduce dod's and congress' flexibility in adjustingthe dod budget in future years to respond to changing circumstances .

thus , in considering a dod request for myp authority for a particularprocurement program , congress balances the potential savings that can be achievedby using myp on the program against the effect that approving the use of mypwould have in tying the hands of future congresses and reducing dod's andcongress' flexibility in making adjustments to the dod budget in the future torespond to changing circumstances .

this weighing of potential advantages anddisadvantages traditionally has resulted in a situation where only a few major dodprocurement programs at any one time are given myp authority while most dodprocurement programs use annual contracting .

how does congress approve myp ? .

defense appropriation act .

subsection ( l ) ( 3 ) of 10 usc 2306b states that "the head of an agency may notinitiate a multi - year procurement contract for any system ( or component thereof ) ifthe value of the multi - year contract would exceed $500,000,000 unless authority forthe contract is specifically provided in an appropriations act. .

the appropriation actthat usually provides myp authority for dod procurement programs is the annualdefense appropriation act .

the authority is usually granted through a provision intitle viii of the act , which is the general provisions title .

in recent years it has beensection 8008 .

in the fy2003 defense appropriations act , for example , section 8008provided myp authority for the air force c - 130 cargo plane program , the army'sfamily of medium tactical vehicles ( fmtv ) program , and the navy's f / a - 18e / fstrike fighter aircraft program .

defense authorization act .

subsection ( i ) ( 3 ) of 10 usc 2306b states that "in the case of the department ofdefense , a multi - year contract in an amount equal to or greater than $500,000,000may not be entered into for any fiscal year under this section unless the contract isspecifically authorized by law in an act other than an appropriations act. .

the "actother than an appropriations act" where dod myp contracts are authorized isusually the defense authorization act .

in the defense authorization act , myp isauthority is usually granted on a program - by - program basis through separate sectionsin title i of the act ( the procurement title ) .

in the fy2003 defense authorization act,for example , myp authority was provided for the air force c - 130 cargo planeprogram in section 131 , for the army's fmtv program in section 113 , and for dodprocurement of certain chemicals relating to the u.s. space program in section 826 .

in addition , section 121 of the act extended the duration of a previously authorizedmyp for the navy's ddg - 51 destroyer program .

associated committees .

giventhat myp authority for a dod procurement program is usually provided throughprovisions in both the defense appropriation and authorization bills , the granting ofmyp authority for a dod procurement program usually reflects a favorablerecommendation on the issue by the committees with principal jurisdiction over thesetwo bills - - the house and senate appropriations committees and the house andsenate armed services committees , respectively .

what criteria do programs need to meet to qualify for myp ? .

subsection ( a ) of 10 usc 2306b sets forth 6 criteria that dod procurementprograms need to meet to qualify for myp: to the extent that funds are otherwiseavailable for obligation , the head of an agency may enter into multi - year contracts forthe purchase of property whenever the head of that agency finds each of thefollowing: ( 1 ) that the use of such a contract willresult in substantial savings of the total anticipated costs of carrying out the programthrough annual contracts .

 ( 2 ) that the minimum need for theproperty to be purchased is expected to remain substantially unchanged during thecontemplated contract period in terms of production rate , procurement rate , and totalquantities .

 ( 3 ) that there is a reasonableexpectation that throughout the contemplated contract period the head of the agencywill request funding for the contract at the level required to avoid contractcancellation .

 ( 4 ) that there is a stable design for theproperty to be acquired and that the technical risks associated with such property arenot excessive .

 ( 5 ) that the estimates of both the costof the contract and the anticipated cost avoidance through the use of a multi - yearcontract are realistic .

 ( 6 ) in the case of a purchase by thedepartment of defense , that the use of such a contract will promote the nationalsecurity of the united states .

criterion ( 1 ) is intended to disqualify programs where the anticipated savingsfrom using myp are relatively minor and thus not worth the consequences in termsof tying the hands of future congresses and reducing dod's and congress's flexibilityfor making adjustments to future dod budgets in response to changingcircumstances .

the clause previously required a minimum anticipated savings of10% , but was changed in the early 1990s to a requirement for "substantial savings,"which in practice might be understood to mean at least 5% or so , and preferablysomething closer to a minimum of10% .

criterion ( 2 ) is intended to disqualify programs where there might be asignificant risk of dod changing its mind about the need for procuring the item inthe annual and total quantities set forth in the myp contract due to changing militaryrequirements - - a decision which could incur a sizeable termination liability .

criterion ( 3 ) is similarly intended to disqualify programs where there might be asignificant risk of dod changing its mind about the need for procuring the item inthe annual quantities set forth in the myp contract due to a service's inability to fullyfund the program .

criterion ( 4 ) is intended to disqualify programs where there mightbe a significant risk of incurring the potentially high costs associated with issuingchange orders to alter the design of weapons and platforms that are underconstruction .

