while the primary focus of this report is on conditions in the u. s. market , analyses shouldbe carried out in the context of the larger world market .

few actions by consuming , or producingnations , can be properly evaluated independently of the world market .

oil is a fungible , internationalcommodity whose ownership and ultimate destination is determined by market forces once it leavesthe producing country .

no country can effectively isolate itself from changes elsewhere in themarket , nor is it likely that any nation can take actions that do not indirectly affect other nations .

oil prices are linked , like those of other commodities , to the levels of economic activity inthe industrial nations .

demand , both from consumers and industrial users , tends to pick up whengrowth rates of gross domestic product increase and slow down when those growth rates decline .

as a result , oil prices tend to be volatile , at least partly due to variations in the business cycle .

while oil markets may behave like other commodity markets much of the time , the oil marketdoes have unique features .

first , few commodity markets have an institution like the organizationof petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) .

since its creation in 1960 , opec has had a variableinfluence on the price of oil through its member nation quota system .

second , oil has been subjectto supply disruption due to political instability as well as technical factors .

third , psychological orexpectations effects , tied to real or perceived probabilities of market disruption , may lead to pricevolatility .

finally , world oil transactions are settled in u.s. dollars , which affects the value of thedollar in world currency markets , as well as the magnitude of international reserves held bypetroleum importing and exporting nations around the world .

spot market price data for west texas intermediate ( wti ) at cushing , oklahoma , is shownin figure 1 .

 ( 1 ) during thetime period covered in figure 1 , the opec price band for crude oil was at $22 to $28 per barrel .

accounting for quality and location differences between the opec reference crude ( saudi arabianlight ) and wti , prices in the u.s. spot market during 2003 remained close to , or were above , theupper end of the opec price band .

however , prices moderated for several months after thebeginning of the iraq war in march 2003 .

figure 1 .

u.s. spot price of oil , 2003-2005 price increases began in the late fall of 2003 , and continued into 2004 , reaching a yearlypeak of over $53 per barrel in october 2004 .

although prices fell by $10 per barrel by december2004 , they began to rise again in january 2005 , and peaked again at nearly $53 per barrel in april2005 .

 ( 2 ) some insight intofuture spot market prices might be gained by examining nymex futures market prices .

 ( 3 ) for example , in the five daysbefore it terminated trading on july 20 , 2004 , the august 2004 contract on wti at cushing,oklahoma was trading at over $40 per barrel .

as of july 23 , 2004 the september and october wtifutures contracts continued to trade at over $41 per barrel on the nymex .

 ( 4 ) on august 10 , 2004 thenymex futures price for crude oil traded above $45 , a first in the history of the exchange .

on thesame day , the spot market price for wti was at $44.48 .

 ( 5 ) these data accurately suggested that high crude oil prices werelikely to continue for the remainder of 2004 .

by the end of may 2005 , futures prices for the august2005 contract were trading at nearly $50 per barrel and the september 2005 contract was trading at$50.41 per barrel .

these prices suggest that , while the crude oil price might remain volatile , reactingto current market conditions , it is unlikely that prices will return to pre - 2003 price increase levelsfor the remainder of 2005 .

figure 2 shows the behavior of spot market prices for reformulated regular gasoline at newyork harbor .

the price of gasoline has shown a pattern of movement somewhat similar to that ofoil prices .

figure 2 .

u.s. spot market price for reformulated regular gasoline , new york harbor , 2003-2005 gasoline prices peaked in february and august of 2003 .

they then lagged oil prices , notshowing price increases in the fall of 2003 .

however , they did follow oil price increases throughoutthe spring of 2004 , also peaking in may of 2004 .

gasoline prices were volatile for the remainder of2004 .

after the may peak , the price remained approximately 12 cents per gallon lower for the nextfour months .

although the price went above $1.37 per gallon in october 2004 , it finished the yearat $1.07 , about 24% off the may peak .

gasoline spot prices increased in 2005 .

by april 2005 , theprice peaked at over $1.52 per gallon .

on june 3 , 2005 the nymex future prices for gasoline injuly , august , and september were above $1.50 per gallon .

 ( 6 ) as in the oil market , these futures prices suggest that there is likelyto be only modest , if any , moderation in gasoline prices for the rest of the year .

conclusions concerning projected spot prices based on the trading value of current futurescontracts may or may not be accurate .

futures prices process new information and market conditionsquickly and prices can change direction on a daily basis .

the futures price on the nymex and othermarkets is conditional on information available today .

as more information becomes available,futures prices will adjust .

however , futures markets are providing little indication that either oil orgasoline prices might decline in the near term .

the long term ability of the oil market to meet demand depends on the magnitude ofavailable reserves .

an important category of reserves are proved reserves .

proved reserves are thosequantities that geological and engineering analysis suggest can be recovered with high probabilityunder existing technological and economic conditions .

proved reserves can be augmented throughexploration and development of new discoveries , through technological improvements , as well asthrough the existence of more favorable economic conditions .

in the past , all of these factors havecontributed to augmenting the proved reserve base .

whether the proved reserve base grows over time or not depends in part on the level ofproduction .

as production proceeds , the level of proved reserves declines .

as new oil discoveriesare made , recovery technologies improve , or as the price of oil rises , the stock of proved reservesincreases .

a standard measure of the potential availability of oil over time is the reserve toproduction ratio ( r / p ) .

the r / p can be interpreted as the number of years that the existing reservebase can sustain the current level of production .

since both proved reserves and production canchange year - to - year , the value of the r / p is more descriptive as a measure of potential marketviability when considered over time .

table 1 shows the r / p over the past 20 years for the world aswell as various regions .

table 1 shows that on the world level there appears to be little cause for concern that oil isphysically running out .

while the r / p is lower in 2003 than in 1993 it is actually higher than it wasin 1983 .

 ( 7 ) a reasonableestimate , given the political changes since 1983 might be that the ratio has remained roughlyconstant over the past 2 decades , leading to the inference that 2003 levels of consumption seem tobe about as sustainable as 1983 and 1993 levels of consumption were at those times , even though2003 world consumption levels were 17% greater than those of 1993 .

table 1 .

oil reserve / production ratios , selectedyears source: for 2003 and 1993 , bp statistical review of world energy , june 2004. pp .

4 , 6 ; and for1983 , u.s. energy information administration .

international energy annual 1983 .

tables 14 , 30. pp .

30 , 84 .

* europe and eurasian data incomplete because of lack of ussr data for 1983 .

the reserve portion of the ratio shows that the world had access to more reserves in 2003than in 1993 or 1983 .

reserves in 2003 totaled 1.147 trillion barrels .

reserves in 1993 were 1.023trillion barrels , and in 1983 were 723 billion barrels .

these data represent over a 12% increase inreserves for the decade since 1993 , and a 36% increase compared to 1983 .

similarly , worldproduction is greater in 2003 , at 76.7 million barrels per day ( b / d ) , than in 1993 when production was66 million b / d , or 1983 when production was 57.9 million b / d .

this represents an increase inproduction of over 32% compared to 1983 .

 ( 8 ) on a regional level , the most important change between 1993 and 2003 is the weakeningreserve position of north america , and the reserve position of the united states .

on one level , thedata suggest that the u.s. position is improving .

the u.s. r / p has increased from 7.7 years in 1993to 11.3 years in 2003 and total u.s. reserves have also increased to 30.7 billion barrels from 30.2billion barrels in 1993 .

however , the u.s. r / p has increased because u.s. production has declined,from 8.6 million b / d in 1993 to 7.4 million b / d 2003 .

as u.s. total consumption has increased overthe period , the result has been that u.s. imports of oil have increased along with our dependence onother nations and the world oil market .

the declining reserve position of north america in generalmeans that , absent new major discoveries , the united states will continue to depend on the worldmarket , and the opec , persian gulf nations for a large part of its supply .

 ( 9 ) the middle east , and especially saudi arabia , continue to be the largest holders of reservesin the world .

some of the other regional changes in the data reflect changing national and politicalborders as well as oil positions .

european reserves are now dominated by members of the formersoviet bloc , including azerbaijan , kazakhstan , romania , and others .

overall , the data suggest thecontinuation of an integrated world oil market .

any region , or nation , might well experiencedifficulty in trying to implement a singular oil policy , independent of the world market .

another conclusion that might be drawn from the r / p data is that it provides little supportfor the escalated prices of the first quarter of 2004 .

since little has changed in the long term balancebetween reserves and production , it is unlikely that the r / p has been the source of upward pricepressures .

long term oil prices might be affected by reserve and production positions in the future,but r / p ratios do not appear to be a major cause of recent oil price increases .

the world r / p has stayed roughly constant over the past 2 decades because investments havebeen made in exploration , development , and production .

the international energy agency estimatesthat over $3 trillion , or $103 billion per year will need to be invested in the oil sector through 2030if its projections for increased demand materialize .

it estimates that 70% of this total will be spenton exploration and development , with the remainder in refining , transportation and the developmentof non - conventional oil sources .

 ( 10 ) oil industry investment is only partly required to meet new demand .

only 16% of totalinvestment is projected to meet new demand growth .

the remaining 84% is required to compensatefor declining production from the reserve base .

the reason so much investment is needed tocompensate for declining fields lies in the decline rates observed in producing fields .

decline ratesdepend on a wide variety of factors , including geology , extraction technology , field age , andproduction policies .

decline rates range from 4% to over 11% per year .

if production levels are tobe maintained , new reserves and production must continually be developed to compensate , financedby investment in exploration and development .

 ( 11 ) .

after averaging about $23 per barrel for the five year period 1998 to 2002 , the average priceof oil increased to $31 in 2003 .

for 2004 , price remained high , reaching a peak of $53.28 per barrelin october .

 ( 12 ) as ofapril 2005 , the price of oil continued to remain over $50 per barrel , and peaked at $54 per barrel inmarch 2004 .

 ( 13 ) r / panalysis showed that there has been little change in the underlying long term balance in the oilmarket that might be used to justify high prices .

however , a number of short term economicfundamentals as well as the coincidence of a set of singular events affecting the market may haveinteracted in such a way that prices were pushed up .

global oil demand was over 79 million b / d in 2003 , an increase of about 1.8% over 2002levels .

demand for 2004 was over 82 million b / d , an increase of about 3% compared to 2003 levels .

demand projections for 2004 were increased for nine consecutive months by the iea since itsestimate in november 2003 .

world oil demand is expected to exceed 84 million b / d in 2005 .

 ( 32 ) within this pattern ofworld growth , differences among regions , as well as individual countries , exist .

in addition,increased demand is not evenly spread across the product mix that is produced at refineries .

the international energy agency recently reduced its forecast for global oil demand in 2005 .

it estimated that world demand would be 84.3 million barrels per day in 2005 .

this value representsa growth of 1.77 million barrels per day , or 2.2% above 2004 levels .

 ( 38 ) in a typical manufacturing or service market , demand growth of this magnitude might bewelcomed , and met with increased job creation and facility expansion , or more intensive use ofexisting facilities .

conditions in the oil and oil products industries might not be so accommodating .

excess capacity in the crude oil market is low , with most estimates averaging less than 1.5 millionbarrels per day .

if we add the increased estimate of consumption in 2004 to the projected increasein 2005 it is clear that the crude oil industry is likely to be at full production capacity through 2005 .

it has been reported that aramco ( saudi arabia ) has a plan in place to expand production by1 million barrels per day within a year .

non - opec production is expected to increase by about 1.4million barrels per day in 2004 , but only smaller increases are expected in 2005 .

 ( 39 ) high prices , if they persist,can be expected to increase exploration and ultimately production in the longer term if the currentmarket follows past patterns .

the eia's annual energy outlook , 2004 ( aeo ) provides a projection of u.s. energy balanceout to 2025 , and includes scenarios based on different market price assumptions .

price is taken tobe an assumption , rather than a predicted value , because it is assumed to be determined on the worldmarket .

for the base case , the aeo assumes a crude oil price of $23.61 per barrel in 2010 and$26.71 per barrel in 2025 .

for the high price case , aeo assumes a price of $32.80 per barrel in 2010and $34.90 per barrel in 2025 .

 ( 40 ) if the factors that are influencing the current market continue inthe future , it may be that even the high price case assumptions are too low .

the world oil market , as a result of the convergence of a number of factors , has experiencedsignificant tightness since the end of 2003 , continuing through 2004 and the first half of 2005 .

someof the factors influencing the market might be temporary , some may be cyclical , and others maypossibly be permanent .

while the high prices that resulted from the tight balance between oildemand and supply caused increased energy expenditures for consumers , business , and industry , italso led to higher incomes for energy producers .

it is possible that the economy as a whole mightexperience macroeconomic effects , not only from the high oil prices themselves , but as a result ofthe monetary and fiscal policy responses that might be taken if the high prices persist and aredetermined to constitute inflation .

although it has been under pressure in 2003 , 2004 , and into 2005 , the oil market has shownthat the market process is functioning .

the factors discussed in this paper that affected oil andgasoline demand as well as the supply response of opec and other producers caused prices to rise,but there has been little , or no , evidence of physical shortage or supply disruption .

effective policies to mitigate high oil prices are difficult to define at the national level .

theprice of oil is determined on a world market .

it is unlikely that any consuming nation can insulateitself from the forces driving the world market .

for example , if a nation decided to reduce oreliminate its direct dependence on the persian gulf , it might succeed in doing that by buying oil fromother nations .

however , this would reduce the total amount of non - persian gulf oil available toother nations , increasing their dependence on the region and leaving the level of world dependenceunchanged .

if political events in the persian gulf caused the price of oil to rise , that price increasewould be transmitted to all oil produced around the world .

it is not possible to isolate oneself fromthe world market , except perhaps by cutting domestic consumption to the level of domesticproduction .

the market in 2004 was likely affected by a "fear factor" premium on the price of oil , raisingits price above that indicated by market fundamentals .

some estimates of the "fear factor" run ashigh as $15 per barrel , while others rate it at only a few dollars , or nothing at all .

 ( 41 ) the threat of supplydisruption due to potential terrorism or political instability appears to be the source of this pricefactor .

an important question is , how long this factor will influence price ? .

in the past , fears of political instability , especially in the persian gulf , tended to be quelled in relatively shorttime - frames .

today , with the war on terrorism perceived as a long term reality , it may be that oilprices will incorporate a "fear factor" for a significant time .

the nature of the exploration and production cycle in the oil industry encourages majorswings in the price of oil even in more politically stable times .

this cycle makes it difficult forgovernments to time oil policies effectively .

in the past , periods of high oil prices have led to a rapidexpansion of exploration , and given improving technology , have led to substantial oil finds in manyplaces in the world .

as newly discovered extra oil comes on the market several years later , theincreased supply tends to overwhelm demand , causing price to drop .

while demand tends toincrease incrementally , by a few percent per year , supply tends to increase discrete amounts inresponse to a period of high prices .

this relationship leads to cyclic price volatility .

set against thisrecord is the opinion of some that world oil production is soon to peak as a result of geologicalfactors and the likelihood that the largest oil reserves have already been discovered .

 ( 42 ) a major continuing factor in the market is the emergence of china as a major importer ofcrude oil .

in addition , the possibility exists that india , and perhaps other asian nations , might expandtheir imports of oil as industrial production expands in those nations .

although the 2005 projectionof chinese import growth moderates to approximately 7% from the 2003 level of 11.2% , in thelonger term much depends on whether oil use for private automobiles in china expands very quicklyor is moderated by the government .

however , either of these yearly growth rates imply stress forthe world oil market .

based on china's consumption of almost 6 million barrels per day in 2003 , itmay generate increases of demand of 500 thousand b / d or more in the next few years .

in a marketwith very limited excess capacity , and possibly facing the discovery of fewer giant fields , increasesin demand of these magnitudes promise to contribute to an upward pressure on price .

the 2004 , and potentially for 2005 , oil market reflects the influence of a number of factorsall of which have led to upward pressure on price .

although some of these factors might have beenjudged temporary in the past , there is a danger that in the current political environment they mayperpetuate themselves , keeping oil prices well above the opec price target .

