concerns that the economy might be heading toward a recession have led some policymakers to consider economic stimulus legislation .

to judge the efficacy of such proposals , some policymakers have expressed a desire to look back at the economic effects of past policy changes .

proponents of the tax cuts passed in 2001 , 2002 , and 2003 argued that they would have salutary effects on the economy .

particular emphasis was placed on economic stimulus in the short - term .

this report traces out the channels through which the tax cuts are thought to affect the economy and assesses the performance of those economic indicators , including gross domestic product ( gdp ) , employment , interest rates , inflation , labor supply , saving , capital investment , and the trade deficit .

the report uses theory and data to evaluate the tax cuts' effects through 2004 .

 ( this report does not analyze economic developments since 2004 .

presumably , individuals had adjusted their behavior to the tax changes by then , and economic developments since have not been significantly influenced by tax cuts enacted several years earlier. ) .

the report also offers an overview of the forecasts of their effects made at the time the tax cuts were passed .

most estimates predicted that the tax cuts would increase economic growth in the short - term and reduce it in the long run .

despite the wide diversity of the models used , all of the results are relatively small , as would be expected of tax cuts that are relatively small in relation to gdp in the years considered .

three tax cuts have been signed into law in recent years .

this report focuses on provisions of those bills that caused significant revenue loss from 2001 to 2003 .

in 2001 , the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act was signed into law ( egtrra , p.l .

107-16 ) .

its major provisions for 2001-2004 were a reduction in marginal income tax rates , an increase in the child tax credit , "marriage penalty" tax relief , and elimination of the estate tax .

all of these provisions were phased in gradually over several years , and then scheduled to expire due to budget rules ( although it was the framers' stated intent that they become permanent ) .

in 2002 , the job creation and worker assistance act ( jcwaa , p.l .

107-147 ) was signed into law .

its major revenue - side provision was accelerated depreciation for business investment .

in 2003 , the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra , p.l .

108-27 ) was signed into law .

it accelerated the phase in of the main egtrra provisions , with the exception of the estate tax provisions , and extended and expanded the accelerated depreciation in jcwaa .

it also reduced the tax rates on dividend and capital gains income .

in addition , the 2004 working family tax relief act ( wftra , p.l .

108-311 ) extended some provisions of the earlier acts that were slated to expire .

it had no revenue effect in 2004 .

table 1 gives the estimated revenue loss of the tax cuts and their key provisions as scored by the joint committee on taxation at the time the tax cuts were enacted .

estimates of the cost of the tax cuts based on ex post data do not exist .

egtrra was the largest of the tax cuts and most of egtrra's costs are to occur in the out years .

most of the costs of jgtrra and jcwaa occurred in the short - term .

in fact , because accelerated depreciation is a revenue loser in the short - term and revenue raiser in the medium - term , the 10-year cost of jcwaa is smaller than the short - term cost .

in the long run , it was by far the smallest of the three , but of comparable size in the time period considered here .

jgtrra's costs are mainly short - term because it mostly accelerates tax cuts that would have occurred later under egtrra .

all of the tax cuts are temporary and scheduled to expire , although it was the intention of their supporters that egtrra / jgtrra be permanent .

consistent with the goal of short - term stimulus , this report focuses on the effects of the tax cuts through 2004 .

certain provisions that are large in the long run are small to date and will not be explored , most notably the repeal of the estate tax .

other provisions , such as accelerated depreciation , were large in the short run , but not in the long run .

although the costs of the tax cuts are large as a fraction of total receipts , particularly in the out years , the costs as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in the years of interest are small .

the small size of the tax cuts places a low ceiling on their potential economic effects .

this is especially the case when evaluating demand - side effects , where their incremental increase from year to year , rather than their absolute value , is the relevant figure .

in 2001 , the tax cuts ( revenue provisions only ) were equal to 0.4% of gdp , all of which occurred in the second half of the year .

in 2002 , they increased 0.7 percentage points to 1.1% of gdp .

in 2003 , they increased 0.5 percentage points to 1.6% of gdp .

in 2004 , they increased 0.7 percentage points to a projected 2.3% of gdp .

as discussed below , when considering the effects of tax cuts on labor supply and saving , the key measure is marginal tax rates .

as seen in table 2 , the change in average marginal tax rates under egtrra and jgtrra is modest for wages and interest income when fully phased in ; however , egtrra / jgtrra leads to a larger decline in marginal rates on capital gains income and a more than 50% decline in marginal rates on dividend income .

because government spending rose as a percentage of gdp in the years when taxes were cut , these tax cuts can be characterized as wholly deficit - financed tax cuts ( financed by increasing the deficit or decreasing the surplus ) .

this is important to note because deficit - financed tax cuts have a different economic effect than tax cuts financed by reducing spending or raising other taxes in the models described below .

it may be surprising to learn that there is no straightforward way to evaluate how a tax cut has affected the economy .

economists can observe how the economy performed after a tax cut , but because they cannot observe the counterfactual — how the economy would have performed in the absence of a tax cut — there is no direct way to tell what contribution the tax cut made to the economy's performance .

if the economy boomed after a tax cut , there is no way of telling whether the economy would have boomed even if the tax cut had not been passed .

if the economy grew sluggishly after a tax cut , there is no way of telling whether the economy would have grown even more slowly without a tax cut .

econometric research is based on observing variation between data observations to determine correlation between variables .

for studies of individual behavior , variations in the tax cut that individuals receive can be used to establish correlation .

if recipients of a tax cut systematically behave differently than nonrecipients , all else equal , it can be deduced that the tax cut caused that behavior .

unfortunately , in the case of tax cuts , variation between individuals is not independent of other control variables needed to hold all else equal .

the size and eligibility of a tax cut is based on criteria that may strongly influence an individual's behavior .

for example , the size of the marginal tax rate reduction received under egtrra is determined by factors such as income .

yet if the experience of individuals in one income cohort is systematically different than in a different cohort , a tax cut could be erroneously attributed as the cause when some other factor was the cause .

for example , income inequality has been growing in the united states in recent decades because the income of upper - income cohorts has been rising more quickly than lower - income cohorts .

because egtrra gave larger tax cuts to upper - income cohorts on average , the portion of faster income growth caused by growing inequality , unless properly controlled for , would be spuriously attributed to the larger tax cut .

for economy - wide studies , the variation studied is typically over time rather than across individuals .

in the case of a tax cut , this would entail comparing how the economy performed in periods with the tax cut compared to periods without the tax cut .

but because other factors are also changing over time , different control variables are not independent , and causation runs in both directions , it is very difficult to isolate the effect of tax cuts .

for example , consider a tax cut implemented to stimulate the economy in response to a downturn .

comparing economic activity before and during the tax cut , simple correlation could lead to the conclusion that tax cuts cause recessions since the timing of the tax cut is associated with a decline in growth .

some other factor is necessary to control for this "endogeneity" problem .

some econometric methods can overcome the endogeneity problem , but greatly limit the number of control variables that can be employed because of insufficient "degrees of freedom. .

some time series analysis has been criticized for assuming that individuals do not change their reactions in response to changes in the behavior of policymakers ( known as the "lucas critique" ) .

because there have been relatively few major tax cuts or increases in recent history , there are relatively few observations to consider .

in this situation , economists typically predict a tax cut's economic effects by building econometric forecasting models , calibrating the models to match actual economic data , and then running the model with and without a tax cut .

the difference between the two outcomes is said to be the tax cut's economic effects .

notice that this approach does not rely on actual , after the fact data to determine the tax cuts' effects .

these simulations are typically run before the tax cut is implemented , and it is rare for the modeler to go back after the fact and test the accuracy of the prediction .

as shown in the section below , none of the predictions made for egtrra and jgtrra were based on actual ex - post data .

 ( using ex - post data would improve the accuracy of the results , but not avoid all of the problems discussed above. ) .

this method of estimating a tax cut's effects would be less problematic if there were widespread consensus that one particular econometric model could accurately predict economic activity .

in fact , econometric models are sometimes poor predictors of economic activity , even over short periods of time .

although some models have proven capable of making reasonably accurate short - term projections during expansions , no model has proven able to correctly predict turning points in the business cycle on a regular basis .

for example , every month the company blue chip surveys 50 private forecasters .

not one of the 50 forecasters predicted the 2001 recession until april 2001 — a month after the recession had started .

there is little consensus over the correct approach in theory to modeling macroeconomic activity , so there are many competing models that radically differ in basic and fundamental ways .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and joint committee on taxation ( jct ) have responded to this problem by using several different models to offer a range of predictions of a proposal's effects .

as shown below , these models predict that tax cuts will have widely different — sometimes contradictory — economic outcomes .

given these circumstances , it is difficult to argue that model - based predictions offer a reliable proxy for the tax cuts' actual effects .

as discussed above , there is no consensus as to which type of macroeconomic model best describes reality .

each model captures certain aspects of economic behavior well , but no model adequately synthesizes all the different aspects at once .

because economists differ on which aspects of economic behavior are most important , they also differ on which model is preferable for evaluating policy .

no model described below is right or wrong ; each has unique strengths and weaknesses .

but the predicted effects of a tax cut will be highly sensitive to the assumptions of the model used to evaluate it .

because the models are not integrated , a major problem with the estimates is that if there are effects caused by properties that the model being used neglects , the effects will be incorrectly attributed to other properties that are included in the model being used .

for example , if a tax cut boosted aggregate demand , a supply side model would attribute the rise in output to an increase in labor or saving , even though the increase would not necessarily be induced by incentives , would not necessarily be permanent , nor would it necessarily be replicable at a different point in the business cycle .

before egtrra and jgtrra were enacted , a number of simulations were performed that estimated their economic effects using the economic models discussed above .

 ( no estimates of jcwaa's effects were found. ) .

as tax cut proposals move through the policy process , details change .

the estimates presented here are based on proposals that may differ slightly from the policy that was eventually enacted .

it should be stressed that all of the estimates were made before the fact ; none of the estimators examined the data retrospectively to check their accuracy .

nearly all of the simulations showed that the tax cuts would have positive effects in the short run and negative effects in the long run .

often , the long - run effects did not entirely materialize by the end of the traditional 10-year forecast window .

thus , the tax cuts cannot be said to be unambiguously good or bad ; the merits of this tradeoff depend on a policymaker's preferences over time .

this report studied the macroeconomic effects of the tax cuts enacted between 2001 and 2003 .

there is no direct way to determine the effects of a tax cut on the economy because there is no way to observe the counterfactual case where the tax cut did not occur .

estimates were made by comparing the results of macroeconomic models with and without the tax cuts .

these estimates were made before the tax cut occurred , and were not based on actual ex - post data .

unfortunately , there is no consensus among macroeconomists as to which one model is most suitable for policy simulations , and no model with a strong track record in accurately projecting economic events .

the different models vary in fundamental ways , and no one model incorporates every key aspect of economic behavior .

keynesian models focus on the business cycle but neglect the determinants of long - run growth .

neoclassical growth models and intertemporal models concentrate on long - run growth , but do not feature recessions , involuntary unemployment , or monetary policy .

the results generated by intertemporal models are based on assumptions about behavior that most people would find highly unrealistic .

despite the wide diversity of the models used , all of the results are relatively small , as would be expected of tax cuts that are relatively small in relation to gdp in the years considered .

keynesian models predict that deficit - financed tax cuts would boost output during a recession by increasing spending so that slack labor and capital resources are brought back into production .

for the individual income tax cuts , higher consumption in response to higher after - tax income is the channel through which spending is boosted .

this boost in growth is temporary because the growth rate of spending cannot exceed potential production over time .

keynesian macroeconomic models are the only popular model that allows for short - run business cycle fluctuations .

the effect of growth in other macroeconomic models is considered next .

the economy was in a recession of mild depth and average contraction when egtrra was passed .

the recovery was unusually sluggish for the first six quarters , during which jcwaa and jgtrra were passed , before a more normal growth rate took root .

proponents point to the short and mild recession as evidence that egtrra boosted growth .

opponents point to the sluggish recovery as a sign that the tax cuts were ineffective , and credit monetary expansion and normal market forces for the mild recession .

opponents also point to the performance of labor markets as evidence that the tax cuts did not appreciably stimulate spending .

deficit - financed tax cuts reduce public saving ; unless this is offset by higher private saving or borrowing from abroad , national saving will be reduced and interest rates will rise .

most empirical estimates suggest that the offset will be only partial ( because some of the tax cut is not saved ) , and national saving will fall .

the neoclassical solow growth model predicts that a reduction in national saving would reduce economic growth over the medium term by reducing capital investment .

empirical evidence suggests that marginal tax cuts create incentives to work and save more ( referred to as "supply side effects" ) , but the increases in work and saving are too small to offset the reduction in capital accumulation caused by the budget deficit .

thus , on net , the neoclassical model predicts that growth will be reduced by deficit - financed tax cuts .

national saving fell from 2000-2003 , but this did not lead to higher interest rates because investment demand fell even more sharply .

accelerated depreciation , which was the major tax provision in jcwaa and was extended and expanded in jgtrra , was intended to stimulate capital investment spending .

investment spending sharply contracted during and following the recession .

this is not unusual , but it is difficult to make the case that investment spending would have been even lower in the absence of the tax cuts .

jcwaa may have distorted investment decisions toward equipment , which qualified for accelerated depreciation , and away from structures , which generally did not qualify .

equipment spending contracted by 3% from 2001 to 2003 , whereas spending on structures contracted by 21% .

investment spending recovered in 2004 .

deficit - financed tax cuts can be financed through national saving or by borrowing from abroad .

net borrowing from abroad must take the form of a trade deficit .

borrowing abroad will mitigate the rise in interest rates and the "crowding out" of capital investment , but will lead to dollar appreciation that causes exports and import - competing goods to be "crowded out. .

evidence shows that this has occurred , as the trade deficit increased from 4% in 2000 to 5.6% in 2004 .

typically , the trade deficit declines when growth has been low .

for a mild recession , the contraction in employment and rise in unemployment was unusually long lasting — the longest period of employment decline since the great depression .

employment declined throughout and for 21 months after the recession — a post - war record by 10 months .

since the employment contraction was so prolonged , it is difficult to argue it would have been even longer in the absence of the tax cuts .

in keynesian models , tax cuts boost employment and reduce unemployment by boosting aggregate spending .

the other macroeconomic models do not feature involuntary unemployment , and make no prediction that tax cuts will affect unemployment .

"supply - siders" focus on the incentives that tax cuts provide to work and save more .

however , marginal tax cuts could theoretically lead to more or less work because tax cuts also reduce the labor and saving required to meet income targets .

 ( tax cuts without marginal effects , such as the child tax credit , unambiguously reduce work and saving. ) .

it is an empirical question as to the size and direction of these effects .

most estimates for labor supply are positive and very small for primary earners , and somewhat larger for secondary earners .

no evidence of supply - side effects from the tax cuts exists thus far .

hours worked and labor force participation both declined after the tax cuts were passed .

this was likely due to cyclical factors , which suggest that supply - side effects are not large enough to outweigh other factors .

even in 2004 , when the expansion picked up steam , there was still no aggregate increase in labor supply .

private sector saving increased after the tax cuts , but this was due to an increase in business saving .

supply - side analysis predicted that reductions in individual income taxes ( particularly reductions in taxes on dividends and capital gains ) would lead to higher personal saving by individuals , but personal saving fell between 2000 and 2004 .

