u.s. farmers grow more than 250 types of fruit , vegetable , tree nut , flower , ornamental nursery , and turfgrass crops in addition to the major bulk commodity crops .

in 2006 , specialty crop production accounted for $53.3 billion , or 44% , of total u.s. crop receipts ( 22% of total receipts for crops and livestock ) .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) traditionally has not subsidized specialty crops as it has bulk commodities such as wheat , feed grains , soybeans , cotton , rice , dairy , peanuts , tobacco , and others ( about two dozen commodities in all , often referred to as "program commodities" ) .

nonetheless , over several decades congress has authorized a wide range of programs — especially crop insurance and marketing orders — intended to facilitate the growth and benefit the economic health of the specialty crop sector .

relatedly , when congress gave commodity program producers planting flexibility in the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-127 , the 1996 farm act ) , it included a provision prohibiting them from planting fruit and vegetable crops on program acres .

congress renewed this provision in the 2002 farm act ( p.l .

107-171 ) .

government programs affecting the sector are not limited to usda .

the department of commerce and the u.s. international trade commission are the agencies to which specialty crop growers can turn for assistance if they suspect that foreign countries are selling their products in the united states at less than fair value ( a practice called "dumping" ) .

the food and drug administration ( fda , within the department of health and human services ) is responsible for assuring the safety of specialty crops for human consumption , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) regulates the safety of pesticides used on specialty crops and sets tolerances for permissible residues ( which are enforced by fda ) .

the department of labor administers programs that help provide the workforce growers need to harvest major specialty crops at certain times of year , regulate working conditions , and support continuing education and employment assistance .

since world war i , congress has allowed the temporary immigration of foreign workers ( generally referred to as guest workers ) to perform agricultural labor of a seasonal nature if enough u.s. workers cannot be found .

this policy has been of particular importance to produce growers in california and the pacific northwest .

the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of homeland security , and the department of state are involved in administering the system generally referred to as the h - 2a program ( after the name of the authorizing section in the immigration and naturalization act of 1952 ; ( sec.101 ( a ) ( 15 ) ( h ) ( ii ) ( a ) ) .

employers must demonstrate to dol that sufficient domestic workers are not available and that employment of foreign workers will not adversely affect u.s. workers who are similarly employed .

the department of homeland security handles the visa determinations , and a department of state foreign office issues the visas .

dol administers a number of programs intended to benefit domestic agricultural workers , whose lives tend to be characterized by poverty , frequent moving , and chronic unemployment and underemployment .

since 1964 , dol has conducted a national farmworker jobs program to provide job training and employment assistance , in order to increase the income and stability of farmworker families .

under the migrant and seasonal agricultural worker protection act ( 29 u.s.c .

1801 et seq .

 ) , dol also is responsible for monitoring farm labor contractors and the wages , working , and housing arrangements of migrant and seasonal laborers , among other things .

dol's occupational safety and health administration administers workplace and field safety and sanitation requirements .

additionally , there are special provisions for the education of farmworkers' children under the no child left behind act ( department of education ) .

