geographically and by population , poland is the largest of the countries recently admittedinto the european union ( eu ) and nato ; with 38 million citizens , poland is now the 6th mostpopulous country in the eu .

and with strong growth rates and a gdp exceeding $200 billion , it isa major player economically , especially in central and eastern europe .

some foreign policy analystsargue that , if it continues on its current path , poland may well emerge as a leading nation in europe - - particularly within the eu and nato .

this report provides background information on recentu.s. - polish relations , a summary of poland's political situation and economic conditions , and adescription of poland's major foreign policy initiatives , mainly with neighboring states .

poland and the united states have enjoyed close relations over the years .

the reagan andgeorge h. w. bush administrations actively supported poland's efforts to shake off communism .

the clinton administration strongly advocated poland's candidacy for nato membership,beginning with clinton's speech before the polish parliament in 1994 and ending with his signatureon the instruments of ratification on may 21 , 1998 .

president george w. bush visited poland duringhis first official trip to europe in june 2001 ; then - national security advisor condoleezza rice hascharacterized poland as a "strategic partner" to the united states .

 ( 1 ) warsaw has been a particularly reliable supporter and ally since the terrorist attacks ofseptember 11 ; it has aided u.s. efforts in the global war on terrorism , and has contributed troops tothe u.s. - led coalitions in both afghanistan and iraq .

over the past year , however , many poles haveconcluded that their country's involvement in iraq has increasingly become a political liability,particularly on the domestic front .

with elections likely in 2005 , the government announced indecember 2004 that it would maintain a presence in iraq , but that troop levels would be drawn downafter the january 30 iraqi elections .

some poles are of the view that their loyalty to the united stateshas gone unrewarded , and hope that the bush administration still might respond favorably to polishrequests for increased military assistance , iraq reconstruction contracts to polish firms , and changesto in u.s. visa policy .

since the collapse of communism , poland has conducted active and independent domesticand foreign policies .

successive governments have advanced economic reforms that generally haveresulted in a successful transformation to a market economy .

corruption remains a serious problem,but the print and broadcast media have increasingly put a spotlight on corruption cases , a practicethat some analysts believe should result in reduced public tolerance and an increase in legal prosecutions .

despite reports of graft , foreign investors have continued to enter polish markets,helping fuel steady economic growth .

poland has had a dynamic political life as well , with each ofthe post - 1989 elections resulting in a change in government from left to right or vice versa .

pollssuggest that this pattern may continue with the next parliamentary elections , scheduled for lateseptember 2005 .

poland's external relations , deeply influenced by its history , have also been dynamic .

warsaw has integrated into the nato and eu , and has proactively promoted its perceived nationalinterests in those institutions , as well as bilaterally with neighboring states .

in addition to joiningthe alliance , poland has looked to its security by modernizing its military ; it has been acquiring newweapons systems and reorganizing and downsizing its armed forces .

to the east , poland has soughtto promote democracy in ukraine and to normalize relations with belarus and russia .

to the west,poland has shown a willingness to confront its new eu partners on issues of national importance .

poland's relations with the united states have been positive , particularly since 9 / 11 .

warsaw hassupported u.s. policies in the global war on terrorism , in afghanistan and in iraq - - where it assumeda leading role .

but over the past year , poles have increasingly expressed disillusionment with theiraq mission and disappointment that the united states has not rewarded their country's loyalty andsacrifices .

the government has announced a phased troop withdrawal .

some analysts argue that , if it continues on its current path , poland may well emerge as aleading nation in europe .

although most analysts do not anticipate major changes in polish foreignpolicy in the near future , some believe that it is inevitable that poland will draw closer to the euover the long term .

