meeting highway capacity needs while protecting the environment is a challenging task formany states .

in order to receive federal highway funding , several environmental requirements mustbe met .

the clean air act requires states with poor air quality to demonstrate that plans to expandhighway capacity would conform with their plans to control emissions , referred to as "transportationconformity. .

a state may be denied access to federal highway funds if conformity is notdemonstrated , or if air quality plans are determined to be inadequate .

as required by the nationalenvironmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) , the potential environmental impacts of all highway andtransit projects are also subject to review prior to the approval of federal highway funds for finalproject design , property acquisition , or construction .

while air quality impacts are a prominentconsideration in the approval of many projects , other common environmental impacts include waterpollution from contaminated runoff and the loss of wetlands or other natural habitat that may occurfrom clearing the land for construction .

such impacts would need to be mitigated as a condition ofapproval for federal highway funds .

environmental permits or other documentation may also berequired before certain aspects of a project may proceed .

to address potential conflicts between surface transportation needs and environmental quality , congress has established numerous programs and authorities intended to help mitigate pollutionresulting from highway construction and travel .

the most recent multi - year funding authorizationfor these activities was provided in the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 , p.l.105-178 ) , which expired on september 30 , 2003 .

this law authorized a total of $218 billion forfederal highway and transit programs from fy1998 through fy2003 .

it set aside approximately $9billion of this amount for air quality projects , authorized tax benefits for cleaner - burningalcohol - based fuels , and permitted states to exempt certain low - emission vehicles from highoccupancy vehicle ( hov ) lane requirements .

tea - 21 also made funding available for mitigatingwater pollution from highway runoff , and authorized funding for environmental research and thedevelopment of advanced vehicle technologies .

the most controversial issues for the reauthorization of federal highway and transit programs have been the amount of funding to provide for surface transportation infrastructure needs and howto allocate this funding among the states .

demonstration of conformity with air quality requirementsand the performance of environmental reviews are pertinent to these overall funding issues , as theyplay a major role in the approval of federal highway funds for individual projects .

transportationstakeholders , including numerous state departments of transportation and transportation advocacyorganizations , argue that extending the time frame for conformity would provide more time tocontrol emissions and that streamlining the environmental review process would be more efficient,thereby speeding project delivery .

on the other hand , some environmental organizations haveexpressed concern that such changes may compromise environmental protection .

there also has been significant interest in the adequacy of funding for air quality projects under the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) .

states andenvironmental organizations advocate significantly increasing the funding for this program , in lightof emissions reductions that states may soon need to make in order to attain stricter federal air qualitystandards for ozone and fine particulates .

stakeholders have expressed differing levels of interestin other environmental issues regarding the adequacy of funding for the mitigation of water pollutionfrom highway runoff , research on how surface transportation impacts the environment , and thedevelopment of advanced - vehicle technologies .

whether to extend tax benefits for renewablealcohol - based fuels , and whether to expand the exemption for low - emission vehicles from hov lanerequirements , are also issues .

this report provides background information on activities intended to help mitigate pollution resulting from highway construction and travel , and analyzes key issues for congress .

this reportis a resource document for the reauthorization debate and will not be updated .

 ( for a discussion ofreauthorization legislation , see crs report rl32454 , environmental provisions in surfacetransportation reauthorization legislation: safetea ( s. 1072 ) and tea - lu ( h.r.3550 ) ; crs report rl32226 , highway and transit program reauthorization legislationin the 2nd session , 108th congress ; crs report rl32032 , streamlining environmental reviewsof highway and transit projects: analysis of safetea and recent legislative activities ; crs report rl32106 , transportation conformity under the clean air act: in need of reform ? .

 ; andcrs issue brief ib10128 , alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles: issues incongress . ) .

slower growth in motor fuels excise tax revenues that support the federal highway trust fundis a significant consideration in determining how much funding is available for surface transportationinfrastructure and related environmental needs .

during the previous authorization cycle , robustgasoline sales led to a substantial increase in trust fund revenues .

congress used the greateravailability of funds to significantly expand most highway and transit programs , including numerousenvironmental activities .

however , the fiscal climate of the current authorization cycle is morerestrictive , due to a smaller balance in the trust fund as a result of slower growth in motor fuelsexcise tax revenues .

the limitation on available funding has made it more challenging to balancehighway capacity needs with protecting the environment and other competing priorities .

in addition to deciding how much funding is made available for environmental activities , the category of funding under which these activities would be authorized will be a critical factor indetermining whether their support is insured .

tea - 21 established a new budget category ofdiscretionary spending guarantees that function as a "firewall" to ensure a minimum level of fundingfor the majority of highway and transit programs , including most environmental activities .

guaranteed funding is separated from the rest of the discretionary budget in a way that prevents theuse of federal highway trust fund revenues for any other purpose , and as such , is not subject toreduction in the annual appropriations process .

 ( 1 ) in addition to guaranteed funding , tea - 21 authorized traditional discretionary funding for certain programs , which is entirely subject to the annual appropriations process .

in appropriationssubsequent to tea - 21 , congress did not fully support the authorized levels for some of thetraditional discretionary funding for environmental programs , such as those for clean fuel buses,environmental research , and advanced vehicle technologies .

consequently , an issue for thereauthorization of environmental programs is the extent to which funding for them should befirewalled to guarantee support for their implementation .

motor vehicles have become cleaner in operation with the gradual tightening of federalemission standards since 1965 .

 ( 2 ) however , the risein the number of vehicle miles traveled has offsetsome of the reductions in air pollution achieved by more advanced emission controls .

 ( 3 ) as a result,motor vehicles continue to be major sources of air pollution , including ground - level ozone,commonly referred to as smog .

 ( 4 ) emissions frommotor vehicles continue to contribute significantlyto poor air quality in numerous metropolitan areas , making it difficult for some states to comply withemissions limits in their state implementation plans ( sips ) to attain and maintain the nationalambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) .

 ( 5 ) howto meet public needs for greater highway capacitywhile controlling emissions is a major issue for states with areas that are in nonattainment with thenaaqs and areas that must maintain them , as the availability of federal highway funding in theseareas is dependent on the state demonstrating that its transportation plan conforms to the emissionsbudget for motor vehicles in its air quality plan .

in order to reduce conflicts between highway capacity needs and air quality requirements , congress has authorized the use of federal highway funds for various projects that would reducevehicular emissions .

the majority of the air quality funding authorized in tea - 21 was allocated tothe cmaq program .

federal transit funding has also been made available to local transit agenciesfor the purchase of clean fuel buses .

congress has also authorized tax benefits to encourage theproduction and sale of renewable alcohol - based fuels that reduce vehicular emissions and petroleumconsumption .

in addition , states have had the flexibility to allow the single - occupant use of certainlow - emission vehicles in high occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lanes , in order to encourage the purchaseof cleaner vehicles .

further background information on transportation conformity and specific airquality programs and authorities , and key issues for congress , are discussed below .

in addition to contributing to air pollution , highway travel and constructionactivities can impair water quality .

runoff from highways can deposit a variety ofpetrochemicals and other potentially hazardous substances into adjacent waterwaysand wetlands , which can migrate over time throughout a watershed and result inviolations of water quality standards .

highway runoff is basically a "nonpoint"source that is more difficult to quantify and control than a conventional "point"source , such as a water discharge pipe from a stationary facility .

in seeking federal funds for new highway construction , states must consider the potential impacts of highway runoff on water quality and wetlands during theenvironmental review process , required by nepa .

depending on the extent of theseimpacts , mitigation , such as storm water management systems , may be required toprevent or minimize the potential for pollution .

if wetlands would be lost as a resultof new highway construction , other measures , such as mitigation "banks" may berequired in order to make up for these losses .

tea - 21 established a preference forthe use of these banks to address the impact of new highway construction onwetlands .

 ( 13 ) the costs of water pollutionmitigation and the replacement of wetlandsis typically absorbed as part of the total costs for a new highway construction project .

however , many highways were constructed prior to more recent requirements for the installation of storm water management systems , or other water pollutionmitigation measures .

consequently , many waterways adjacent to highways havebeen contaminated from years of runoff and are in need of environmental restoration .

in response to these needs , congress has provided authority for states to use federalhighway funds for environmental restoration or mitigation projects to address waterpollution from existing highways .

eligibility for these projects is provided under thesurface transportation program in general , and under the transportationenhancements set - aside within this program .

the conditions of eligibility under eachauthority and key issues for congress are discussed below .

the majority of research and development activities that are supported withfederal highway funds focus on how to improve the overall function and safety of thenation's surface transportation system , in order to meet travel needs .

a relativelysmall fraction of federal highway funds has been devoted to researching theenvironmental impacts of highway travel or developing environmentally beneficialtechnologies .

some argue that more highway resources should be devoted toenvironmental research and development in light of the impacts of vehicular travelon air and water quality .

others counter that highway capacity and safety needsshould remain the focus of research funded with motor fuels tax revenues , and thatother federal agencies , such as epa or the department of energy , already conducta variety of activities to research pollution from motor vehicles and developadvanced vehicle technologies .

while tea - 21 authorized the secretary oftransportation to establish an environmental research program , it was neverimplemented due to lack of funding .

tea - 21 also authorized a program to developadvanced vehicle technologies , but its implementation has been limited due toinsufficient funding .

many stakeholders at the state and local level have expressed long - standingconcerns that the environmental review process for highway construction projects can be overly time - consuming and can impose additional costs .

some statetransportation departments and transportation advocacy organizations supportrevisions to certain elements of the process that could speed project delivery.however , environmental organizations have expressed concern that changes to theprocess might weaken environmental protections .

they also argue that lengthyenvironmental reviews are sometimes warranted due to the scope of proposedalterations to the natural landscape and the potential effects of increased trafficcapacity on air and water quality .

the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , p.l .

91-190 ) requires all federal agencies to consider the environmental impacts of their proposed actions.to ensure that these impacts are considered before final decisions are made , neparequires federal agencies to provide a detailed statement of environmental impactsfor every proposed federal action significantly affecting the quality of theenvironment .

the "detailed statement" has been subsequently referred to as anenvironmental impact statement ( eis ) .

the eis must include a description of theproject's purpose and need , an analysis of all reasonable project alternatives , adescription of the affected environment , and the environmental consequences ofimpacts to the affected environment of each alternative .

 ( 19 ) the eis must alsodemonstrate that appropriate comments were solicited from relevant federal , state andlocal agencies and from the public .

relevant agencies obligated to provide commentsare those with jurisdiction by law or special expertise with regard to theenvironmental impacts of the project .

if it is not clear whether a project would have significant impacts , an environmental assessment ( ea ) must be prepared .

an eis is required if significantimpacts are identified at any time during preparation of the ea .

otherwise , a findingof no significant impact ( fonsi ) will be issued .

projects that do not individuallyor cumulatively have a significant social , economic , or environmental impact areexcluded from the requirement to prepare an ea or eis .

such projects are processedas a categorical exclusion ( ce ) , which according to the federal highwayadministration , account for about 91% of all highway projects .

state agencies arerequired to provide fhwa with documentation to prove the action qualifies as a ce.the type of documentation required will depend upon the project .

final designactivities , property acquisition , or project construction cannot proceed until one ofthe following occurs: an action is classified as a ce , a fonsi is approved for an ea,or an eis is approved .

 ( for further discussion , refer to crs report rl32024 , background on nepa implementation for highway projects: streamlining theprocess. ) .

the federal highway administration reports that approximately 3% of all federally funded highway projects have a significant enough impact on theenvironment to require the preparation of an eis .

these projects have received about9% of all federal highway funds .

while these amounts represent a relatively smallportion of projects and overall funding , projects requiring an eis are usually largeand costly and affect sizeable populations .

consequently , construction delays can becontroversial .

the federal highway administration has indicated that the planningand construction of a major highway project typically takes between 9 and 19 years,depending on size and complexity .

of these projects , the preliminary design andenvironmental review process accounts for one to five years of this time .

to reduce the approval time for highway projects and speed the delivery of federal highway funds to states and local areas , congress included provisions insection 1309 of tea - 21 which require the secretary of transportation to streamlinethe environmental review process .

environmental streamlining can generally bedescribed as cooperatively establishing realistic project development time framesamong transportation and environmental agencies , and then working together toadhere to those time frames .

the department of transportation has taken numerousadministrative actions in response to this requirement , but has not issued finalregulations to put streamlining into practice on a national scale .

while the clinton administration did submit a streamlining regulatory proposal in may 2000 , it was widely criticized on numerous grounds by congress , the states,highway interest groups , and environmental organizations .

the principal criticismswere that it did not fully address the requirements of tea21 , and that it would haveadded new elements to the planning and development process that may have resultedin further project delays .

due to the these concerns , the bush administration withdrew the proposal in september 2002 , and indicated that a new proposal would not be forthcoming untilit is clear how congress may address the issue during surface transportationreauthorization .

in the interim , president bush has issued an executive order whichdirects federal agencies to expedite environmental reviews for high - prioritytransportation projects , and has established specific goals to reduce the time framesfor review .

 ( 20 ) hearings were held during the 107th congress to examine the streamlining issue , and streamlining has been discussed in hearings on surface transportationreauthorization during the 108th congress .

in the conference report on tea - 21 ( h.rept .

105-550 ) , congress stated its expectation that the secretary oftransportation would implement the streamlining requirements through theregulatory process .

some members have expressed their disappointment that fiveyears after the enactment of the law , streamlining regulations have yet to be finalized .

the lack of final regulations has increased interest in further legislative action tospeed project delivery and meet public demands for transportation infrastructure .

