congress might consider reforms to the nation's immigration system , and , thus , the detention of noncitizens ( aliens ) in the united states may be an issue .

congressional interest in the policy of detaining noncitizens in the united states while determining whether noncitizens should be removed from the united states tends to be varied .

for example , while some want to increase the categories of aliens who are detained and increase the amount of detention space , others want to create alternatives to detention and exempt asylum seekers from mandatory detention .

in addition , immigration enforcement activities affect the need for and allocation of detention resources .

for example , as the department of homeland security ( dhs ) expands programs to locate removable aliens from jails throughout the country , dhs may need additional detention beds in areas of the united states where traditionally there has not been a need for detention space .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides broad authority to detain aliens while awaiting a determination of whether they should be removed from the united states and mandates that certain categories of aliens are subject to mandatory detention ( i.e. , the aliens must be detained ) by dhs .

aliens not subject to mandatory detention may be detained , paroled , or released on bond .

any alien can be detained while dhs determines whether the alien should be removed from the united states .

approximately half of the detained aliens have committed a crime while in the united states , have served their criminal sentence , and are detained while undergoing deportation proceedings .

other detained aliens include those who are arrested in the united states for being illegally present , or who arrived at a port - of - entry without proper documentation ( eg , fraudulent or invalid visas , or no documentation ) , but most of these aliens are quickly returned to their country of origin through a process known as expedited removal .

the majority of aliens arriving without proper documentation who claim asylum are held until their "credible fear hearing," but some asylum seekers are held until their asylum claims have been adjudicated .

this report provides an overview of immigration detention in the united states .

it begins with a discussion of the authority to detain noncitizens while awaiting a determination of whether the noncitizen is removable from the united states .

the report continues with a discussion of the resources for immigration detention and concludes with a discussion of legislation in the 112 th congress related to detention .

the report also presents general policy issues surrounding detention of aliens , including concerns about the number of aliens subject to mandatory detention ; the justness of mandatory detention , especially as it is applied to asylum seekers arriving without proper documentation ; and the proper limits on the length of time in detention for aliens who have been ordered removed but cannot be returned to their home country .

in the 112 th congress , bills were introduced that covered a range of provisions and perspectives concerning the detention of noncitizens .

several bills — including h.r .

100 and h.r .

1274 — would have mandated that dhs increase the amount of detention space .

in addition , other bills ( eg , h.r .

933 , s. 1258 ) would have required the propagation of regulations concerning detainee care , and expanded the alternatives to detention program .

other proposed legislation , such as h.r .

713 , would have made changes to the mandatory detention provisions , providing the administration with more discretion on who should be detained .

only one bill , h.r .

1932 , received any congressional action .

on october 18 , 2011 , the house judiciary committee reported the keep our communities safe act of 2011 ( h.r .

1932 ) .

among other things , h.r .

1932 would have codified and modified the conditions for post - removal order detention .

the bill would have allowed dhs to detain indefinitely , subject to six - month reviews , an alien under orders of removal who could not be removed if ( 1 ) there was a significant likelihood that the alien would be removed in the reasonably foreseeable future ; ( 2 ) the alien would have been removed but for the alien's refusal to cooperate with the dhs secretary's identification and removal efforts ; ( 3 ) the alien had a highly contagious disease that posed a public safety threat ; ( 4 ) release would have had serious adverse foreign policy consequences ; ( 5 ) release would have threatened national security ; ( 6 ) release would have threatened the safety of the community , and the alien had either been convicted of one or more aggravated felonies or other designated crimes or been convicted of one or more crimes of violence and due to a mental condition or personality disorder was likely to engage in future acts of violence ; or ( 7 ) release would have threatened the safety of the community , and the alien has been convicted of at least one aggravated felony .

the bill would have limited habeas corpus reviews of such detention and related actions or decisions to the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

also , the bill would have permitted unlimited detention of certain aliens during pending removal proceedings .

proponents of h.r .

1932 contended that legislation is needed to prevent criminal aliens who cannot be removed to their home countries from being released and committing additional crimes .

they argued that the supreme court in zadvydas v. davis ( 2001 ) , did not deny congress the authority to provide for extended periods of detention .

indeed , they contended that the court "invited" congress to amend existing law to clarify circumstances and procedures under which extended detention would be permissible .

nonetheless , others argued that the criminal justice and civil commitment systems already exist to keep dangerous individuals away from the public .

they also contended that h.r .

1932 would allow for the prolonged , unnecessary , and expensive detention of asylum seekers and other immigrants by preventing bond determination hearings and limiting habeas corpus review to the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

the number of noncitizens in immigration detention and the funding for immigration detention has increased fairly steadily over the past decade .

under law , there is broad authority to detain noncitizens in the united states while awaiting a determination of whether the alien should be removed from the country .

in addition , the law specifies certain categories of aliens that must be detained while the secretaries of dhs and the attorney general , operating through their delegates , can parole or release on bond aliens who are not mandatory detainees .

aliens in immigration detention have certain rights , but the courts have afforded the administration much discretion in decisions related to where aliens are detained , the management of detention facilities , and the treatment of aliens .

congressional interest in detention policy has included hearings and legislation dealing with concerns about the number of aliens subject to mandatory detention ; the justness of mandatory detention ; detention conditions ; and the proper limits on the length of time in detention for aliens who have been ordered removed but cannot be returned to their home country .

