farmers have always modified plants and animals to improve growth rates and yields , create varieties resistant to pests and diseases , and infuse special nutritional or handling characteristics .

such modifications have been achieved by crossbreeding plants and animals with desirable traits , through hybridization , and other methods .

now , using recombinant dna techniques , scientists also genetically modify plants and animals by selecting individual genes that carry desirable traits ( eg , resistance to a pest or disease ) from one organism , and inserting them into another , sometimes very different , organism , that can be raised for food , fiber , pharmaceutical , or industrial uses .

karl ereky , a hungarian engineer , coined the term "biotechnology" in 1919 to refer to the science and the methods that permit products to be produced from raw materials with the aid of living organisms .

according to the convention of biological diversity , biotechnology is "any technological application that uses biological systems , living organisms , or derivatives thereof , to make or modify products or processes for specific use" ( article 2 ) .

according to the fao's statement on biotechnology , "interpreted in a narrow sense , ... [biotechnology] covers a range of different technologies such as gene manipulation and gene transfer , dna typing and cloning of plants and animals. .

since genetically engineered ( ge , sometimes called genetically modified organism or gmo ) crop varieties first became commercially available in the mid - 1990s , u.s. soybean , cotton , and corn farmers have rapidly adopted them in order to lower production costs and increase crop yields .

proponents point to the emergence of "second generation" ge commodities that could shift the focus of biotechnology from the "input" side ( creating traits that benefit crop production , such as pest resistance ) to the "output" side ( creating traits that benefit consumers , such as lower - fat oils ) .

these second generation products could offer enhanced nutritional and processing qualities and also industrial and pharmaceutical uses .

future products are expected to be livestock - as well as crop - based .

critics , meanwhile , complain that biotechnology companies generally have not yet delivered the consumer benefits they have been promising for years .

incidents of regulatory noncompliance have continued to spike concern about the adequacy of regulatory structures .

in december 2008 , a small amount of unapproved ge cotton was harvested along with commercially available ge cotton .

the unapproved ge cotton variety produces a pesticide that is a plant - incorporated protectant ( pip ) .

in august 2006 , traces of an unapproved variety of ge rice were reported in commercial rice samples from parts of the southern united states ( see " ge rice ," below ) .

these incidents have added to the ongoing interest in a number of public policy questions .

what are the environmental and food safety impacts of ge crops and animals ? .

what obstacles and opportunities are exporters of ge crops encountering in the global marketplace ? .

is the current u.s. regulatory framework , which is based primarily upon statutory authorities enacted before the rise of agricultural biotechnology , adequate for these new technologies and products ? .

after a ge variety is approved for release into the environment on a test basis , the owner of the ge seed generally petitions aphis for "deregulated status" of the particular ge "event" that has been approved .

this is the last step to full - scale commercialization of the ge plant .

once the ge plant is deregulated , it is no longer subject to aphis regulation under the ppa ( 7 c.f.r .

part 340 ) .

a significant step in the deregulation process involves an assessment of the plant's environmental impact .

the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requires federal agencies to prepare a detailed environmental impact statement ( eis ) for all "major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. .

nepa requires that environmental analyses use an interdisciplinary approach "which will insure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design arts in planning and in decisionmaking. .

the regulations governing the finding of a significant effect are promulgated by the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) .

when an eis is not categorically required , an agency may determine , from the data already at hand , that the environmental impacts are not significant enough to warrant an eis .

this judgment permits the agency initially to prepare an environmental assessment ( ea ) rather than the lengthier and more detailed eis .

an ea is a public document that briefly provides the basis for determining whether to move forward with an eis or to make a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) .

several cases over the past several years have raised issues about the adequacy of aphis's regulatory structure in moving to deregulate a ge plant .

aphis on several occasions has issued a fonsi on the basis of an ea and deregulated a ge plant , only to have that decision decisively challenged in court .

in april 2011 , aphis announced that it was soliciting letters of interest to participate in its national environmental policy act pilot project to explore ways of improving the eas and eiss to mitigate the increasingly contentious deregulation process .

the u.s. approach to biotechnology regulation contrasts with that of many major trading partners .

for example , the european union ( eu ) , japan , south korea , new zealand , and australia either have or are establishing separate mandatory labeling requirements for products containing genetically modified ingredients ; in many of these countries , consumer and official attitudes toward ge foods are more skeptical .

differing regulatory approaches have arisen at least partly because widely accepted international standards continue to evolve .

incidents , such as those discussed below , have disrupted u.s. exports and contributed to trade tensions .

in the united states , many consumers may be wary of ge foods out of fear that introduced genes could prove allergenic , introduce increased toxicity , or otherwise be harmful to human health .

some critics express concern that fda is placing all the responsibility on manufacturers to generate safety data , as it does normally under its pre - market approval system , and is reviewing only the conclusions of industry - sponsored studies rather than conducting its own tests .

they also believe that the process lacks transparency and adequate public scrutiny of data .

others counter that additional testing and oversight are unnecessary because all foods must meet the same rigorous federal safety standards regardless of whether they are genetically engineered .

in july 2004 , the institute of medicine and the national research council ( iom / nrc ) of the national academies of science released a report generally supporting the proponents' view .

the iom / nrc found that food safety should be assessed based on the composition of the altered food ( eg , whether it contains new compounds , unusually high levels of nutrients , or other significant traits ) rather than how the food was produced ( by genetic engineering or conventional methods ) .

however , the iom / nrc determined that the safety of modified foods should be assessed on a case - by - case basis and cautioned that scientists' current ability to predict adverse consequences of genetic changes is limited .

federal policy also does not require ge - derived foods to be so labeled as long as they are substantially the same as their conventional counterparts .

nonetheless , some consumer groups continue to seek mandatory labeling of all ge foods .

these groups argue that u.s. consumers , like their eu counterparts , should have an opportunity to see all relevant information on labels so that they can make food choices based on their own views about its perceived quality or safety .

the food and biotechnology industries generally oppose compulsory labeling .

they contend that consumers might interpret ge labels as "warning labels" implying that the foods are less safe or nutritious than conventional foods , whereas the industry believes the preponderance of scientific evidence indicates otherwise .

the industry has also asserted that mandatory labeling would require development of a costly and possibly unattainable supply chain management system to ensure that ge and non - ge foods remain segregated from the farm to the store , with no added benefit to the consumer .

the industry has asserted that if consumers want to purchase ge - free products , the market will support a voluntary system , as exists for organic foods ( where rules already prohibit ge foods from being called "organic" ) .

in fall 2012 , californians voted on proposition 37 , which would have required labeling of all foods containing ge material .

opponents of labeling , including many large food companies and grocery outlets , spent heavily to defeat the proposal .

in 2014 , vermont became the first state to pass a mandatory ge labeling law .

the law will not be implemented until july 2016 .

connecticut and maine also passed mandatory ge labeling laws in 2013 and 2014 , respectively , but they will not go into effect until five contiguous states also pass mandatory ge labeling laws .

the framing of the debate over ge products as one of "sound science" versus "politics" is a central dynamic in the public controversy over ge products , not just in and between the united states and the eu but increasingly as a factor in the acceptance of ge products in less - developed countries ( ldcs ) , particularly those countries with historical ties to europe .

for poor countries without a well - articulated regulatory regime or scientific infrastructure for the introduction of ge products into their countries , the "science - based regulation" framing of the issue in the united states that underlies their promotion of ge crops conflicts with the eu precautionary principle .

for ldcs that trade extensively with the eu , the introduction of ge crops that are banned by their trading partners is a factor in the acceptance or rejection of ge crops and foods within their own countries .

political pressures to ban ge cultivation , to label ge foods , and to reinforce doubts about risks and benefits have limited the expansion of ge products in many ldcs .

as noted above , several major biotechnology firms have essentially abandoned their plans to increase sales of ge seed in the eu .

opposition to new plant varieties and foods ( eg , ge eucalyptus trees , ge apple ) and mandatory labeling efforts in the united states are also increasing and could further dampen public acceptance of ge foods in ldcs .

the ongoing ge debate in the eu and u.s. about perceived risks can influence the public acceptance of ge foods and crops in ldcs .

with the successes , however limited at this time , that the anti - ge forces have had in the united states and eu to limit the expansion of ge agriculture , the biotechnology industry is turning to the ldcs as their most promising future market .

this development , however , may be occurring at the same time the technology is beginning to offer food products that consumers and small producers in poor countries may find more attractive than the traits of herbicide tolerance and / or pest resistance that have appealed to large - scale commodity producers .

to date , the major ge crop cultivated in ldcs is cotton .

pest resistant food crops , increased nutritional quality of foods widely consumed in poor countries , and the promise of higher yields in arid climates or where soils are less fertile are ge traits that could , in coming years , find greater acceptance in ldcs than they have in the industrial economies .

also , as indigenous agricultural science and technology expertise develops , genetic engineering for local cropping systems and locally consumed foods could become more readily accepted by the public in the future .

new ge technologies could also help attenuate the opposition to the current varieties of ge plants .

in asia , particularly china and india , governments view ge varieties as a way to produce more food for burgeoning populations , despite some in - country opposition and support for labeling ge products .

china has been researching ge corn , cotton , wheat , soy , tomatoes , and peppers since 1986 .

currently , china has over 10 million acres planted to ge varieties , mostly upland cotton .

as china's urban population grows , the country is likely to begin considering planting ge soy and corn .

if so , it would be the first time a ge plant was used widely as a staple food , and may influence the decisions of other asian countries with regard to accepting ge foods .

in the debate over the potential contribution of biotechnology to food security in developing countries , critics argue that the benefits of biotechnology in such countries have not been established and that the technology poses unacceptable risks .

they also suggest that intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection gives multinational companies control over developing country farmers .

proponents say that the development of ge technology appears to hold great promise , with the potential to complement other , more traditional research methods , as the new driving force for sustained agricultural productivity in the 21 st century .

they maintain that ipr difficulties have been exaggerated .

differences on this issue were featured in 2002 , when the united nations ( un ) world food program ( wfp ) announced an appeal for food aid to meet the needs of some 14 million food - short people in six southern african countries: lesotho , malawi , mozambique , swaziland , zambia , and zimbabwe .

however , a debate over the presence of genetically modified corn in u.s. food aid shipments made the provision of food aid more difficult and costly .

some of the countries expressed reluctance to accept unmilled ge corn on account of perceived environmental and commercial risks associated with potential introduction of ge seeds into southern african agriculture .

zambia refused all shipments of food aid with ge corn out of health concerns as well .

in march 2004 , angola said it too would ban imports of ge food aid , including thousands of tons of u.s. corn , despite a need to feed approximately 2 million angolans .

the united states has blamed eu policies for southern african countries' views on food aid containing ge products .

the united states maintains that genetically modified crops are safe to eat and that there is little likelihood of ge corn entering the food supply of african countries for several reasons , including the fact that current bioengineered varieties of corn are not well adapted to african growing conditions .

south africa is the only african country to commercialize biotech crops widely .

however , as table 1 above shows , developing countries , as least those with regulatory regimes in place , have become more accepting of ge crops .

concerns that an industrial cropping system is also highly dependent on the ge seeds , research , and inputs owned by a handful of global agro - food corporations is also a theme in the debates over ge crops and food in ldcs .

there is concern that ge technology concentrates power and resources with large multinational corporations that own intellectual property rights in these technologies .

there is fear that this could permit the corporations that dominate biotechnology to exploit farmers and limit their right to save and exchange seeds .

the biotechnology industry believes that its proprietary seeds can offer innovation and superior performance and play an important role in lessening the environmental impact of agriculture through soil improvements , cleaner water , fewer pesticides , and reduced fuel use .

the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) of the united nations has also offered a qualified endorsement of agricultural biotechnology , stating that it "can benefit the poor when appropriate innovations are developed and when poor farmers in poor countries have access to them... .

thus far , these conditions are only being met in a handful of developing countries. .

biotechnology research and development should complement other agricultural improvements that give priority to the problems of the poor , fao said , adding: "regulatory procedures should be strengthened and rationalized to ensure that the environment and public health are protected and that the process is transparent , predictable and science - based. .

other groups have been more pointed in criticizing ge crops , arguing that they can have hidden costs that are inadequately examined by biotechnology advocates .

a related question is the definition of "mixing" and whether there should be a threshold de minimis amount of ge material permissible in non - ge material .

"adventitious presence" ( ap ) , or low - level presence ( llp ) , refers to any incidental appearance of very small amounts of foreign material in a commodity , food , or feedstuff .

this can occur at any time during production , harvesting , storage , or marketing .

beyond setting thresholds , and developing testing protocols , a related issue is assessing liability if such mixing does occur , or if ge plants prove harmful to the environment .

for example , to what extent , if any , should biotechnology companies share liability with producers and others who use their products ? .

presently in the grain business , even shipments of the highest grades are permitted to contain some specified low levels of unwanted material , such as weeds , damaged kernels , and / or stems and leaves .

corn graded no .

1 , for example , may contain up to 2% foreign material .

as more crops and acreage are devoted to ge varieties , it becomes increasingly difficult , if not impossible , to avoid their trace presence in non - ge varieties .

no internationally recognized standards have existed for what amounts , if any , of ge material should be permitted in a non - ge crop , especially if that crop or a food derived from it will be labeled as non - ge .

in the absence of international standards ( and given the increasing global sourcing of food ) , individual countries are establishing their own , often varying , ap thresholds .

the lack of consistent , scientifically sound standards is confusing consumers and disrupting trade , the biotech industry has asserted .

for example , eu regulation sets a tolerance level for non - gm foods , feeds , and processed products at 0.9% .

all products with more than 0.9% must be labeled as gm .

u.s. agricultural interests consider the eu regulation in particular to be unworkable and discriminatory .

eu officials counter that their standards not only are reasonable but also are being demanded by consumers .

these issues , like that of different approval processes for ge crops in the united states and european union , will loom large in any forthcoming u.s. - eu trade discussions .

 ( see also " u.s. - eu regulatory conflicts " above. ) .

in its january 23 , 2004 , notice , aphis asked for comments on if , and how , its regulations should address the llp question for ge plant material .

questions include whether such presence should be exempt from regulation , what thresholds ( levels ) of low - level presence ( llp ) might be acceptable , and under what conditions .

major grain and biotechnology industry organizations responded by urging the fda , epa and aphis to establish a policy governing llp .

in march 2007 , aphis published a federal register notice describing how the agency responds when llp of regulated ge materials occurs in commercial seed or grain that may be used for food or feed .

in the proposed aphis regulation revisions discussed above , aphis had proposed establishing criteria under which the occurrence of llp may not be cause for agency remedial action .

the new provision would permit aphis to determine that a llp event is non - actionable when the criteria support the conclusion that the llp is unlikely to result in the introduction or dissemination of a plant pest or noxious weed .

a provision in the 2012 house farm bill ( h.r .

5973 ) , would have required usda to begin developing an llp standard .

the provision was not included in the final bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

two main issues continue to drive the science and public debate on the environmental impacts of ge plants , and now , ge salmon .

one issue is the transfer of the introduced genes to wild plants and non - gm crops ( i.e. , gene flow from ge plants ) .

this was most clearly seen with ge alfalfa and ge sugar beet .

because they are pollinated by the wind and bees , contamination of organic and conventional alfalfa is a distinct possibility .

with ge sugar beets , the concern is that it could contaminate table beets and swiss chard , two closely related species .

similarly , with ge salmon there is some probability , however small , that the fish could escape into the wild and breed with native salmon , thereby wiping out native atlantic salmon .

as other ge fish are approved , the problem of escape into the wild will mount .

the second environmental issue concerns the indirect effects of the ge crops themselves on the local environment .

widespread planting of crop varieties engineered to be resistant to glyphosate herbicide , trademarked by monsanto as roundup , has , after 15 years , created significant weed resistance , leading to the development of newer ge varieties that are tolerant of older and ( some would argue ) potentially more environmentally harmful herbicides ( eg , 2 , 4-d , dicamba ) .

a survey of thousands of u.s. farmers found that 49% had problems with herbicide - resistant weeds in 2012 and that over 40 million acres in the united states now have weed resistance problems from glyphosate resistance .

this weed resistance is increasing annually .

according to the international survey of herbicide resistant weeds , in 2013 there were 29 species of weeds around the world with some level of resistance to glyphosate .

weed resistance to glyphosate is also a major problem in brazil and argentina .

biotechnology advocates claim that ge crops offer environmental advantages over conventionally produced organisms .

they note that the technology is more precise than traditional methods like crossbreeding .

the latter methods transfer unwanted and unanticipated characteristics along with the desired new traits from one organism to another .

biotechnology also has made it possible to apply fewer and less toxic chemical herbicides and insecticides and to reduce soil tillage ( thereby decreasing erosion and improving soil fertility ) , supporters of the technology assert .

critics counter that genetic engineering is not like traditional breeding .

it creates crop and animal varieties that would not otherwise occur in nature , posing unpredictable risks to the environment ( and to human health ) , they point out .

because they are living organisms , ge crops are difficult to control , greatly increasing the potential for escaping into the environment , crossbreeding with and overtaking wild species , and generally disrupting the natural ecosystem , critics believe .

for example , ge , herbicide - tolerant seeds or pollen could create "superweeds" that out - compete cultivated or wild plants , critics argue .

a 2002 nas / nrc report stated that it could find no new distinctions between the types of environmental risks posed by ge plants and those posed by more conventionally bred crops ( and that , in fact , there is a need to re - evaluate the potential environmental effects of the latter ) .

the study concluded that the current aphis regulatory system for biotechnology had improved substantially since it was first initiated and is more rigorous than the environmental oversight for other agricultural products and practices .

the study did find areas of concern , including the need for greater transparency and public input into the regulatory process , and for more ecological monitoring after ge plants are approved and enter the marketplace .

a 2004 nas / nrc report cited studies to conclude that some ge organisms are viable in natural ecosystems and can breed with wild relatives .

the report urged developers of ge organisms to consider biological techniques such as induced sterility in order to prevent transgenic plants and animals from escaping into the environment .

"because no single bioconfinement method is likely to be 100% effective," and because few are well - developed , such developers should create a redundant system by using more than one method of containment .

the report called for more research to improve both containment methods and public confidence in regulation .

in may 2004 , a separate report by university of arizona and texas a&m university researchers confirmed the spread of ge corn into a nearby field of non - ge corn .

in september 2004 , a team of researchers from the environmental protection agency confirmed the spread of ge grass pollen to non - ge grass up to 13 miles away , much further than previous studies would have indicated .

worldwide , hundreds of ge plants are under development for use as "factories" for pharmaceuticals ( and other industrial compounds ) .

between 2004 and 2007 approximately 485 acres in the united states were planted to regulated ge plants for field testing of plants producing pharmaceuticals , industrial compounds , and value - added chemicals for human consumption or phytoremediation .

none of these compounds has been commercialized to date .

pharmaceuticals might include , for example , vaccines or medicines for forms of cancer , infectious diseases , cardiovascular and nervous system diseases , metabolic disorders , and agents of biowarfare .

a national research council report in 2004 recognized that "biopharm crops pose a wholly different order" of environmental and human health risks .

aphis announced in 2007 that an environmental impact statement was being prepared for field trials of a transgenic sunflower that in engineered to produce human proinsulin , which tests have shown to be structurally , chemically , and functionally the same as pharmaceutical grade human insulin .

proponents believe plant - based pharmaceuticals will provide a far more cost - effective alternative to conventional pharmaceutical production , which now requires major investments both in large volumes of purified culture mediums and in manufacturing plants .

plant - based pharmaceuticals , on the other hand , may be more easily incorporated into the existing agricultural infrastructure , providing a significant new source of farm income , they believe .

critics are concerned about impacts on the food supply if crops like corn ( the most widely planted u.s. crop , an intensively researched plant for biotechnology , and also an airborne pollinator ) are "pharmed. .

in 2002 , for example , material from ge - altered corn plants that had been test - planted in a prior growing season in nebraska for pharmaceutical use ( for prodigene , inc. ) was inadvertently mixed with some 500,000 bushels of soybeans , which had to be quarantined by usda to keep them out of the food supply .

usda officials observed that the soybeans never reached the food or feed supply , evidence that current regulatory oversight is effective .

some critics argue that ge plants producing pharmaceuticals and industrial compounds should be evaluated by criteria different from those used to evaluate crops intended for food .

others have argued that biopharm plants should not be food crops .

concerns persist among both consumer groups and the food manufacturing industry about producing ge plant - made pharmaceuticals in food crops .

some want 100% prevention systems in place before the first product is commercialized .

some of these groups suggest that only non - food crops should be used for ge plant - made pharmaceuticals , or that , at a minimum , pharmaceutical crops should be banned from agricultural areas where food and feed crops are produced .

other potential issues include whether manufacturers of plant - based pharmaceuticals will be able to maintain consistency in dosages and overall quality , and unanticipated environmental problems ( eg , threatening endangered species ) .

responding to such concerns , aphis published in the march 10 , 2003 , federal register a notice tightening permit conditions for its 2003 field tests of ge plants with pharmaceutical and industrial traits .

the changes included ( 1 ) doubling the minimum distance allowed between traditional corn fields and test sites of pharmaceutical or industrial corn ; ( 2 ) for all pharmaceutical crops ( corn and other ) , doubling fallow zones around test sites ; ( 3 ) restricting what can be grown on a test site and fallow zone in the next growing season ; ( 4 ) using dedicated machinery ( eg , harvesters , planters ) and storage facilities only for pharmaceutical production — adequate cleaning for other uses is no longer acceptable ; ( 5 ) submitting for aphis approval equipment cleaning and seed cleaning and drying procedures ; ( 6 ) increasing aphis field site inspections from one per season to five per season plus two visits the following year to look for any volunteer plants ; ( 7 ) more record - keeping and training requirements .

aphis issued a letter on january 14 , 2004 , aimed at clarifying and updating its previous guidance on permits .

the proposed aphis revisions for regulating ge plants discussed above would put ge plants expressing pharmaceuticals or industrial compounds in a risk category where the engineered trait had a high potential for harm .

it is not the highest risk category .

aphis equated the biopharmed plants with a poplar engineered to produce enzymes for heavy metal remediation .

more recently , a variety of rice , produced by california - based ventria bioscience , has been developed that contains human genes .

the rice , nearly ready to be approved for commercial production , produces some of the human proteins found in breast milk and saliva .

the developers say the rice could be used to treat children with diarrhea in poor countries .

the rice developers have received preliminary approval for growing the rice on 3,000 acres in kansas .

the company plans to harvest the proteins from the rice and use them in various food products .

in early august 2006 , a u.s. district court judge in hawaii ruled that aphis had violated the federal endangered species act ( p.l .

93-205 ) and the national environmental policy act ( p.l .

91-190 ) because it had failed to consider potential impacts on endangered species and critical habitats prior to approving field trials for pharmaceutical corn on more than 800 acres throughout the hawaiian islands .

the four companies issued the permits by aphis were prodigene , monsanto , hawaii agriculture research center , and garst seed .

all of the companies' plants used to make pharmaceutical crops had been harvested before the suit was filed and the companies stopped planting the crops under the permits .

spokesmen for both syngenta , which subsequently bought garst , and monsanto , said at the time they no longer intend to pursue research into making drugs from plant crops .

in the coming decade , several policy issues are likely to be at the center of attention by industry , consumer groups , and policymakers .

from a general perspective , some of the issues revolve around managing the coexistence of traditional agricultural production with the increased presence of ge - based agricultural production .

this issue was a major source of conflict in the decision to deregulate ge alfalfa and sugar beets .

in some respects , the policy and regulatory issues may not be fundamentally new or different from the biotechnology issues of the past 20 years .

rather , certain issues are increasing in importance as the industry matures , technologies evolve , and these longer - standing regulatory issues take new forms .

while not exhaustive , some of these issues may include: evolving technologies , including the introduction of new "stacked trait" varieties — plant varieties with multiple genetically engineered traits — which is likely to increase ; continuing development and the eventual commercialization of ge plant - based industrial and pharmaceutical output traits ; oversight of second - generation biotechnology traits such as improved nutritional qualities and resistance to environmental stress ( eg , drought ) ; transgenic animals and the food and industrial / pharmaceutical products derived from them ; animal welfare concerns ; importation of ge products ; developing a low - level presence standard for unapproved ge materials in food and feed products ; legal challenges to environmental assessments of transgenic plants and animals ; issues related to transparency and the participation in policy and regulatory issues by various stakeholders ( eg , consumers , religious groups , animal welfare activists ) ; compliance with existing and emerging regulatory structures in the united states and our trading partners , particularly the european union ; testing and measurement issues ; traceability and labeling of ge products .

as noted above , the evolution of herbicide - resistant weeds , especially those resistant to glyphosate , is a growing concern .

as herbicide resistance increases among weed varieties , there could be increased reliance on herbicides that are arguably less benign than glyphosate ( eg , dicamba , 2,4 d ) .

biotechnology companies have engineered new plant varieties that are tolerant to these herbicides , or varieties where several herbicide - tolerant traits are "stacked" into a single variety .

the environmental effects of the increasing herbicide resistance and the resort to other herbicides may become policy issues as companies commercialize these new varieties .

