since the 1970s , private saudi citizens , saudi government ministries , saudi government charitable committees , and international islamic charity organizations based in saudi arabia have provided financial and relief assistance to muslims around the world .

this has included the provision of assistance to individuals and groups engaged in or victimized by various nationalist and religious conflicts .

similar public and private saudi efforts have financed religious education and proselytization programs in dozens of muslim - majority and muslim - minority countries .

in places such as afghanistan , pakistan , the philippines , chechnya , bosnia , indonesia , nigeria , kashmir , kosovo , and the west bank and gaza , some of these activities appear to have provided financial or material support to individuals or groups actively involved in terrorism , armed violence , or the propagation of divisive religious ideologies .

in 2007 , the u.s. department of state reported that , "saudi donors and unregulated charities have been a major source of financing to extremist and terrorist groups over the past 25 years. .

official u.s. government concerns about this trend were apparent prior to the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , which amplified public criticism within the united states of alleged saudi involvement in terrorism or of saudi laxity in acting against terrorist groups .

various critics have accused the saudi government of directly supporting terrorism and of creating a permissive environment that has allowed funding to flow to terrorists and extremists .

the final report released by the bipartisan national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) indicates that the commission "found no evidence that the saudi government as an institution or senior saudi officials individually funded [al qaeda]. .

the report also states , however , that saudi arabia "was a place where al qaeda raised money directly from individuals and through charities" and indicates that "charities with significant saudi government sponsorship" may have diverted funding to al qaeda .

the bush administration's statements on saudi arabia's counterterrorism policies have praised new saudi efforts to combat terrorist financing , while generally confirming accounts that suggest that the activities of some saudi entities and individuals have contributed to the spread of terrorism and extremism over time .

in april 2008 , undersecretary of the treasury for terrorism and financial intelligence stuart levey told the senate finance committee that the saudi government is "serious about fighting al qaeda in the kingdom , and they do," and argued that saudi officials' "seriousness of purpose with respect to the money going out of the kingdom is not as high. .

he added , "saudi arabia today remains the location from which more money is going to... sunni terror groups and the taliban than from any other place in the world. .

this report: reviews allegations of involvement by saudis in terrorist financing together with saudi rebuttals ; discusses the question of saudi support for palestinian organizations and religious charities and schools ( madrasas ) abroad ; analyzes recent steps taken by saudi arabia to counter terrorist financing ( many in conjunction with the united states ) ; and suggests some implications of recent saudi actions for u.s. counterterrorism policy .

in the aftermath of the september 11 attacks , numerous allegations have been leveled against the saudi arabian government and prominent saudi citizens regarding financial support for international terrorist groups .

although many of the allegations fault the saudi government for failing to act decisively to close down channels of financial support , some critics go so far as to accuse saudi government officials of responsibility for the september 11 attacks through design or negligence and for the continuing threat posed by the perpetrators or by like - minded terrorist groups .

since september 11 , u.s. government officials have welcomed "undeniable progress" in the saudi arabian government's efforts to combat terrorist financing , while maintaining concern that "wealthy donors in saudi arabia are still funding violent extremists around the world , from europe to north africa , from iraq to southeast asia. .

the following are summaries of the more publicized post - september 11 reports of alleged saudi involvement in terrorist financing .

support for palestinian causes and the provision of humanitarian aid to palestinians has long been an important component of saudi foreign policy , and many saudis identify strongly with the palestinian people and view support for palestinian causes as a religious , cultural , or , in some cases , political obligation .

repeated allegations made by israeli and western sources have contended that saudi support for palestinian institutions and individuals has directly or indirectly supported palestinian terrorist groups , although public reporting has not conclusively linked official saudi government support to palestinian terrorist organizations .

some reports suggest that hamas maintains a significant fund - raising infrastructure inside saudi arabia .

saudi arabia , like other arab states , recognizes the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) as the legitimate representative of the palestinian people .

a 2002 saudi government report stated that overall government and private aid to palestinian causes had reached $2.61 billion .

currently , saudi officials say that government support to palestinian causes , approximately $80 million to $100 million per year , goes solely to the palestinian authority , which was established pursuant to the israeli - palestinian agreement of september 13 , 1993 , known as the first oslo accord .

following the january 25 , 2006 , elections for the palestinian legislative council in which hamas won a majority of the votes , saudi officials indicated that funding support for the palestinian authority would continue .

according to press reports , saudi officials promised $20 million to cover immediate needs on the part of the palestinian authority .

on march 19 , 2006 , prince saud al faisal stated the saudi position , saying that "humanitarian assistance is not given to a government .

it is given to a people ..." to help them deal with a difficult humanitarian situation .

saudi arabia made significant efforts to support a palestinian unity government prior to the intra - palestinian violence of early 2007 , and , in december 2007 , saudi arabia pledged between $500 and $750 million to the palestinian authority over three years .

charitable giving ( zakat ) is a religious obligation for muslims , constituting one of the five "pillars of islam. .

many wealthy saudis contribute approximately 2.5 percent of their annual income or more to charitable causes and relief organizations that fund religious education programs , orphanages , hospitals , and other development projects both within saudi arabia and around the world .

one expert estimates saudi charitable donations , in general , to be about $3 billion to $4 billion annually , of which 10-20% is disseminated abroad .

saudi officials estimate that $100 million in charitable donations are directed abroad each year .

as part of the government's effort to combat potential terrorist financing activities , saudi charities reportedly are now prohibited from sending funds abroad , although international charities headquartered in the kingdom continue to raise funds for international activities via saudi banks and private saudi citizens may direct domestic and externally - held assets to overseas charitable endeavors .

it seems clear that challenges to internal security and terrorist incidents in saudi arabia have impelled the saudi leadership to devote heightened attention to countering the financing of terrorism .

this has been particularly true since mid - 2003 , when terrorists began mounting a series of attacks on residential and office compounds , apparently in an effort to target the saudi government as well as the western presence in saudi arabia .

both u.s. officials and independent observers have welcomed the mechanisms that saudi authorities have put in place with the aim of stemming the flow of funds destined for terrorist groups .

they point out , however , that the effectiveness of these measures will be tested by the degree to which saudi authorities succeed in implementing the various regulations that have been established in recent years .

to date , u.s. officials have continued to express approval of changes in saudi policy along with disappointment with saudi enforcement measures , particularly with a lack of public prosecutions for individuals accused of financing terrorism outside of the kingdom .

several committees and members in the 108 th and 109 th congresses expressed interest in these issues and held hearings and introduced legislation relating to u.s. - saudi cooperation in the fight against terrorism and terrorist financing .

section 575 of the fy2005 omnibus appropriations bill ( p.l .

108-447 ) prohibited saudi arabia from receiving aid or any direct assistance from the united states unless the president exercised waiver authority and certified that saudi arabia was "cooperating with efforts to combat international terrorism and that the proposed assistance will help facilitate that effort. .

the president exercised this waiver by presidential determination 2005-38 on september 26 , 2005 , and provided $200,000 in terrorism financing assistance ( nadr - ctf ) to saudi authorities .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l .

108-458 ) required the president to submit to congress within 180 days a strategy for collaboration with the people and government of saudi arabia , including a framework for cooperation on efforts to combat terrorist financing .

in the 110 th congress , section 2043 of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act ( p.l .

110-53 , signed august 3 , 2007 ) finds that "the kingdom of saudi arabia has an uneven record in the fight against terrorism , especially with respect to terrorist financing," and requires the administration to submit a report 180 days after enactment describing the long term strategy of the united states , "to work with the government of saudi arabia to combat terrorism , including through effective measures to prevent and prohibit the financing of terrorists by saudi institutions and citizens. .

the document submitted in january 2008 does not describe a strategy for future counter - terrorist financing cooperation with saudi arabia , but does review in general terms saudi actions to date to improve their counter - terrorist financing measures .

members of congress may seek to support executive branch efforts to encourage implementation of new saudi laws and regulations .

hearings and inquiries seeking specific information about terrorist financing threats and monitoring u.s. and foreign government efforts to strengthen regulatory regimes , implementation capacity , and enforcement may improve public consideration of these issues .

intelligence considerations may limit the degree to which officials can publicly discuss terrorist financing threats and u.s. and foreign responses .

domestic political considerations and information security requirements may continue to limit the saudi government's willingness to enforce existing regulations , particularly to prosecute prominent alleged financiers .

