churches jeopardize their tax - exempt status under internal revenue code ( irc ) § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) if they participate in campaign activity .

legislation has been introduced in the past several congresses that would allow churches to engage in at least some campaign activity without risking their § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status .

churches would still be subject to applicable campaign finance laws .

this report provides an overview of tax and campaign finance laws and discusses these bills .

for further analysis of the legal restrictions on electioneering activities by churches , see crs report rl34447 , churches and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

bills introduced in the 110 th , 109 th , 108 th , and 107 th congresses would have allowed churches to engage in some amount of political campaign activity without risking their tax - exempt status .

each bill addressed the issue in a different way .

thus , they provide examples of various approaches congress could take , if it so chose , to amend the tax code's prohibition on campaign activity by churches .

no such legislation has yet been introduced in the 111 th congress .

none of the bills would have changed the reporting requirements under current law .

churches , unlike most tax - exempt organizations , are not required to file an annual information return ( form 990 ) with the irs .

tax - exempt organizations permitted to engage in political activities are generally required to report information about those activities on the form's schedule c. thus , while the bills would have permitted churches to engage in campaign activities , they would not have required churches to report to the irs on those activities .

h.r .

2275 would have repealed the political campaign prohibition in irc § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) .

thus , it would have allowed churches and other § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations to engage in all types of campaign activity without jeopardizing their tax - exempt status .

the bill did not expressly impose any limitation on the amount of permissible campaign activity .

however , the existing requirement in i.r.c.§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) that organizations be "organized and operated exclusively" for an exempt purpose would appear to require that any such activity have been insubstantial .

churches and other organizations would have still been subject to tax on their political expenditures , thus possibly providing a disincentive to engage in activities with associated taxable expenditures .

it appears the bill would have allowed churches and other § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations to establish § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) separate segregated funds to conduct election - related activities .

churches would have still been subject to applicable campaign finance laws .

under h.r .

235 , the houses of worship free speech restoration act , churches would not have been treated as participating in campaign activity "because of the content , preparation , or presentation of any homily , sermon , teaching , dialectic , or other presentation made during religious services or gatherings. .

this rule would have applied for purposes of § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status , eligibility to receive tax - deductible contributions under § 170 ( c ) ( 2 ) , various estate and gift tax provisions ( §§ 2055 , 2106 and 2522 ) , and the § 4955 excise tax on political expenditures .

the bill clarified that no church member or leader would be prohibited from expressing personal views on political matters or elections during regular religious services so long as those views were not disseminated beyond the service's attendees .

dissemination would have included a mailing with more than an incremental cost to the church and any electioneering communication .

the bill expressly stated that it did not permit disbursements for electioneering communications or political expenditures prohibited by feca .

it appears that h.r .

235 would have permitted activities such as the express endorsement of a candidate by church leaders and others during religious services , requests for contributions to candidate committees and other political committees during religious gatherings , and written endorsements in church bulletins and inserts .

any expenditures for these activities would not have been subject to the § 4955 tax .

the bill would not have allowed churches to set up § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) separate segregated funds or change existing campaign finance laws .

h.r .

235 , an earlier version of the houses of worship free speech restoration act , was identical to the version introduced in the 109 th congress except it did not reference irc §§ 2055 , 2106 , 2522 and 4955 nor did it include the clarification concerning church leaders .

while this version did not provide an exception from the § 4955 tax , it would seem from a practical standpoint that this difference between the two versions could be insignificant because many of the activities permitted under the bills would have little or no associated expenditures .

the provision in h.r .

4520 , former section 692 ( safe harbor for churches ) , was only briefly in the bill before the house ways and means committee struck it by unanimous consent .

it would have done several things .

first , churches would not have been treated as participating in campaign activity solely because of their religious leaders' private statements .

second , churches that unintentionally intervened in a political campaign would not have lost their tax - exempt status or eligibility to receive deductible contributions unless the church or its religious leaders had done so on more than three occasions during the year .

third , unintentional violations of the § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) prohibition would have been subject to a new excise tax .

if the church had at least three unintentional violations during the year , the tax would have equaled the highest corporate tax rate multiplied by the church's gross income , contributions , and gifts .

if the church had two violations , then the tax would have equaled that amount divided by two .

if the church had one violation , then the tax would have equaled the full amount divided by 52 .

the tax would have been reduced by any amount imposed under § 4955 .

this bill was more restrictive than the others because it would have only permitted unintentional violations of the campaign prohibition and even those violations would have been fined .

thus , this bill was specifically targeted at removing the risk that churches that inadvertently engaged in campaign activity could lose their tax - exempt status , as opposed to permitting churches to engage in such activity .

the impact of the provision addressing religious leaders' private statements could be unclear because it could be interpreted as simply codifying existing law .

h.r .

2357 and s. 2886 , the houses of worship political speech protection act , would have allowed § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) churches to engage in campaign activity so long as it was "no substantial part" of a church's activities .

s. 2886 — but not h.r .

2357 — clarified that the bill would not allow disbursements for electioneering communications not permitted under feca .

h.r .

2357 received a floor vote on october 2 , 2002 , and failed to pass by a vote of 178 to 239 .

the "no substantial part" test , which is currently used to measure § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations' lobbying activities , is a flexible standard .

thus , the bills would have required each church to be judged on a case - by - case basis as to whether its campaign activities were a substantial part of its activities .

churches would have been allowed to engage in any type of campaign activity ; however , the § 4955 tax could have discouraged churches from conducting activities with associated taxable expenditures .

it could be unclear the extent to which the bills would have permitted churches to establish § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) separate segregated funds without overstepping the "no substantial part" rule .

churches would have still been subject to applicable campaign finance laws .

under , h.r .

2931 , the bright - line act of 2001 , a church would only have violated the campaign prohibition if it normally made expenditures for campaign activity in excess of 5% of its gross revenues .

lobbying expenditures could not have normally exceeded 20% of its gross revenues , and the church could not have normally spent more than 20% of its gross revenues on campaign and lobbying activities combined .

the bill did not define the term "normally. .

the bill would have permitted churches to routinely engage in any type of campaign activity without risking their tax - exempt status so long as their expenditures for such activities did not "normally" exceed the limits .

thus , in practice , no or low - cost campaign activities could have been conducted almost without limit .

churches would have been allowed to occasionally engage in campaign activity in excess of the limits so long as this did not normally happen .

it could be unclear the extent to which a church would have been able to establish a § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) separate segregated fund under the bill and still comply with the 5% limit .

any campaign activity would have been subject to the applicable campaign finance laws .

