this report considers population longevity in the united states , as measured by life expectancy .

life expectancy is the expected number of years to be lived , on average , by a particular cohort , if current mortality trends continue for the rest of that cohort's life .

it most commonly refers to life expectancy at birth , the median number of years that a population born in a particular year could expect to live .

for instance , based on recently released final data , life expectancy at birth in 2003 was 77.5 years .

this tells us that , for those born in calendar year 2003 in the united states , 50% will die before that age ; the other half will live longer .

life expectancy is also routinely calculated for other ages .

life expectancy at age 60 , for instance , refers to the additional number of years that a person who has already attained age 60 will live beyond age 60 .

life expectancy at age 60 in the year 2003 was 22.2 years in the united states .

a person who reached age 60 in 2003 was expected to live an additional 22.2 years , on average , and would die at age 82.2 .

while this report concentrates on trends and differentials in life expectancy at birth , appendix b table b - 2 provides estimates of life expectancy at selected additional ages in 2003 ( the most recent final data available ) .

measures of life expectancy are published in official life tables , which are based on age - specific death rates .

in the united states , data on mortality are collected and compiled through the vital statistics system by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) / national center for health statistics ( nchs ) .

the most recently released final data on deaths and mortality are for calendar year 2003 ; preliminary estimates are often released by nchs but are generally not referred to in this report .

the concept of life expectancy , which considers the average experience for a population , is distinct from the concept of life span , which considers the upper limit of human life that could be reached by an individual .

according to the u.s. census bureau , international data base , the highest attained life expectancy to date for a national population was that of andorra in 2006 , when life expectancy was 83.5 years for the total population ( 86.6 years for females ; 80.6 years for males ) .

the oldest authenticated female life span thus far recorded was for j. calment of france , who died at age 122 years , 164 days , and , for a man , c. mortensen ( a danish immigrant to the u.s. ) , who died at age 115 years , 252 days .

there is a lively debate among researchers regarding whether the biological limits of life spans have been reached or whether future increases are probable .

life spans are not considered further in this report .

this report documents the improvements in life expectancy that have occurred , analyzing both the underlying factors that contributed to mortality reductions as well as the continuing longevity differentials by sex and race .

in addition , it considers whether life expectancy will continue to increase in future years .

while this report focuses on describing the demographic context of longevity change in the united states , these trends have implications for a wide range of social and economic issues that are likely to be considered by congress .

for instance , one consequence of lengthening life expectancies is that the older population's needs for care—assistance with daily tasks to allow continued community - living for high - functioning seniors , institutions for those with more severe disabilities or cognitive impairments , training of a specialized work force in geriatric care—are likely to increase , particularly for the oldest - old .

there are also questions with respect to ensuring basic income support , medical care , and housing for the older population .

at the same time , there is the recognition that government programs , such as social security and medicare , will face financial pressures to meet the increasing needs .

what program changes are required to ensure the continued viability of such programs as the number of beneficiaries increases ? .

what will be the federal government's role in an environment of competing demands for limited resources ? .

as seen in table 1 and appendix b table b - 1 , life expectancy at birth increased dramatically over the past century in the united states—from 49.2 years ( the average for 1900-1902 ) to 77.5 years in 2003 , the most recent year for which official data have been released by the centers for disease control ( cdc ) / national center for health statistics ( nchs ) .

gains in longevity were fastest in the first half of the 20 th century .

these advances were largely attributed to "an enormous scientific breakthrough—the germ theory of disease" which led to the eradication and control of numerous infectious and parasitic diseases , especially among infants and children .

the new theory led to an entirely new approach to preventative medicine , practiced both by departments of public health and by individuals .

interventions included boiling bottles and milk , washing hands , protecting food from flies , isolating sick children , ventilating rooms , and improving water supply and sewage disposal .

beginning in the 1940s , the control of infectious diseases was also aided by the increasing distribution and usage of antibiotics , including penicillin and sulfa drugs .

since mid - century , advances in life expectancy have largely been attributable to improvements in the prevention and control of the chronic diseases of adulthood .

in particular , death rates from two of the three major causes of death in 1950—diseases of the heart ( i.e. , coronary heart disease , hypertensive heart disease , and rheumatic heart disease ) and cerebrovascular diseases ( stroke ) —have fallen by approximately 60% and 70% , respectively , on an age - adjusted basis since 1950 ( see table 2 ) , improvements that the cdc has characterized as "one of the most important public health achievements of the 20 th century. .

the cdc attributes the declines in diseases of the heart and cerebrovascular diseases to a combination of medical advances , including —discoveries in diagnosing and treating heart disease and stroke ; —development of effective medications for treatment of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia ; —greater numbers of specialists and health - care providers focusing on cardiovascular diseases ; —an increase in emergency medical services for heart attack and stroke ; and —an increase in coronary - care units .

changes in individually controlled behaviors , including —declines in cigarette smoking ; —decreases in mean blood pressure levels ; —an increase in persons with hypertension who have the condition treated and controlled ; —a decrease in mean blood cholesterol levels ; and —changes in the american diet ( reductions in the consumption of saturated fat and cholesterol ) .

beyond medical interventions , public health measures , and individual behaviors , a number of additional factors are known to be associated with mortality decline .

they are briefly mentioned here , but it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss them in detail or to disentangle them from the factors already described: socioeconomic status ( ses ) .

higher ses persons tend to be better educated , have higher incomes , and practice better individual behaviors ( less smoking , healthier diets , etc .

 ) , and are more likely to have financial resources or health insurance to ensure access to medical care .

social policies .

some social policies , such as medicare and medicaid , are oriented to health improvements .

both programs were designed to increase access to health care for vulnerable populations , the elderly and the poor , with the ultimate goal of improving health for these groups .

other social policies , such as social security , affect income , and may affect health and well - being through that channel .

finally , some social policies may affect health by changing the access that people have to already - established resources .

an example is the combination of civil rights legislation and improved health programs for the poor during the mid - 1960s , especially through medicaid .

life expectancy in the united states , for both men and women , is significantly higher than the global average but is only slightly higher than the average for more developed countries ( see table 3 ) .

life expectancy surpasses that of the united states in a large number of countries , including but not limited to japan , andorra , canada , hong kong , macau s.a.r , singapore , sweden , australia , martinique , greece , israel , aruba , italy , netherlands , norway , france , liechtenstein , monaco , spain , and more .

estimates are provided for a non - comprehensive list of selected counties in table 3 .

the united states was ranked 48 th among 227 countries and territories for both sexes .

the social security trustees report to congress on the actuarial status of the trust funds annually .

the long - range projections needed for this assessment depend critically on assumptions for the future course of longevity .

according to steven goss , chief actuary of the social security administration ( ssa ) , their future mortality assumptions are based on the recorded average annual mortality decline for the total u.s. population aged 65 and older between 1900 and 2000 .

he asserted that assuming future mortality improvement at nearly the same rate as for the last century—a little more than 0.7% annually—is a reasonable assumption , with a roughly equal likelihood of doing better or worse .

this rate of improvement is more optimistic—about twice as large—as experienced during the last 18 years of the 20 th century .

goss further suggested that "matching the accomplishments of the past century will not be easy .

aids , sars , and antibiotic resistant microbes , along with increasing obesity and declining levels of exercise , remind us that mortality improvements will not be automatic .

gains from replacement organs and genetic engineering will be expensive , and may be difficult to provide for the population as a whole. .

ssa's projections of period life expectancy are shown in table 4 .

a benefit of the statistical methods that have emerged to extrapolate historical mortality trends to the future is that they have worked well and are relatively simple and efficient .

in addition to being utilized by ssa , similar approaches are also used in canada and in the united kingdom ( uk ) .

canada's approach assumes that economic productivity is the overall driving factor for sustained longevity improvements , and projects a relationship between future mortality decline and future real growth in employment earnings .

the uk extrapolates trends from 15 years of past data to help define base starting points and establish initial rates of mortality improvement for projections .

an assumption is also made that there will be a gradual slowing of rates of improvement after the first 10 years .

future mortality and survival are , however , difficult to predict and specialists disagree on not only the level but also the direction of future trends .

james vaupel , director of the max planck institute for demographic research , argues that the social security projections are too pessimistic .

he notes that ssa's forecast is that female life expectancy in the united states will gradually rise from 79.5 years today to 83.4 years in 2050 .

ssa's projected level of life expectancy in 2050 , half - a - century from today , is less than current life expectancy in japan and france , and is 13 to 14 years less than likely japanese and french female life expectancy in 2050 .

vaupel further suggests that it is unrealistic for ssa to assume that the united states will be unable to match the level of life expectancy in half - a - century that is already attained in other countries today .

a number of articles suggested that current models may be too pessimistic in their assumptions about mortality and survival probabilities ( i.e. , americans may live longer than currently projected ) .

two of these studies showed that there has been a tendency for international life expectancy to rise linearly by more than two years per decade over the past 40 years or the last 160 years , a more rapid pace than suggested by current models .

also , useful analyses of the contributions of smoking behavior to mortality trends in the united states suggests that slow female gains in life expectancy over the past few decades may be temporary , and that the pace may pick up fairly soon .

technological advances also have the potential to expand life .

the national institute on aging supports extensive analyses of genetic contributions to longevity in diverse species , as well as on the diseases and conditions that are responsible for premature death .

one of the most important public health achievements of the 20 th century in the united states was the dramatic and widespread increase in life expectancy that occurred over the past century in the united states—first as a result of the control of the infectious and parasitic diseases that had plagued mostly infants and children in the early part of the century , and later because of medical advances that led to large decreases in adult mortality , especially from two of the most prevalent causes of death—cardiovascular diseases and cerebrovascular diseases .

a consequence of the improved survival , coupled with declining fertility rates , is that the united states is in the midst of a profound demographic change: rapid population aging , a phenomenon that is replacing the earlier "young" age - sex structure with that of an older population .

hastened by the retirement of the "baby boom" generation ( the cohort born between 1946 and 1964 ) , the inexorable demographic momentum will have important implications for a large number of essential economic and social domains , including work , retirement , and pensions , wealth and income security , and the health and well - being of the aging population .

whether the life expectancy improvements will continue is the subject of intense debate .

the social security administration ( ssa ) assumes that the rate of future mortality improvements will be nearly the same as for the last century—a little more than 0.7% annually—while asserting that it may be difficult to match the accomplishments of the past century , especially in light of increasing obesity , declining levels of exercise , and the introduction of new scourges , such as aids , sars , antibiotic resistant microbes .

some demographers , on the other hand , feel that such projections are pessimistic , and argue , based on historical trends and evidence from other developed countries , that american survival will be longer than that projected by ssa .

the outcome of the debate has important implications for determining the number of future beneficiaries and ultimately the financial soundness of the social security and the medicare programs .

this report also highlights the continuing differentials in life expectancy by race and sex in the united states , with black males continuing to be the most disadvantaged group on this measure .

life expectancy at birth in 2003 for black males measured 69.0 years , falling short of the comparable figure for white males by 6.3 years .

the gap between black and white men has remained relatively stagnant since the mid - 1950s .

the sources of the racial disparities in life expectancy are complex and require disentangling the complex web of factors connecting the nexus among race , socioeconomic status , behavioral factors , and health .

differences exist on a wide variety of important variables including lifetime income and wealth , marriage patterns , birth weight and childhood nutrition , access to employer - provided health insurance , the strain of physically demanding work , exposure to toxins , risky behaviors ( such as smoking , high saturated diet ) , adherence to preventative health measures ( such as maintaining a healthy weight , exercise ) , and access to and quality of health care .

in addition , the experience of racial discrimination may have adverse psychological and physiological effects , in addition to limiting the quantity and quality of health care received .

recent research , however , that shows that the leading specific diseases that are the main sources of the racial disparity in life expectancy are largely preventable causes of premature death offers hope that public - health interventions can reduce the racial disparities .

specifically , the leading causes of the racial disparity were hypertension ( which contributed 15.0% to the disparity ) , followed by hiv disease ( 11.2% ) , diabetes ( 8.5% ) , and homicide ( 8.5% ) in a recent analysis .

appendix a. glossary of terms appendix b .

detailed life expectancy table .

