there is consensus that border security is a pivotal function in protecting the american people from terrorists and their instruments of destruction .

the adequate provision of border security is an extremely complex endeavor given the scope of u.s. borders , and the volume of traffic flowing across them .

as described by admiral james loy , former deputy secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) : we must secure nearly 7,500 miles of land border with canada and mexico , across which more than 500 million people , 130 million motor vehicles , and 2.5 million rail cars pass every year .

we also patrol almost 95,000 miles of shoreline and navigable waters , and 361 ports that see 8,000 foreign flag vessels , 9 million containers of cargo , and nearly 200 million cruise and ferry passengers every year .

we have some 422 primary airports and another 124 commercial service airports that see 30,000 flights and 1.8 million passengers every day .

there are approximately 110,000 miles of highway and 220,000 miles of rail track that cut across our nation , and 590,000 bridges dotting america's biggest cities and smallest towns .

that is just a thumbnail of the vast infrastructure that supports the largest and most efficient economy in the world — with more than $11 trillion in gross domestic product .

this report utilizes several graphical presentations to better understand the points of vulnerability in the border security system , before discussing one , integrated approach .

it should be noted that the approach in this report is but one of a number of possible approaches to this issue .

this report is the first in a three - part series of crs reports that make use of analytical frameworks to better understand complex problems in border security and cast them in terms that facilitate the consideration of alternative policies and practices .

 ( crs report rl32840 , border and transportation security: selected programs and policies , the second report in the series discusses selected programs and policies currently in place to address these issues .

the third and final report in the series addresses possible approaches and policy options that might be explored by congress in searching for higher levels of border security , and is entitled crs report rl32841 , border and transportation security: possible new directions and policy options . ) .

the homeland security effort can be seen as a series of concentric circles or screens , with the outer screen being that of preventive efforts launched outside the country .

the continuum of activities to provide homeland security then moves through progressively smaller circles starting from more distant efforts to closer and more localized measures .

thus , the process starts with prevention abroad and progresses through the other stages as needed .

this section of the report aims to provide an understanding of border security — redefined later in this report as "good border management. .

to further this understanding , this section offers several graphical presentations of border security .

at the end of the report , we synthesize these concepts into a single , more comprehensive framework .

border management is an extremely complex task .

as the second report in the part series will illustrate , even the current u.s. border management regime with its bevy of institutions , policies , and programs can seem overwhelmingly complex and difficult to approach in a systematic way .

seemingly simple notions such as what is the border ; where is it ; and when should we be concerned about it are not as straight forward as they appear on the surface .

the first two questions , the what and the where of the border , are related and somewhat interdependent .

for example , if the what of the border is simply the physical geographic boundary and limited to u.s. ports of entry , then the where and the when are self explanatory: people or goods enter the united states when they have physically crossed the territorial boundary , and they need not be addressed until they reach the border .

this approach to border control might work in a situation where the flow of cross - border traffic was small , and the resources available to process this traffic were plentiful .

however , the current environment for securing u.s. borders is far more complicated , as noted above in the introduction with the statement of admiral james loy , former deputy secretary of the dhs .

if the border is envisioned not merely as a physical boundary but rather as a flexible concept that allows for the possibility that the border begins at the point where goods or people commence their u.s. - bound journey , a significantly wider array of options for border management policies becomes available .

what follows are a series of conceptualizations intended to assist in answering the above questions and when combined with a discussion of current border policies , may be useful in seeking new directions for more effective border management policies .

it is important to note that this series of conceptualizations is cumulative , in the sense that each one builds off of the concepts illustrated in the previous section .

achieving adequate border security is an extremely complex task .

the conceptual frameworks outlined in this report are meant to assist the policy maker in understanding the legitimate flows of people and goods entering the country .

as acknowledged earlier in the report , legitimate flows are but part of the picture: criminals and terrorists can and do manipulate and interfere with legitimate cargo to smuggle people and contraband into the country .

they also bypass the legitimate processes and ports altogether , bringing their goods across between ports of entry .

understanding the flow of people and goods into the united states is a first step to assessing current efforts , and developing new options and next steps .

as noted earlier , this report is the first in a series of three reports addressing the issue of border security .

the second report in the series ( crs report rl32840 , border and transportation security: selected programs and policies ) discusses selected current policies and programs in operation to improve at least some aspect of border security .

these policies are grouped in a framework that suggests types of possible policy actions: pushing the border outwards to intercept unwanted people or goods before they reach the united states ; hardening the border through the use of technology and the presence of more agents at the border ; making the border more accessible for legitimate trade and travel ; strengthening the border through more effective use of intelligence ; and multiplying effectiveness through the engagement of other actors in the enforcement effort ( including engaging canada , mexico , state and local law enforcement resources , and the private sector ) .

security of people and cargo destined for the united states requires a complex set of policies that engage actors from each of the geographic zones ( foreign governments , private sector actors , and other u.s. government agencies ) .

these relationships and policies must also take into consideration requirements unique to the different modes of transportation ( air , vessel , truck , and rail ) .

policies could , for example , encompass the entire journey from the source zone to the destination zone ; or policies could focus distinctly on a particular zone / place / actor in the journey .

or , a layered approach may be employed that involves nearly all of the constructs identified in figure 5 ( viz . , people , conveyances , cargo , places , routes , etc. ) .

the transit zone in the maritime environment poses a unique challenge for cargo security .

this is because there is no single governing body responsible for regulating the zone .

organizations like the world customs organization ( wco ) and the international maritime organization ( imo ) have adopted measures and are working towards developing strategies to harmonize customs procedures and increase maritime security , but the standards and conventions developed by these institutions must be adopted by individual governments for them to have any real authority .

the third report in the series , crs report rl32841 , border and transportation security: possible new directions and policy options builds on the first two reports , and offers possible new directions and policy options that spring directly from the analytical frameworks contained within those reports .

