arguably , the three most important homeland security public laws enacted following the terrorist attacks on september 2001 are: p.l .

107-56 , "uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act ( usa patriot act ) " ; p.l .

107-296 , "homeland security act of 2002" ; and p.l .

108-458 , "intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004. .

the patriot act focused on enhancing domestic security through anti - terrorism measures , specifically , law enforcement and legal responses to terrorism .

the homeland security act established the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act restructured the u.s. intelligence community to better assist in terrorism preparedness and response .

numerous other recently enacted public laws address homeland security issues such as the following: transportation security ; border security ; bioterrorism ; maritime security ; and terrorism insurance .

these key laws not withstanding , a host of important state and local homeland security policy issues remain , which the 109 th congress might address .

some of the issues include reportedly unmet emergency responder needs ; the proposed reduction in appropriations for federal homeland security assistance ; the determination of state and local homeland security risk assessment factors ; the absence of emergency responder equipment standards ; the development of state and local homeland security strategies ; and the limited number of state and local officials with security clearances .

the state and local homeland security issues may be deemed important because they arguably identify critical homeland security needs and policy questions that have not been fully addressed since september 2001 .

one could argue that the primary state and local homeland security issue is the widely reported unfair and inadequate distribution of federal homeland security assistance ; this report , however , does not address that issue .

for information concerning fy2006 homeland security grant allocations , a discussion of federal homeland security assistance distribution formulas , risk factors , and state and urban area homeland security strategies see crs report rl33583 , homeland security grants: fy2003 - fy2006 evolution of program guidance and grant allocation methods , by [author name scrubbed] .

the fy2006 homeland security grant program ( hsgp ) guidelines , which include guidance for the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) , the urban area security initiative ( uasi ) , the law enforcement terrorism prevention program ( letpp ) , the emergency management performance grant program ( empg ) , and the citizen corps programs ( ccp ) , provide a list of authorized equipment , training courses , exercises , and planning activities that states and localities can purchase with grant allocations .

observers note , however , that the list of authorized expenditures does not adequately address the two most important ( according to emergency responders ) needs—hiring and retention of personnel , and interoperable communications .

the reduction of federal homeland security assistance funding is another homeland security issue states and localities face .

in fy2005 , congress appropriated approximately $3.61 billion for state and local homeland security assistance .

in the fy2006 budget request , the administration proposes a total of $3.36 billion for federal homeland security assistance , a reduction of $250 million from fy2005 funding .

additionally , the fy2006 budget request provides no line item funding for the law enforcement terrorism prevention program ( letpp ) .

it proposes , however , to direct states and localities to allocate no less than 20% of shsgp and uasi funding for lettp activities .

apparently , this would be a reduction in shsgp and uasi funding for equipment , training , exercises , and planning , which states and localities were authorized to fund with 100% of their allocated amount in fy2005 .

one could argue that the proposed overall funding reduction of $250 million and the administration's requirement for states and localities to allocate no less than 20% of their shsgp and uasi funding to letpp activities would represent a further reduction of funding for state and local homeland security activities .

the administration's budget proposal requests $500 million for fire in fy2006 , a cut of 30% from the fy2005 appropriated level .

priority would be given to grant applications enhancing counter - terrorism capabilities .

grants would be available only for training , vehicle acquisition , firefighting equipment , and personal protective equipment .

under the budget proposal , activities such as wellness / fitness and fire station modification would not be funded .

activities such as prevention , public fire safety education and awareness , and fire code enforcement would be funded under a separate fire prevention and firefighter safety grant program .

for fy2006 , the administration is requesting no funding of the staffing for adequate fire and emergency response ( safer ) grants , which provide assistance to fire departments for hiring personnel .

the house appropriations committee recommends $600 million for firefighter assistance , including $550 million for fire grants and $50 million for safer act grants .

the committee does not agree with the administration's proposal to shift the program's priority to terrorism or to limit the list of eligible activities .

the following table compares funding for fy2003 through fy2005 with the fy2006 budget request and dhs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2360 ) .

the house appropriations committee recommends a total of $3.19 billion for federal homeland security assistance , a reduction of $420 million from fy2005 funding .

initially , following the september 2001 terrorist attacks , there may have been a need for a significant amount of funding for state and local homeland security .

some may argue , however , that now there is only a need to maintain state and local homeland security programs and activities .

nevertheless , some may argue that the initial attempt to create a base amount of homeland security funding may have been inadequate .

as an example , states have identified a need for additional funding for interoperable communications systems .

additionally , the reduction of funding may impair state and local attempts to meet the national preparedness goal 's national priorities of implementing the national incident management system ( nims ) and national response plan ( nrp ) ; expanding regional homeland security collaboration ; implementing the interim national infrastructure protection plan ; strengthening homeland security information sharing and collaboration capabilities ; strengthening chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosive ( cbrne ) detection , response , and decontamination capabilities ; and strengthening medical surge and mass prophylaxis capabilities .

another state and local homeland security issue concerns equipment standards .

on december 17 , 2003 , the president issued homeland security presidential directive - 8 ( hspd - 8 ) .

among other things , hspd - 8 directs the dhs secretary , in coordination with state and local officials , to establish and implement procedures for developing and adopting first responder equipment standards that support a national preparedness capability .

dhs , however , has so far issued standards only for two first responder equipment categories: personal protective gear , and radiation and nuclear detection equipment .

presently , dhs has not provided standards for any other type of first responder equipment .

a report prepared for the oklahoma city national memorial institute for the prevention of terrorism and the department of justice recommends that the federal government establish first responder equipment standards to assist in the nation's preparedness for terrorist attacks .

in february 2003 , the national task force on interoperability , a task force composed of representatives from professional emergency responder and government personnel associations , recommended the establishment of standards for interoperable communications .

in a report on interoperable communications , the task force stated that the use of standards for equipment and software might alleviate many of the interoperability problems faced by emergency responders , and state and local governments .

in the fy2006 hsgp guidance , dhs provides an ael that categorizes which equipment states and localities are authorized to purchase .

the list , however , does not identify standards for equipment selection .

h.r .

1544 and s. 21 either require a determination of the need for equipment standards or require dhs to provide information to states and localities on voluntary standards .

the lack of equipment standards may result in states and localities purchasing equipment which does not meet their homeland security needs .

it may also result in states and localities purchasing equipment that is not compatible with other jurisdictions' equipment .

the need for multiple jurisdictions to use the same equipment or compatible equipment might become evident if multiple jurisdictions were to respond jointly to a homeland security emergency .

most information dhs provides to state and local government officials is unclassified .

nevertheless , these officials might need some access to classified information , for example , "real time" intelligence information concerning terrorism threats , to adequately plan , coordinate , and execute homeland security activities .

presently , about 325 state and local government officials possess dhs - sponsored security clearances , and 250 state and local government officials are in the process of receiving dhs - sponsored security clearances .

dhs continues to processes additional clearances for state , local , territorial , and tribal officials whose requests are submitted through their states' office of homeland security .

one mayor from new york state has a dhs - sponsored security clearance , and the state of hawaii has recently submitted clearance requests for four mayors .

dhs states that no other mayors have requested dhs - sponsored security clearances .

every governor , however , is granted a security clearance after signing a non - disclosure agreement ( special form - 312 ) .

in addition to dhs , several other federal departments and agencies provide security clearances to state and local officials .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) provides numerous state and local law enforcement officials with security clearances .

state and local officials may also possess security clearances provided by the department of defense , as a result of military ( reserves and national guard ) service .

while hundreds of state and local officials have federally sponsored security clearances , dhs is unable to provide an accurate number of them .

this limited and uncertain number of state and local officials with security clearances might affect the ability of dhs ( or other federal departments and agencies ) to provide classified information to states and localities .

they , in turn , might not be able to adequately prepare for , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks without access to classified information .

additionally , states and localities might not be able to coordinate with other government entities ( federal or state and local ) if information cannot be shared due to a lack of security clearances .

security clearances are a problem not only for state and local officials , but also , according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , for port security officials .

gao reported in april 2005 that port security officials are having difficulties getting homeland security information due to delays in obtaining security clearances .

delays , as determined by gao , have occurred because u.s. coast guard field representatives did not know that the coast guard was responsible for contacting non - federal port security officials concerning security clearances , and coast guard field offices were not tracking submitted port security officials' security clearance requests .

