u.s. military operations as part of the global war on terrorism ( gwot ) began on october7 , 2001 , and continue today .

the military component is just one aspect in this endeavor , which alsoinvolves diplomatic , intelligence , law enforcement , and financial efforts to defeat terrorists aroundthe world .

this report focuses on u.s. military operations in four areas - - afghanistan , africa , thephilippines , and colombia - - although the u.s. military is likely engaged in a variety of activitiesin other countries or regions that are considered part of the gwot by the administration .

whilesome consider military operations in iraq as part of this war , many do not , and because of thecomplexity of this issue , iraq is treated separately and in greater detail in other crs reports .

 ( 2 ) congress has a wide ranging interest in u.s. military operations in these regions .

natoassumption of responsibility for afghanistan and its impact on u.s. military operations,counternarcotics operations in afghanistan , and the apparently emerging long - term military strategyfor africa - - raise a variety of issues for potential congressional consideration .

 ( 3 ) .

the united states is deeply concerned about the potential for africa to become a breedingground for terrorists - - citing its vast ungoverned spaces and unprotected borders .

somalia has beenreferred to as a "lawless haven for terrorists," ( 100 ) and reports suggest that al qaeda has opened recruiting basesin nigeria , somalia , tanzania , and uganda .

 ( 101 ) one report suggests that there is evidence of 17 trainingcenters in kenya , possibly set up by groups related to al qaeda .

 ( 102 ) others , however,disagree and contend that the region is not the terrorist zone that some u.s. officials assert .

 ( 103 ) these critics suggestthat there are some groups with ties to al qaeda in the region but no actual al qaeda groups or evenfranchise groups and that u.s. military and financial support to some of the region's military forcescould actually "fuel radicalism where it scarcely exists. .

 ( 104 ) the u.s. european command ( u.s. eucom ) , which oversees military operations in mostof africa , has reported that nearly 400 foreign fighters captured in iraq have come from africa andthat some of these veterans of iraq are returning to places like morocco and algeria where theiracquired skills , such as operational planning and bomb making , could be used against theirrespective governments .

 ( 105 ) while terrorism is cited as the primary reason for u.s. militaryoperations in africa , access to africa's oil - - which presently accounts for 15 percent of the u.s. oilsupply and could reach 25 percent by 2015 - - is also considered a primary factor for growing u.s.military involvement in the region .

 ( 106 ) in october 2002 , the united states established combined joint task force ( cjtf ) horn ofafrica ( hoa ) to combat terrorism in the region .

for the purpose of this operation , the horn ofafrica is defined as "the total airspace and land areas out to the high - water mark of kenya , somalia,ethiopia , sudan , eritrea , djibouti , and yemen. .

 ( 107 ) cjtf - hoa is headquartered at camp lemonier in djiboutiand consists of approximately 1,400 personnel including u.s. military and special operations forces ( sof ) , u.s. civilian , and coalition force members .

 ( 108 ) in addition to cjtf - hoa , combined task force ( ctf ) 150is a naval task force consisting of ships from australia , canada , france , germany , italy , pakistan,new zealand , spain , the united kingdom and the united states , and has the task of monitoring,inspecting , boarding , and stopping suspect shipping not only in the horn of africa region , but alsoin support of operation iraqi freedom .

 ( 109 ) originally , the reported mission of cjtf - hoa was to conductraids on al qaeda targets in the region - particularly somalia - but due to a lack of targets , themission has instead evolved into gathering intelligence , military training for some of the region'smilitary forces , and building infrastructure and goodwill to create an environment hostile to terroristorganizations .

 ( 110 ) .

the government of the philippines , a long - time major non - nato ally of the united states,faces an insurgency threat from four primary groups - - three islamic groups who seek anindependent state in mindanao and one communist group which seeks a marxist state .

 ( 115 ) one group inparticular , the abu sayyaf group ( asg ) , has reported financial and training links to al qaeda andhas become the focus of the administration's counterterror efforts in the region .

 ( 116 ) estimates vary on thesize of abu sayyaf - - ranging from one thousand to a couple of hundred fighters - - and theiractivities were largely aimed at the philippine government until 2001 when allegations emerged thatabu sayyaf had been involved in planning the assassination of the pope during a planned visit to thephilippines and also had plans to hijack and destroy 12 u.s. airliners .

 ( 117 ) philippine authoritiesreportedly suspect that abu sayyaf had a role in the october 2002 bombing near a philippinemilitary base , which killed three filipinos and one u.s. army special forces soldier .

 ( 118 ) another group , the moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) , with an estimated 10,000 fighters,is presently involved in negotiations with the philippine government , but there is reported evidencethat the milf provides training facilities to the al qaeda affiliate jemaah islamiyah - - an islamicgroup based largely in indonesia .

 ( 119 ) .

colombia occupies a unique position in the administration's global war on terror in that itstargeted terrorist groups are marxist as opposed to islamic - based and have no reported links to alqaeda or other islamic groups .

u.s. military involvement began in 2000 under "plan colombia" andwas limited to training colombian counternarcotics units , although u.s. forces now train thecolombian military in counterinsurgency operations .

colombia has been involved for almost fortyyears in what some describe as a civil war and others describe as a counterinsurgency campaignagainst three major groups .

the first two groups , the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) and the national liberation army ( eln ) started in the 1950s as marxist revolutionarygroups but reportedly have lost most of their ideological support and have transformed into violentcriminal organizations .

 ( 134 ) the other group , the rightist united self - defense forces ofcolombia ( auc ) is a conglomerate of illegal self - defense groups formed in rural areas where thecolombian government did not exert a strong presence .

 ( 135 ) all three groups allegedly fund their activities through drugrevenues ( 136 ) and areon the administration's official list of terrorist organizations .

 ( 137 ) these groups alsocurrently hold a number of colombian and foreign hostages whom they use as negotiating leverage - - including three u.s. defense contractors who were taken by the farc in february 2003 whentheir plane was shot down .

 ( 138 ) on december 12 , 2005 , the colombian government said thatit would withdraw its forces from a contested area if the farc would agree to talks intended toexchanged jailed rebels for 59 hostages being held by the farc - - including the three u.s. defensecontractors .

 ( 139 ) .

congress may opt to examine a number of issues concerning nato's assumption ofcommand of isaf and operation enduring freedom in 2006 .

some possible issues include: is there a formal transition plan for the transfer of command tonato ? .

 ; what will be the u.s. military role in the nato commandstructure ? .

 ; how much say will nato have in security and stability operations andoffensive operations designed to destroy the taliban / al qaeda insurgency ? .

will nato be able to"overrule" the united states or change existing policies ? .

will nato assumption of command leadto a less vigorous pursuit of insurgents ? .

 ; what are nato's long - term plans to provide adequate forces for security andstability and offensive operations ? .

has nato secured commitments from nato members fortroops and military resources for at least the next ten years or will nato continue to "pass the hat"to obtain forces needed for afghanistan ? .

 ; does nato have a comprehensive and effective counternarcotics plan forafghanistan ? .

 ; and does nato have a long - term strategy to transition all security and offensivemilitary operations to the afghan government and its armed forces andpolice ? .

congress might act to review current administration and dod policy concerning the u.s.military role in afghan counternarcotics operations .

while the insurgency remains a threat , theperformance of the ana and the progress made toward governance , suggest that the afghan nationalgovernment and coalition are successfully meeting these challenges .

some suggest that , despite theprogress made to date , afghanistan's burgeoning drug trade has the potential to undermine theafghan government and provide the taliban with the financial resources needed to perpetuate theinsurgency indefinitely .

the current u.s. military role in counternarcotics operations is limited to training , planningsupport , and the transport of police and troops .

the rationale provided in the past for limited u.s.military involvement in afghan counterdrug operations was that active involvement "was notachievable given u.s. force levels in afghanistan" and that it could "significantly undermine itscounterinsurgency campaign. .

 ( 153 ) while the united states has gone from a "no participation"policy to a supporting role , critics suggest that a more active role is now essential .

some suggest thatu.s .

strategy in this regard is contradictory - - senior u.s. military leadership describes the afghandrug trade as the most significant security problem facing afghanistan yet it appears that somebelieve that the u.s. is ceding its responsibilities in counternarcotics operations at a time that suchefforts should be intensified .

it is possible that congress may explore in greater detail how africa not only fits into theadministration's long term strategy for the war on terror but also what the administration's specificstrategy is for africa , if such a strategy exists .

while combined joint task force horn of africa ( cjtf - hoa ) has been in existence for almost three years , little is publicly known about theselong - term commitments to the region in terms of overall strategy and what resources - - both militaryand financial - - would be required to implement such a strategy , particularly if the administrationintends to expand operations to other african nations .

congress may also choose to review with dod , the prospects for establishing a separateregional command for africa .

while there appears to be a number of arguments favoring such acourse of action , there are also political and resource issues that might be examined in great detail.security for such a headquarters , if it is placed in africa , could also be a significant issue fordiscussion , given the volatile nature of the region .

removing africa from u.s. centcom's andu.s .

eucom's responsibility could also have political and resource implications .

reports that abu sayaaf and jemaah islamiyah are developing a training relationship andoperational alliance suggest to some the potential for an increase in terrorist activities throughoutsoutheast asia .

while the majority of these activities would likely be against regional governments,the potential exists for attacks against u.s. concerns and citizens in the region .

u.s. military presenceand ongoing operations in the region are considered by some as modest at best and might do littleto deter attacks or assist u.s. regional allies in pursuing those responsible .

given this possibility,congress might act to review the adequacy of u.s. military forces in the region as well as theircurrent mandate in terms of training and advising regional military forces .

congress may decide to examine the progress being made against the farc by theu.s. - trained colombian military .

while reports of demobilization and peace talks by the otherinsurgent groups are considered promising by some , others note that the farc continues itscampaign against the colombian government , adopting some of the tactics employed successfullyby insurgents in afghanistan and iraq .

some reports also suggest that while colombian militaryoperations against the farc have enjoyed a degree of success , that joint u.s. - colombiancounternarcotics operations have done little to stem the supply of cocaine .

 ( 154 ) critics note that profitsfrom drug operations finance the farc and suggest that drastically reducing narcotics - related profitswould have a significant impact on the farc's ability to sustain operations against the colombianmilitary .

