what federal agencies or governing bodies are involved incontracting for the reconstruction of iraq ? .

primary authority for the awarding andadministration of iraq reconstruction contracts has been transferred to the u.s. - led coalitionprovisional authority ( cpa ) http: / / www.cpa - iraq.org / .

the cpa program management office ( pmo ) http: / / www.rebuilding - iraq.net / is responsible for selecting projects and overseeing 25 iraqreconstruction prime contracts worth up to $18.6 billion that were originally to be awarded byfebruary 2004 .

however , slipped deadlines and the accelerated sovereignty schedule have led toa re - evaluation of the pmo's needs and capabilities .

by the end of march 2004 , only about $2.2billion of the original $18.6 billion had been obligated .

as of may , contracts potentially worth nearly$8 billion of the $18.6 billion in fy2004 supplemental funding had been awarded .

among recentreasons for the slow progress are the requirement for open and competitive bidding for most of thenew reconstruction contracts and inter - agency disputes over control of the funds .

security concerns,escalating since march , have also delayed reconstruction further .

previously , major contract awards and management for postwar iraq reconstruction projectswere administered by usaid http: / / www.usaid.gov / iraq / activities.html .

other federal agencieshave taken steps in the awarding and / or disseminating of information on contracts and thecontracting process , including the u.s. army corps of engineers http: / / www.hq.usace.army.mil / cepa / iraq / contracts.htm and the u.s. department of state http: / / usinfo.state.gov / mena / middle_east_north_africa / iraq / iraq.html .

it is anticipated that usaidand the other federal agencies involved with iraq's reconstruction will continue their roles in thecontracting process as a complement to cpa's efforts .

for additional information on federal agencysolicitations , application procedures , and contact information , see crs report rs21546 , iraqreconstruction resources: fact sheet .

under the broader question of different authorities , what is theusaid contracting role in iraq ? .

usaid has been responsible for contracting themajority of fy2003 reconstruction appropriations in iraq and the widest range of economic , social,and political development programs .

to date , usaid has awarded contracts in seaport and airportadministration , capital construction , theater logistical support , public health , primary and secondaryeducation , personnel support , local governance , agricultural development , and higher education .

although usaid was responsible for the fy2003-funded $1 billion construction contractawarded to bechtel and an fy2004-funded $1.8 billion follow - on project , the cpa has control overmost of the funding available for reconstruction - related activities , particularly in the infrastructureand security sectors .

usaid appears likely to continue to carry out many of the non - constructiondevelopment programs supported by fy2004 appropriations in areas such as education anddemocratization .

as of may 18 , 2004 , usaid had obligated more than $3.5 billion in iraq aidcontracts and grants .

 ( 9 ) .

crs report rl32017 .

circular a - 76 revision 2003: selected issues .

crs report rs21489 .

omb circular a - 76: explanation and discussion of the recently revisedfederal outsourcing policy .

crs report rl32079 .

federal contracting of commercial activities: competitive sourcingtargets .

crs report rl31024 .

the federal activities inventory reform act and circular a - 76 .

