this report provides background information and discusses possible oversight issues for congress regarding dod's strategy for implementing a network centric approach to warfare , otherwise known as network centric operations ( nco ) .

nco forms a central part of the administration's plans for defense transformation .

proponents argue that a network centric approach may improve both the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. combat operations .

however , when nco was originally envisioned , the u.s. military was structured to counter conventional threats , including possibly , two regional war scenarios involving national armies .

now , partly from recognition that u.s. forces were inadequately prepared for the insurgency in iraq and the wider hunt for terrorists worldwide , dod reportedly may be considering new policy that places less emphasis on waging conventional warfare and more on dealing with counterinsurgency , terrorist networks , and other non - traditional threats .

some observers now question the effectiveness of network centric operations , and its relevance to different types of conflict , including close urban combat .

others argue that technology may be dictating military strategy , and point out that the military's extreme reliance on high technology may also present a new vulnerability that adversaries may exploit .

still others pose questions about ( 1 ) the interoperability of information systems for joint and coalition forces , ( 2 ) a shortage of available bandwidth to support net centric operations , and ( 3 ) possible unexpected outcomes when organizations rely on data - dependent systems .

potential oversight issues for congress pertaining to nco include the following .

no bills have yet been introduced in the current congress that are directly related to network centric operations .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

appendix a .

the transition from internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) to ipv6 the internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) is the name of the digital signal transport protocol that has been used for global communications through the internet since the 1970s .

the u.s. military now uses several transport protocols for digital communications in addition to ipv4 .

however , dod planners see a need for more network capabilities to support future nco operations .

by 2008 , dod is planning to convert digital military communications to use the newer internet protocol version 6 ( ipv6 ) as the standard for all transmission through the global information grid ( gig ) , and for all systems that are part of the defense information system network ( disn ) that will interoperate with the gig .

ipv6 technology is considered the next - generation internet transport protocol , and all commercial network communications equipment ( also heavily used by the military ) will eventually transition to its use , and gradually reduce support for ipv4 .

this is because ipv6 offers advantages in speed , capacity , and flexibility over ipv4 .

for example , ipv6 will enable network users to more easily set up a secure virtual private network ( also known as secure tunneling through a network ) than with ipv4 .

using ipv6 , hardware devices can be attached to a network and configured more easily , which will also provide mobile users with easier and faster access to network services .

however , because use of ipv4 is so firmly embedded in the commercial systems now used in the united states , the transition for the civilian communications infrastructure in other countries may go more smoothly and quickly .

this is because new communications infrastructures now being built in other countries will use the newest equipment with ipv6 capability already built in .

this may also mean that much of the talent for managing the new ipv6 technology may eventually belong to technicians and programmers who reside in countries outside the united states .

research has shown that regional agglomeration of technical expertise increases active sharing of tacit knowledge among groups of innovators .

some of that tacit knowledge may also include sharing of information about newly - discovered vulnerabilities for the ipv6 technology .

what follows is a brief explanation of some technical differences between ipv4 and ipv6 , and a discussion of possible economic and security issues related to the coming transition to the new internet protocol .

technical differences between ipv4 and ipv6 information is sent through the internet using packets ( approximately 4000 digital bits per packet ) , and which include the address of the sender and the intended destination .

internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) has been used globally since before 1983 .

however , ipv4 information packets are designed to carry an address in a 32-bit field , which means that ipv4 can only support approximately 4,000,000,000 internet devices ( computers , routers , websites , etc. ) .

with internet access expanding globally , and with more types of equipment now using internet addresses ( eg , cell phones , household appliances , and pdas ) the number of internet addresses needed for connected equipment could soon exceed the addressing capacity of the ipv4 protocol .

for example , slightly more than 3 billion of the 4 billion possible 32-bit ipv4 addresses are now allocated to u.s. - operated isps .

in contrast , china and south korea , with a combined population of more than 1.3 billion , are allocated 38.5 million and 23.6 million respectively .

therefore , asian counties are especially interested in the possibilities that come with adoption of ipv6 .

internet protocol version 6 ( ipv6 ) quadruples the size of the address field from 32 bits to 128 bits ( ipv1-ipv3 , and ipv5 reportedly never emerged from testing in the laboratory ) .

ipv6 could theoretically provide each person on the planet with as many as 60 thousand trillion - trillion unique internet addresses .

theoretically , by switching to ipv6 , humanity will never run out of internet addresses .

ipv6 is also believed to be more secure than ipv4 because it offers a feature for encryption at the ip - level .

however , several drawbacks may slow the global adoption of the ipv6 standard .

switching to ipv6 means that software applications that now use internet addresses need to be changed .

every web browser , every computer , every email application , and every web server must be upgraded to handle the 128-bit address for ipv6 .

the routers that operate the internet backbone now implement ipv4 via computer hardware , and cannot route ipv6 over the same hardware .

by adding software to route ipv6 packets , the routers will operate more slowly , which may cripple the internet .

alternatively , upgrading and replacing the hardware for millions of internet routers would be very costly .

ipv4 also uses a technology feature called natural address translation ( nat ) which effectively multiplies the number of ip address that may exist behind any single firewall .

this technology trick is widely employed within the united states , and its usage also adds an extra layer of security to both commercial networks and home pc networks that have a router .

nat allows a home user to connect multiple pcs to their home network , so they all can share a single ipv4 address behind the router / firewall .

by using nat , it is possible , and certainly much cheaper , to put off or ignore the problem of running out of ipv4 addresses .

at least temporarily , in the united states , most technologists prefer sticking with nat rather than switching over to ipv6 .

also , despite the new feature that allows ip - level encryption , there may be new security problems associated with converting to ipv6 .

whenever new code is deployed onto computers , undiscovered bugs are usually soon discovered through study and repeated experimentation by hackers .

therefore , ipv6 may well hold security surprises that the designers have simply not found through extensive testing .

and because switching over to ipv6 will be a global undertaking , some of the newly discovered security problems could possibly become critical , and even threaten the functioning of the internet itself .

ipv6 also offers other technical advantages over ipv4 .

for example , ipv6 makes peer - to - peer communication between individual computers much easier than with ipv4 .

this will make applications like internet telephony and next generation multi - media groupware work much more smoothly .

technology divide the opportunity to leapfrog past older internet technology may someday result in increased expertise in newer technology for technicians and engineers who reside outside the united states .

for example , countries such as india , north korea , iran , pakistan , and iraq that are now building new communications infrastructures for internet commerce , may initially adopt the latest network switching equipment using the newer ipv6 technology , and thus leapfrog over ipv4 .

meanwhile , industries in the united states , which are already heavily invested in older ipv4 technology , may remain tied to ipv4 using the nat technology for a longer time .

this is because nat can extend the useful life of older ipv4 applications , and can defer the cost of conversion by transferring that cost to the isps , who would then set up gateways to translate between all ipv4 and ipv6 internet traffic going into and out of the united states .

the u.s. could then become divided from the technology used in the rest of the world , at least for a while , by an ipv4 / ipv6 difference that is similar to the u.s. / metric divide we see today .

u.s. military forces , to save time and expense , sometimes connect staff at multiple locations to the dod secure siprnet network by using an encryption technique known as tunneling , which lets users traverse a non - secure network to access a top - secret one .

for example , marine corps staff recently began using tunneling through the non - classified niprnet to extend the dod classified siprnet to 47 sites in the marine forces pacific command .

however , during oif as much as seventy percent of niprnet traffic reportedly was routed through the civilian communications infrastructure .

this means that when there is need for a high volume of u.s. military communications , security may be partly dependent on reliability of ipv6 equipment found in the civilian infrastructure and in commercial satellites .

countries with emerging communications infrastructures , and purchasing the latest commercial network equipment , may also be the home countries of those best able to exploit ipv6 technical vulnerabilities .

if this includes countries where the united states may be involved in military activity , hostile groups with appropriate technical knowledge of ipv6 vulnerabilities may be positioned to attempt to interfere with u.s. military communications .

appendix b .

changing views on metcalfe's law of networks differing interpretations of what is known as "metcalfe's law" may lead to different priorities for acquisition and deployment of nco technologies , systems , and equipment .

in the past , some observers have stated that according to metcalfe's law , "the 'power' of a network is proportional to the square of the number of nodes in the network. .

proponents of nco in the past have also stated that network centric computing is governed by metcalfe's law , which asserts that the "power" or "payoff" of network - centric computing comes from information - intensive interactions between very large numbers of heterogeneous computational nodes on the network .

however , metcalfe's law observes that the potential value of a communications network increases ( or scales ) as a function of the square of the number of nodes that are connected by the network .

after some deliberation , many of the same proponents now argue differently about the applicability of metcalfe's law to nco , saying that it only provides insight into the fact that the "value" of a network to its users depends mainly on the interaction between the following: 1 ) content , quality , and timeliness of information interactions enabled by the network ; 2 ) network - enabled , value - creation logic ; and 3 ) user - value functions .

these proponents further state that nco does not focus on network - centric computing and communications , but rather on information flows and the nature and characteristics of battlespace entities .

however , it is also noteworthy that other military observers now propose a corollary to metcalfe's law: the complexity of a system is proportional to the cube of the number of nodes , and the reliability of a system is inversely proportional to its complexity .

in line with this corollary , some observers propose that different types of networks could have indirect limitations that may begin to appear as those networks reach very large numbers of nodes .

briscoe et .

al .

 ( 2006 ) use observations of the rise and fall of internet companies to propose that use of metcalfe's law to predict organizational success can sometimes result in organizational damage , if expectations are set too high .

other observers agree , stating that , with very large networks , other negative factors begin to emerge .

for example , the number of messages increases beyond the capacity of the reader to handle .

many network users may then see a strong need to operate within a "less - noisey" network by using editors , moderators , or automatic filters to limit the number of messages .

these observers agree that more research is need in the area of indirect limitations of networks .

appendix c. perverse consequences of data - dependent systems the office of force transformation http: / / www.oft.osd.mil / has indicated that dod must continue to refine the rules and theory of network centric operations through simulation , testing , and experimentation .

this section notes that although some experiences have shown that networking may increase certain advantages in warfare , other experiences may also indicate that relying on information systems can sometimes lead to unexpected results .

information - age warfare is increasingly path - dependent , meaning that small changes in the initial conditions will result in enormous changes in outcomes .

speed is an important characteristic for nco because it enables a military force to define initial conditions favorable to their interests , and then pursue a goal of developing high rates of change that an adversary cannot outpace .

to this end , whenever data - links are employed between military units and platforms , digital information can be shared and processed instantaneously , which produces a significant advantage over other military units that must rely on voice - only communications .

examples that illustrate this advantage are found in several training exercises conducted in the 1990's between royal air force jets equipped with data - links , referred to as link - 16 , and u.s. air force jets with voice - only communications .

a series of air - to - air engagements showed that the raf jets were able to increase their kill ratio over the u.s. jets by approximately 4-to - 1 .

other training engagements , involving more than 12,000 sorties using 2-versus - 2 , or 8-versus - 16 , aircraft showed that jets equipped with link - 16 increased their kill ratio by 150 percent over those aircraft having voice - only communications .

similar results were seen in training exercises involving navy and army units equipped with new networking technology .

however , some observers believe that important military decisions may not always lend themselves to information - based rational analysis .

they argue that the military services , national security establishment , and intelligence community have not thoroughly studied the risks associated with a data - dependent military doctrine .

issues raised by these observers include the following: ( 1 ) information flows may be governed by a diminishing marginal utility for added effectiveness .

quantitative changes in information and analysis may lead to qualitative changes in individual and organizational behavior that are sometimes counter - productive .

 ( 2 ) an information - rich , opportunity - rich environment may shift the value of the information , redefine the mission objectives , and possibly increase the chances for perverse consequences .

in 1999 , large - scale army experimentation with better visualization of the battlefield resulted in surprises such as requests for up to five times the normally - expected amounts of ammunition .

instead of concentrating on only critical targets , the experimental army units were overwhelmed with the vast array of potential targets they could now see .

the unprecedented requests for larger quantities of ammunition caused logistical failures .

more information did not assure better decision - making , but rather it exposed doctrinal flaws .

a similar effect was observed in later experiments conducted as part of the network centric operations conceptual framework .

ammunition was expended at a faster rate , possibly because more information creates a target - rich environment .

these observations imply a possibly greater demand for logistics support .

issues raise by other observers of data - driven systems are: ( 3 ) reliance on sophisticated information systems may lead to management overconfidence .

 ( 4 ) different analytical interpretations of data may lead to disagreements among commanders about who is best situated to interpret events and act on them .

the past economic under - performance of many hedge fund organizations and other technology firms that have employed very sophisticated network centric management techniques may serve as examples to caution dod against over - reliance on data - driven military information systems .

for example , long - term capital management ( ltcm ) , a highly - leveraged multi - billion dollar hedge fund , and cisco systems , a well - respected high - tech firm , both used sophisticated systems to track market conditions and expand their data - driven "situational awareness" to gain and maintain competitive advantage .

however , in 1998 a u.s. government - led consortium of banks bailed out ltcm after its trading losses put the entire world's financial system at risk of meltdown .

also , in 2001 cisco was forced to take a $2.25 billion inventory write - down .

while there is yet no professional consensus explaining these poor performance problems , many analysts agree that the presumed excellence of information systems may have invited managerial over - reliance , and that over - reliance led to overconfidence .

executives may have ignored unambiguous external signals in favor of their own networked data .

finally , some believe that more information imposes a higher degree of accountability on actions .

failure to minimize casualties or protect civilians may be digitally reviewed and used to politicize flawed military decisions .

these observers suggest that modern portfolio theory , bayesian analysis , and monte carlo simulation are three quantitative tools that military decision makers should explore if they want the benefits of information transparency to consistently outweigh its costs .

these tools could answer questions , such as: ( a ) if information were to be managed as a portfolio of investment risks much as asset classes like equities , fixed income , and commodities , how would commanders diversify to maximize their returns ; ( b ) what information asset classes would they deem most volatile ; ( c ) what information would they see as most reliable ; and ( d ) which information classes would be co - variant , and which would be auto - correlated ? .

