rising procurement costs for navy ships are a matter of concern for both navy officials and members of congress who track navy - related issues .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that executing a 30-year navy shipbuilding plan submitted to congress in early 2006 may require annual funding levels about 33% higher than the navy plans , and about 76% more than the navy has received on average in recent years .

combined with constraints on ship - procurement funding , rising ship procurement costs have caused the navy in recent years to reduce planned ship procurement rates .

some members of congress have expressed concern about the effects these reduced rates would have on the future size of the navy and on the shipyards that build the navy's ships .

the issue for congress is how to respond to rising navy ship procurement costs .

congress's decisions on this issue could affect future navy capabilities , navy funding requirements , and the shipbuilding industrial base .

aside from reducing planned ship procurement rates , options for responding to rising navy ship procurement costs include the following: increasing annual navy ship - procurement funding ; changing the way navy ships are funded in the budget ; making greater use of multiyear procurement ( myp ) in navy ship - procurement ; changing the acquisition strategy for building certain navy ships ; taking steps to reduce the amount of shipyard fixed overhead costs that are incorporated into the procurement costs of navy ships ; improving the operating efficiency of yards building navy ships ; building ships without some of their planned equipment ( or with less expensive substitute equipment ) ; and building ships in foreign shipyards where construction costs may be lower to due lower wages and material prices or other factors .

for additional comments relating to these options , see appendix .

an additional option , particularly if the above options are not implemented or prove insufficient , would be to reduce navy ship procurement costs by shifting from currently planned designs to designs with lower unit procurement costs .

this report focuses on this option .

the following section of the report provides background information on notional options for lower - cost attack submarines , aircraft carriers , larger surface combatants , and smaller surface combatants .

the section that follows discusses issues that congress may consider in assessing the merits — the potential advantages and disadvantages — of shifting to lower - cost designs .

the final section of the report reviews recent legislative activity relating to rising navy ship procurement costs .

the potential lower - cost ship designs outlined above can be assessed in terms of cost , capability, technical risk , homeporting arrangements , and potential impact on the shipbuilding industrial base .

sections 122 , 123 , and 124 of h.r .

5122 would limit the procurement costs of cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers , lha ( r ) class ships , and lpd - 17 class ships , respectively , to current navy cost estimates , with adjustments permitted for inflation and other factors .

section 1014 would establish a shipbuilding industrial base improvement program .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

109-452 of may 5 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5122 , stated: the rising cost and lengthening production schedules of major defense acquisition programs has led to more expensive platforms fielded in fewer numbers .

the committee believes that internal dod pressure to develop follow - on weapons systems that include all necessary and anticipated military capabilities may create an over - reliance on individual ''mega'' systems that are potentially more expensive and time - consuming to develop than less sophisticated but capable systems .

these increases in cost and development time generally result in smaller numbers of platforms purchased , creating a ''high demand , low density'' situation in which the needed platforms have higher operational tempos , wear out faster , increase stress on military personnel , undermine the ability to conduct traditional presence missions intended to shape the strategic choices of potential adversaries and limit the strategic depth of united states forces responding to multiple contingencies .

 ( pages 14-15 ; see also pages 350-351 ) regarding the affordability of the navy's shipbuilding plan , the report stated: the committee applauds the chief of naval operations for developing the navy's future force structure and the accompanying long - term shipbuilding plan to build it .

this long - term plan provides the shipbuilding industry a view into the future that has been lacking .

however , the committee is concerned that the plan was developed using unrealistic assumptions that will not make the plan executable .

of greatest concern to the committee is the affordability of the ship construction plan .

according to the navy's estimates , execution of this plan requires a significant increase in shipbuilding funds from $8.7 billion in fiscal year 2006 to $17.2 billion in fiscal year 2011 .

obtaining these additional funds in a period of anticipated federal spending reductions will be difficult .

the plan also assumes that individual ship acquisition programs can avoid the cost growth that has plagued most navy ship acquisition programs .

the committee is concerned about the affordability of the navy's long - term shipbuilding plan , recreating much of the uncertainty about the future of naval shipbuilding that the plan was designed to eliminate .

 ( page 67 ) the report also stated: the committee is concerned that the u.s. shipbuilding / ship repair industrial base has significant capacity beyond what is necessary for all anticipated dod new construction and maintenance work , and believes that navy ship acquisition programs are paying the price... .

the committee directs the secretary of the navy to report to the congressional defense committees on measures that can be taken to manage the capacity of the shipbuilding / ship repair industrial base in a manner that would make navy shipbuilding more affordable .

such report shall be submitted by the submission of the president's request for fiscal year 2008 , as required by section 1105 of title 31 , united states code .

 ( pages 70-71 ) regarding the navy's cost estimates for ships , the report stated: the committee is deeply concerned about the process used for establishing the navy's ship cost estimates .

the committee notes that the original cost estimates on numerous existing ship classes have regularly been described by the navy as inaccurate and unrealistic when those ships near completion of construction .

the committee notes that in several cases it has been informed that ship cost estimates delivered to the committee in prior years either intentionally or unintentionally excluded certain known shipbuilding costs such as escalation , and that these cost estimates were known to be inaccurate on the day they were first delivered to the committee .

the committee recommends that the process for deriving ship cost estimates be revised to ensure that all major known elements of ship cost are routinely included in all ship cost estimates .

the committee notes that sections 122 , 123 , and 124 of the bill would impose cost limitations on three current ship classes based on the navy's latest costs estimates .

the committee further notes that the imposition of these statutory cost limitations makes the need for a high level of confidence in the cost estimates for these ship classes unusually important .

accordingly , the committee directs that the secretary of the navy revalidate the cost estimates for cvn - 21 , for the ships currently programmed in the lha replacement program , and for the eight ships of the san antonio class amphibious ship that follow the lead ship .

the committee further directs that the revalidated costs estimates be submitted for review and approval by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics .

finally , the committee directs that no later than july 1 , 2006 , the secretary of the navy submit a report in writing to the congressional defense committees containing the revalidated cost estimates for these ship classes including a certification by the secretary that all known and anticipated major elements of cost have been included in the estimate .

 ( page 71 ) regarding the ddg - 1000 program , the report also stated: the committee does not believe the dd ( x ) is affordable.... the committee understands there is no prospect of being able to design and build the two lead ships for the $6.6 billion budgeted... .

originally , the navy proposed building 32 next generation destroyers , reduced that to 24 , then finally to 7 in order to make the program affordable .

in such small numbers , the committee struggles to see how the original requirements for the next generation destroyer , for example providing naval surface fire support , can be met.... by reducing the requirements for the dd ( x ) , a smaller , less expensive destroyer could be procured in greater numbers .

because of its expense , the committee does not believe that dd ( x ) will be procured in sufficient numbers to meet the operational need... .

the committee supports the construction of up to two dd ( x ) s to demonstrate technologies that could be incorporated into future , more affordable , major surface combatants .

 ( pages 69-70 ) regarding section 1014 and other measures intended to improve the efficiency of navy shipbuilding , the report states: maritime technology the budget request contained no funds in pe 78730n for the maritime technology program .

the committee understands that the purpose of the maritime technology ( maritech ) program is to reduce the cost of naval ship construction , modification , and repair by enhancing the efficiency and competitiveness of the u.s. shipbuilding and ship repair industries .

the committee understands that since the late 1970s the navy has considered capital for facility investments to be an allowable cost on contracts that are not firm fixed price .

the committee is also aware that in the past three years , the navy and industry have agreed to specific recapitalization contract incentives in the virginia class submarine and the cvn - 21 programs .

these incentive clauses have allowed the navy and the contractors to identify improvements in sequencing and build processes to lower construction costs .

the committee encourages the expansion of these efforts to all ship procurements , including the lewis and clark ( t - ake ) class program .

the committee includes a provision ( section 1014 ) that creates a shipbuilding industrial base improvement program through which the secretary of the navy shall award grants and loan guarantees to qualified shipyards to improve their productivity and cost effectiveness .

these authorities will allow the navy to work to an even greater extent with shipbuilders to identify and finance process changes , equipment investments , and facilities improvements to lower the cost of navy ship procurement .

the committee expects that these authorities will allow the navy to achieve savings in the construction of the t - ake class ships , in addition to other ship classes , and improve the competitiveness of u.s. shipyards .

consequently , the committee recommends providing funds for the shipbuilding industrial base improvement program and for the enhancement of the u.s. shipbuilding and ship repair industrial base .

the committee recommends $120.0 million in pe 78730n for the maritime technology program .

national shipbuilding research program the budget request contained no funds in pe 78730n for the national shipbuilding research program .

the committee understands that the national shipbuilding research program ( nsrp ) provides a unique collaborative environment where shipbuilders and government agencies examine processes , tooling and management techniques to improve the efficiency of the united states shipbuilding industry .

the committee understands that nsrp operates on a 50-50 cost share between government and industry , all results are shared with all members , and a conservative estimate for nsrp's return on investment is five to one .

the committee recommends $20.0 million in pe 78730n for the national shipbuilding research program .

shipbuilding industrial base improvement grants the budget request contained no funds in pe 78730n for shipbuilding industrial base improvement grants .

the committee understands the national security importance of sustaining viable and efficient shipbuilding and ship repair industries in the united states .

accordingly , the committee recommends providing grants to u.s. shipyards to facilitate the development of innovative design and production technologies and processes for naval vessel construction , and the development of modernized shipbuilding infrastructure .

the committee recommends $50.0 million in pe 78730n for shipbuilding industrial base improvement grants .

shipbuilding industrial base improvement loan guarantees the budget request contained no funds in pe 78730n for shipbuilding industrial base improvement loan guarantees .

the committee understands the national security importance of sustaining viable and efficient shipbuilding and ship repair industries in the united states .

accordingly , the committee recommends providing loan guarantees to u.s. shipyards to facilitate the acquisition of technologies , processes and infrastructure to enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of the u.s. shipbuilding and ship repair industries .

the committee recommends $50.0 million in pe 78730n for shipbuilding industrial base improvement loan guarantees .

 ( pages 192-193 ) .

section 121 of s. 2766 would authorize 4-year incremental funding and economic order quantity ( eoq ) purchases of long - lead components for cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers .

section 123 would increase a previously legislated cost limit on cvn - 77 to $6,057 million .

regarding section 121 on procurement of aircraft carriers , the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept .

109-254 of may 9 , 2006 ) on s. 2766 , stated: in reviewing the budget request for fiscal year 2006 , the committee received testimony from the navy and industry that the low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs , which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates , creating a downward spiral .

the committee believes that stable ship requirements , increased funding in the shipbuilding budget , and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend... .

elsewhere in this report , the committee has expressed concern with cost growth on the cvn - 77 program , and has urged the navy and the shipbuilder to identify opportunities to improve affordability of future aircraft carriers .

procurement delays , excess inflation , and material escalation have been reported as significant contributors to cvn - 77 cost growth .

the shipbuilder has proposed to achieve significant cvn - 21 class program savings through a stable procurement plan , and through procurement of economic order quantity material for cvn - 79 and cvn - 80 in conjunction with cvn - 78 procurement .

in view of the potential for significant program savings , the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million in scn for cvn - 21 class advance procurement , and directs the secretary of the navy to review economic order quantity and long lead time material procurement for the cvn - 21 class .

the secretary is to submit a report to the congressional defense committees with the fiscal year 2008 budget request , outlining the advance procurement requirements to potentially optimize economic order quantity savings and escalation avoidance ( to include offsetting factors ) for the first three vessels of the cvn - 21 class .

of the amount authorized to be appropriated for advance procurement for cvn - 79 and cvn - 80 , none of the funds are available for obligation prior to 30 days following receipt of the secretary's report .

 ( page 67 ) regarding section 123 on the cost limit for cvn - 77 , the report states: the procurement cost increase to $6.057 billion , which equals the government's maximum contractual liability , is attributed to extraordinary escalation impacts , increased labor hours and overhead rates , and costs related to schedule delays .

the fiscal year 2007 budget request included $348.4 million for cvn - 77 cost growth , with the balance of additional funding to be included in future budget requests .

the committee is aware that the navy has taken a series of management actions to contain cost on cvn - 77 , including deferral of upgrades that are not required for safe system operation or certification ; minimization of contract change orders ; implementation of a joint navy - shipbuilder lean six - sigma program ; and a schedule revision to enable a more efficient completion of cvn - 77 .

the committee is concerned , however , that despite these management actions , the navy is projecting cvn - 77 cost to grow to the contract ceiling , in excess of 30 percent above the baseline cost cap .

the committee notes that the secretary's report to congress on the long - range plan for construction of naval vessels establishes cost estimates for future ship construction , which target improved performance based on a series of management actions similar to ongoing efforts to control cvn - 77 cost .

visibility into cost performance while completing cvn - 77 is necessary in order to assess the effectiveness of these management actions , and will assist in determining further actions necessary to improve affordability of the future force .

improved visibility into completion cost performance will also afford greater opportunity to deliver cvn - 77 below the contract ceiling .

accordingly , the secretary of the navy is directed to submit a quarterly report to the congressional defense committees , beginning december 1 , 2006 , providing the following information regarding the cvn - 77 ship construction contract: ( 1 ) contract target cost ; ( 2 ) program manager's estimate at completion ; ( 3 ) contractor's estimate at completion ; ( 4 ) contract ceiling price ; ( 5 ) end of period actual costs ; and ( 6 ) percent progress .

 ( page 69 ) regarding the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program , the report states: the construction of lead lcs vessels at two shipyards inherently adds cost risk , which will persist until these ships near completion in 2007 and 2008 .

the emphasis on cost control would dictate that the navy pursue competition , commonality , and the results of learning curves to the extent practical in the procurement of this 55 ship class .

the committee views lcs as an important component of the navy's strategy for conducting the global war on terror , and has supported the navy's approach to rapidly field this capability .

the design and construction of lcs in parallel with development of the mission modules requires heightened management of program risk to ensure affordable , full mission capability of the lcs program .

however , the committee is concerned that the affordability appeal of the lcs program is being overtaken by apparent cost growth , and that the rapid ramp up in lcs procurement will compound the issue .

the stated emphasis on affordability is obscured by the absence of a clear acquisition strategy to guide strategic program decisions .

additionally , it is unclear that the navy has assessed the added cost for training , maintenance , configuration management , planning and engineering , and supply support for the two flight 0 ship classes .

further , by virtue of budgeting the costs for procuring the flight 0 lcs vessels in three different appropriations , total costs for the program's start are difficult to discern .

in view of these concerns , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to submit a report on the lcs program , no later than december 1 , 2006 to the congressional defense committees .

the report shall outline the navy's acquisition strategy for the program , including the competition plan , the flight strategy , and the cost containment strategy for the program ; contain a clear representation of all r&d and procurement costs for the total program ; and assess the added life cycle costs associated with operation and support for two dissimilar flight 0 lcs designs .

 ( page 113 ) regarding shipyard costs and efficiency , the report states: the budget request included no funding in pe 78730n for maritime technology .

the national shipbuilding research program - advanced shipbuilding enterprise ( nsrp - ase ) is a collaborative effort between the navy and industry , which has yielded new processes and techniques that reduce the cost of building and repairing ships .

annual navy funding , which is matched and exceeded by industry investment , has achieved savings and cost avoidance for the navy , a positive return on investment , and a high research - to - implementation transition rate .

the committee believes that continuation of the nsrp - ase provides a vital contribution towards achieving the overarching objective of improving the affordability of naval warship construction and maintaining a healthy , innovative shipbuilding industrial base .

the committee recommends an increase of $10.0 million in pe 78730n to support nsrp - ase efforts , including: ( 1 ) establishing a comprehensive national program for development and training of a skilled shipbuilding production and engineering workforce ; ( 2 ) establishing a concept for a national supply chain that will enable leveraging buying power across product lines in an effort to reduce the high cost of material in ship construction ; ( 3 ) exploring secondary and commercial markets for private shipbuilders to broaden the business base and share the overhead applied to naval shipbuilding ; and ( 4 ) developing and deploying an industry - wide architecture for computer interoperability .

 ( pages 181-182 ) .

section 121 of h.r .

5122 ( conference report h.rept .

109-702 of september 29 , 2006 ) authorizes 4-year incremental funding for the cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers cvn - 78 , cvn - 79 , and cvn - 80 .

section 122 establishes unit procurement cost caps for cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers .

section 123 increases a previously legislated procurement cost cap for the cvn - 77 aircraft carrier .

section 125 establishes a unit procurement cost cap for lha ( r ) amphibious assault ships .

section 126 establishes unit procurement cost caps for four lpd - 17 class amphibious ships .

section 215 authorizes $4 million for implementing or evaluating navy shipbuilding technology proposals under the defense acquisition challenge program .

section 1016 directs the navy to conduct an assessment of naval vessel construction efficiencies and of the effectiveness of special contractor incentives .

the sections establishing new procurement cost caps allow the caps to be adjusted upward for inflation and other factors .

regarding section 122 , the report states: the amendment would not provide the secretary authority to adjust the limitation amounts for cost increases attributable to congressional actions that impact on the shipbuilding program of record .

however , the conferees understand that such action could have significant impact on program cost , and therefore direct that the secretary include , within the annual written notice to the congressional defense committees regarding changes to the cost limitations , an assessment of any negative impact of congressional action on program costs .

the conferees understand that the cvn – 21 class budget represents the navy's risk - balanced assessment of the cost for completing design and construction of the future class of nuclear powered aircraft carriers .

the conferees recognize that many uncertainties remain with regard to completion of cvn – 21 design and construction , including innumerable , inestimable events which will impact cost during the next 15 years of performance on the program .

accordingly , the amendment would allow adjustment to the cost limitation for non - recurring design and engineering in order to enable the navy to reduce this risk in the execution of the design effort .

the conferees expect that the navy will ultimately manage program execution within the bounds of the budget estimate .

accordingly , the conferees understand that compliance with this provision will require procurement cost trade - offs to be accomplished , which could reduce the capabilities , system performance , safety , crew quality of life , future growth margin , or other important factors in the design and construction of the cvn – 21 class .

the conferees believe that most of these trade - offs will be within the purview of the program office and requirements office .

however , the secretary shall notify the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives not less than 30 days prior to implementing any cost - driven reduction which would unacceptably impact safety , crew quality of life , or otherwise preclude the program from meeting the requirements of the cvn – 21 operational requirements document .

the secretary's notification shall identify the specific characteristic proposed to be reduced and the cost avoidance provided by such reduction .

 ( page 552 ) regarding section 125 , the report states: the amendment would not provide the secretary authority to adjust the limitation amounts for cost increases attributable to congressional actions that impact on the shipbuilding program of record .

however , the conferees understand that such action could have significant impact on program cost , and therefore direct that the secretary include , within the annual written notice to the congressional defense committees regarding changes to the cost limitations , an assessment of any negative impact of congressional action on program costs .

the conferees understand that the lha - 6 budget represents the navy's risk - balanced assessment of the cost for completing design and construction of the future lha replacement ship .

the conferees recognize that many uncertainties remain with regard to completion of lha - 6 design and construction , including innumerable , inestimable events which will impact cost during the next 6 years of performance on the program .

accordingly , the amendment would allow adjustment to the cost limitation for non - recurring design and engineering in order to enable the navy to reduce this risk in the execution of the design effort .

the conferees expect that the navy will ultimately manage program execution within the bounds of the budget estimate .

the conferees understand that compliance with this provision will require procurement cost trade - offs to be accomplished , which could reduce the capabilities , system performance , safety , crew quality of life , future growth margin , or other important factors in the design and construction of the lha replacement ship .

the conferees believe that most of these trade - offs will be within the purview of the program office and requirements office .

however , the secretary shall notify the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives not less than 30 days prior to implementing any cost - driven reduction which would unacceptably impact safety , crew quality of life , or otherwise preclude the program from meeting the requirements of the lha replacement program capability development document .

the secretary's notification shall identify the specific characteristic proposed to be reduced and the cost avoidance provided by such reduction .

 ( pages 553-554 ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

109-504 of june 16 , 2006 ) on h.r .

5631 , stated that the committee believes that the viability of the navy's long range [shipbuilding] plan will remain tied to the service's ability to control costs in ship design and construction .

navy leadership agrees that cost control is essential , but the navy has produced no plan or initiatives to meet the cost targets assumed in the long range shipbuilding plan .

furthermore , the recent history of ongoing shipbuilding programs indicates the trend in cost growth may be getting worse , and not better .

the committee encourages the navy to set firm cost targets in its future shipbuilding programs , to develop specific initiatives addressing cost control , and to sign contracts that reduce the likelihood of cost growth .

 ( page 139 ) the report recommended reducing by $141.4 million the navy's request for fy2007 procurement funding to cover cost growth on ships procured in prior years .

the report stated: the committee remains concerned over the lack of cost control in navy shipbuilding programs .

in last year's report , the committee noted the rising cost growth in ongoing ship construction contracts , and required the navy to submit a plan on resolving these issues .

that report was submitted two months late , and was little more than a summary of cost overruns in shipbuilding over the past two decades .

the committee is concerned about the gap between the navy's public statements about the need for firm cost controls , and the programmatic and contractual actions needed to accomplish that objective .

navy briefings this year document a litany of programs , including the cvn - 77 aircraft carrier and certain attack submarines of the virginia class , that continue to defy attempts to control costs .

the navy estimates an overrun of $867,900,000 over the next 3 years alone in the cvn - 77 production effort .

these funds cannot be obligated without congressional legislation to raise the current cost cap on the program — a cap that was put in place several years ago to control costs .

the fiscal year 2007 budget requests $136,000,000 for further cost growth in the u.s.s .

texas ( ssn - 775 ) , and cost performance on the u.s.s .

north carolina ( ssn - 777 ) is seriously below navy expectations .

in fact , current cost performance on the virginia class jeopardizes the ability of the navy to meet the performance goals of the multiyear contract signed in 2004 as well as cost targets needed to increase the submarine production rate in future years .

the committee is unwilling to provide increased appropriations for cost overruns in the absence of compelling justification or a realistic and detailed plan for cost control .

the committee recommendation provides $436,449,000 for completion of prior year shipbuilding programs , a reduction of $141,400,000 from the request .

the reduction should be allocated against the following programs: cvn - 77 ( - $30,000,000 ) ; ssn - 777 ( - $48,000,000 ) ; ssn - 776 ( - $10,000,000 ) ; ssn - 775 ( - $10,000,000 ) ; and the lpd - 17 class ( - $43,400,000 ) .

 ( page 140 ) .

aside from reducing planned ship procurement rates or shifting or shifting to lower - cost ship designs , one option for responding to rising navy ship procurement costs would be to increase annual ship - procurement funding .

the navy's proposed fy2007 budget and the fy2007-fy2011 shipbuilding plan propose increasing annual funding for ship construction to an average of roughly $14.4 billion per year in constant fy2007 dollars .

increasing annual ship - procurement funding substantially from current levels , however , may not be easy .

in a situation of finite defense funding , increasing funding for navy ship procurement could require reducing funding for other navy or dod priorities .

the navy has worked in recent years to operate more efficiently on a day - to - day basis so that the resulting savings could be applied to navy procurement programs .

in practice , however , savings from these efficiencies have been offset by rising navy costs in other areas , such as personnel - related costs .

a second option would be to modify the way in which new navy ships are funded in the budget .

possible changes that have been suggested include making greater use of incremental funding or starting to use advance appropriations .

this option , which is examined in crs report rl32776 , might marginally increase the number of ships that could be procured for a given total amount of money .

as discussed in that report , however , it could also pose potentially significant issues relating to congress's power of the purse and congress's responsibility for conducting effective oversight of dod activities .

a third option would be to make greater use in navy ship - procurement programs of a contracting method known as multiyear procurement ( myp ) .

this option , like the previous one , might marginally increase the number of ships that could be procured for a given total amount of money .

not all navy ship - procurement programs , however , would meet the legal requirements for myp , and making greater use of myp could reduce dod's and congress's flexibility to adjust ship - procurement plans in future years to respond to changing strategic and budgetary circumstances .

a fourth option would be to change the acquisition strategy for building certain navy ships .

for example , the navy estimated in 2005 that changing from a strategy of dividing ddg - 1000 destroyers evenly between two yards to a strategy of having all ddg - 1000s built by a single yard could reduce the cost for building 10 ddg - 1000s by a total of $3 billion , or an average of $300 million per ship .

shifting to a single - yard acquisition strategy , however , could cause the second yard to permanently exit the business of building that kind of ship .

that could leave the navy with a single source for building that kind of ship , which could prevent the navy in the future from using competition or benchmarking to spur design innovation , constrain costs , maintain production quality , and ensure adherence to scheduled delivery dates .

another potential change in acquisition strategy would be to make greater use of competition in navy ship acquisition .

competition is used today in navy ship acquisition primarily in the early stages of ship - acquisition programs , to determine who will design and build the lead ship in each new class .

making greater use of competition in navy ship acquisition could involve using competition between shipyards in awarding contracts for building follow - on ships in each class .

this step , if taken , would represent a return to navy practices in the 1980s .

employing competition in the awarding of contracts for building follow - on ships , however , requires either an annual procurement rate for the class of ship in question that is high enough so that the government can contemplate giving ships to one yard or another without endangering the financial health of either yard , or a willingness on the part of the government to have contract award lead to a decision by the losing yard to permanently withdraw from the business of building that kind of ship , or navy ships generally .

in the latter case , the navy's contract - award decision could leave the navy with a single source for that kind of ship in the future .

a fifth option would be to take steps to reduce the amount of shipyard fixed overhead costs that are incorporated into the procurement costs of navy ships .

this could be accomplished by eliminating any excess capacity among the yards building navy ships , which would eliminate the fixed overhead costs associated with maintaining that capacity , or by increasing other kinds of work done by those yards , so that this other work could absorb a greater portion of the yards' fixed overhead costs .

potential other forms of work include construction of ships for other u.s. government agencies , such as the coast guard or the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , construction of commercial ships , overhaul and repair of navy or other u.s. government ships , and overhaul and repair of commercial ships .

a sixth option would be to improve the operating efficiency of yards building navy ships by incorporating more advanced design and production processes and equipment .

the national shipbuilding research program ( nsrp ) advanced shipbuilding enterprise ( ase ) is one effort aimed at this goal .

a may 2005 dod report compares the operating efficiency of the yards that build the navy's major ships relative to that of foreign shipyards that are considered to be among the world's most efficient , and makes recommendations for how to improve the operating efficiency of the u.s. yards .

a seventh option would be to build navy ships without some of their planned equipment ( or with less expensive substitute equipment ) .

building a ship without some of its planned equipment ( or with less expensive substitute equipment ) would likely reduce its capabilities .

equipment not installed during the original construction process could be added back later , after the ship had entered service .

this would restore the ship's lost capability but add back the cost of this equipment , in which case the ship's procurement cost , instead of being reduced , would have been partially deferred into the future .

installing this equipment on an in - service ship , moreover , may be more expensive than building it into the ship during its original construction process .

as a consequence , this strategy over the long run could increase the procurement total cost of the ship above what it would have been if the ship had been built from the beginning with all its planned equipment .

an eighth option would be to build navy ships in foreign shipyards where construction costs may be lower to due lower wages and material prices or other factors .

regarding this option , 10 u.s.c .

§ 7309 states that "no vessel to be constructed for any of the armed forces , and no major component of the hull or superstructure of any such vessel , may be constructed in a foreign shipyard. .

the provision permits the president to authorize exceptions when the president determines that it is in the national security interest .

in such cases , the president is to notify congress of the determination , and no contract may be made until the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the notice is received .

the provision also exempts inflatable boats and rigid inflatable boats .

in addition to 10 u.s.c .

§ 7309 , the annual dod appropriations act contains a provision in the section entitled "shipbuilding and conversion , navy," stating that funds for navy shipbuilding are made available for the fiscal year in question provided , among other things , "that none of the funds provided under this heading for the construction or conversion of any naval vessel to be constructed in shipyards in the united states shall be expended in foreign facilities for the construction of major components of such vessel: provided further , that none of the funds provided under this heading shall be used for the construction of any naval vessel in foreign shipyards. .

a recent report from the rand corporation provides additional discussion of why navy ships cost much more today than they did decades ago , and of options for reducing the cost of navy ships .

