members of the house of representatives have multiple opportunities to participate in the consideration of measures on the floor .

they can discuss legislation , propose changes to the pending text , and suggest actions that may facilitate deliberation or expedite decision making .

to achieve these legislative objectives , members rely on standard procedures and phraseology that have evolved over the course of congressional history .

an important parliamentary device designed to allow greater participation in debate is the committee of the whole ( formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ) .

the committee of the whole can be understood as the assembly in a different form ; it is a committee of the house composed of every representative that meets in the house chamber .

the house considers most major measures in the committee of the whole ; in fact , house rules require revenue , appropriations , and authorization measures to be first considered in the committee of the whole ( house rule xviii , clause 3 ) .

the house can agree to resolve itself into the committee of the whole in one of three ways: by a special rule , by unanimous consent , or by motion .

typically , the house adopts a special rule , a simple resolution reported by the committee on rules , authorizing the speaker to declare the house resolved into the committee of the whole to consider a particular measure .

less frequently , a member might ask unanimous consent that the house resolve itself into the committee of the whole for consideration of a particular measure .

finally , in very limited circumstances a member may make a motion to resolve into the committee of the whole to consider ( or further consider ) a bill , although it is not done in modern practice .

the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole and in the house can be divided into five stages: ( 1 ) the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole ; ( 2 ) members engage in general debate on the measure ; ( 3 ) members offer , consider , and vote on amendments to the measure ; ( 4 ) the committee of the whole rises and reports back to the house with a recommendation ; and ( 5 ) the house votes on the recommendation and then on the measure itself .

various rules and procedures , discussed in this report , govern how and when members can participate in debate , offer amendments , make motions and requests , and take other actions in the committee of the whole .

although there is variation in the language used by members to engage in these activities , the report also presents some examples of parliamentary phraseology .

before a member can take any action , the member must be recognized for such purpose by the chair of the committee of the whole .

the chair of the committee of the whole , who is a member of the majority party appointed by the speaker , exercises substantial discretion in recognition .

sometimes , the chair will ask , "for what purpose does the gentleman ( or gentlewoman ) rise ? .

before according recognition .

measures considered in the committee of the whole typically are subject to conditions governing debate and amendments that are specified by a special rule from the committee on rules or a unanimous consent agreement .

in either case , the house sets the procedural conditions under which the particular measure is considered in the committee of the whole .

the committee of the whole , even by unanimous consent , may not set aside or substantially modify those conditions .

under those conditions , a member may be prohibited from gaining recognition to debate or make a certain motion or request in the committee of the whole .

members are always limited in the amount of time they can spend speaking on the floor .

the manner in which time is obtained , restricted , and distributed in the committee of the whole depends on the stage of consideration of the measure and the terms of any special rule or unanimous consent agreement governing the consideration of the measure .

after the house resolves itself into the committee of the whole to consider a particular bill or resolution , members engage in general debate on the measure .

during the general debate stage , members discuss the bill and may discuss any amendments they plan to offer , but they may not offer amendments during this time .

the next stage of consideration is the amendment process .

during this stage , members seek recognition to offer amendments and to debate their merits .

along with these two distinct stages of debate , there are two different methods by which time is distributed in the committee of the whole .

time for debate is either "controlled" or it is not .

under controlled time , a member is granted a block of time from a member , called a "manager," who determines which members may speak , for how long , and in what order .

controlled time is generally divided equally between two managers .

if time is not controlled , then a member gains time to speak by seeking recognition from the chair of the committee of the whole .

absent any order of the house governing consideration of a measure , time in the committee of the whole would be controlled only during general debate .

during the amendment process , the chair would distribute time in five - minute portions as described in the " debate under the five - minute rule " section , below .

the house usually resolves into the committee of the whole under a special rule , however , and these orders of the house always provide for controlled time during general debate and often during the amendment process .

during the consideration of a measure in the committee of the whole , a number of motions and requests can be made by members to raise questions about the method of proceeding , obtain additional time for debate , or advance a measure closer to a final vote .

not all motions and requests available in the committee of the whole are listed below , although an effort has been made to include those most likely to be used by members in the contemporary congress .

pursuant to house standing rules , a quorum for conducting business in the committee of the whole is 100 members ( house rule xviii , clause 6 ( a ) ) .

a quorum is always presumed to be present unless it is otherwise demonstrated through a process that begins when a member makes a point of order on the floor .

generally , however , the only time that members can make the point of order that a quorum is not present is when a vote is about to take place .

three kinds of votes can take place in the committee of the whole: voice , division , and recorded .

to conduct a voice vote , the chair asks all those in favor to say aye and all those opposed to say no .

the chair then announces his or her opinion as to the outcome of the vote .

in a division vote , the chair asks members in favor of the question to stand to be counted .

the chair then asks all those opposed to stand and be counted , and announces the results of the count .

a recorded vote is conducted by an electronic voting system ; members use a card to record their votes as yea , nay , or present .

in most circumstances , the chair is required to allow a minimum of 15 minutes for a recorded vote ( house rule xx , clause 2 ( a ) ) .

only a recorded vote reveals how individual members voted .

all votes in the committee of the whole are first taken as voice votes .

after the chair announces his or her opinion of the outcome of the vote , but before he or she makes the result final , any member might demand a division vote by standing and saying: mr. / madam chairman , i ask for a division .

as noted above , a quorum is presumed to be present .

therefore , both voice votes and division votes are valid votes even if a quorum may not have been present , as long as no member made the point of order that a quorum was not present .

according to house rules , a request for a recorded , or electronic , vote in the committee of the whole requires the support of 24 members in addition to the member making the request .

to secure a recorded vote in the committee of the whole , a member can rise ( again after the chair announces his or her opinion as to the results of a voice or division vote but before the results are made final by the chair ) and state: mr. / madam chairman , i request a recorded vote .

the chair might then ask members who support the request to stand .

if a sufficient number rise in support , then there will be a recorded vote on the question .

under clause 6 of house rule xviii , the chair can postpone the request for a recorded vote on any amendment .

when a member requests a recorded vote on an amendment , the chair might state that further proceedings on the amendment are postponed .

it is not uncommon for the chair to postpone the vote on several amendments and for the committee of the whole to vote on a series of amendments , one right after the other , at a later time .

in other words , the chair has the authority to "cluster" or "roll" votes on amendments .

after the first vote is held , clause 6 of house rule xviii allows the chair to reduce the minimum time for an electronic vote from 15 minutes to not less than two minutes .

in some situations , a member might not believe there is sufficient support for a recorded vote , perhaps because only a few members are present on the floor .

in that case , the member can instead say: mr. / madam chairman , i request a recorded vote and , pending that , i make a point of order that a quorum is not present .

if the request is for a vote on an amendment , the chair still can postpone the vote under house rule xviii and the point of order of no quorum is considered withdrawn .

alternatively , if the chair determines that a quorum is not present , he or she can immediately order a quorum call in response to the member's request and point of order .

members then usually have approximately 15 minutes to reach the floor and record their presence by electronic device .

after the quorum call , the chair will then ask if there are 24 members , in addition to the member who made the request , who support the demand for a recorded vote .

if there are , a vote on the question is held , by electronic device .

