since the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , considerable concern has been raised because the 19 terrorists were aliens ( i.e. , noncitizens or foreign nationals ) who apparently entered the united states on temporary visas .

fears that lax enforcement of immigration laws regulating the admission of foreign nationals into the united states may continue to make the united states vulnerable to further terrorist attacks have led many to call for revisions in the visa policy and possibly changes in who administers immigration law .

foreign nationals not already legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the united states generally must obtain a visa to be admitted .

under current law , three departments — the department of state ( dos ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of justice ( doj ) — each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens .

dos's bureau of consular affairs ( consular affairs ) is responsible for issuing visas , dhs's citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions , and dhs's customs and border protection bureau ( cbp ) is tasked with inspecting all people who enter the united states .

doj's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) has a significant policy role through its adjudicatory decisions on specific immigration cases .

this report addresses policies on immigration visa issuances , options to reassign this function to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) that were considered prior to passage of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107 - 296 ) , and current administration of visa policy .

it opens with an overview of visa issuances , with brief sections on procedures for aliens coming to live in the united states permanently and on procedures for aliens admitted for temporary stays .

a summary of the grounds for excluding aliens follows .

the report provides a legislative history of the debate to transfer visa issuance policy functions to dhs and analyzes legislative proposals in the 107 th congress to reassign the visa issuance activities .

a discussion of the current division of responsibilities between dhs and dos and the ongoing issues in the 108 th congress conclude the report .

there are two broad classes of aliens that are issued visas: immigrants and nonimmigrants .

humanitarian admissions , such as asylees , refugees , parolees and other aliens granted relief from deportation , are handled separately under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

those aliens granted asylum or refugee status ultimately are eligible to become legal permanent residents ( lprs ) .

illegal aliens or unauthorized aliens include those noncitizens who either entered the united states surreptitiously ( i.e. , entered without inspection , or who violated the terms of their visas ) .

the adjudication and issuance of visas are largely fee - based , rather than a government service funded by direct appropriations .

for the most part , prospective immigrants and nonimmigrants cover the costs of visa processing .

the consular affairs immigrant visa application processing fee is $335 , and the nonimmigrant processing fee is $100 .

moreover , the 107 th congress permanently authorized the collection of machine - readable visa ( mrv ) fees at $65 — or the cost of the machine - readable visa service if higher — and a $10 surcharge for machine - readable visas in nonmachine - readable passports .

these mrv fees are credited as an offsetting collection used by dos to recover costs of providing consular services .

the largest amount of direct appropriations for overseas visa services was $20 million in fy1998 , as table 1 indicates .

according to dos documents , none of the fy2003 and fy2004 appropriations went to overseas visa services .

beginning in fy2003 , however , consular operating expenses were shifted from the diplomatic and consular programs appropriation to funding by mrv fees .

the overall budget authority line item for "conduct of consular relations" grew from $589 million in fy2003 to $789 million in fy2004 .

the funding for the visa activities within the bureau of consular affairs comes from the various fee accounts as presented in table 2 .

not all of the fee monies listed in table 2 , however , are used for consular affairs' visa activities .

as discussed above , the homeland security act contained language stating that dhs is responsible for formulating regulations on visa issuances and may assign staff to consular posts abroad to advise , review , and conduct investigations .

it also stated that dos's consular affairs continues to be responsible for issuing visas .

the act required dhs and dos to reach an understanding on how the details of this division of responsibilities would be implemented .

on september 28 , 2003 , secretary of state colin powell and secretary of homeland security thomas ridge signed the memorandum of understanding ( mou ) implementing §428 of the homeland security act .

the mou describes each department's responsibilities in the area of visa issuances .

in spelling out how these provisions are being implemented between dos and dhs , the mou is also raising a few concerns .

some have expressed the view that dos retains too much power and control over visa issuances under the mou .

they maintain the homeland security act intended dhs to be the lead department and that dos was to merely administer the visa process .

they warn that consular officers are too concerned about facilitating tourism and trade to scrutinize visa applicants thoroughly .

some argue that visa issuance is the real "front line" of homeland security against terrorists and that the principal responsibility should be in dhs , which does not have competing priorities of diplomatic relations and reciprocity with foreign governments .

others have indicated satisfaction with the mou , arguing that it strikes the proper balance between the two departments and reflects the bifurcation envisioned in the act .

they maintain that it plays off the strengths of the two departments and allows for refinement of the implementation in the future .

proponents of dos playing the lead role in visa issuances assert that only consular officers in the field have the country - specific knowledge to make decisions about whether an alien is admissible and that staffing 250 diplomatic and consular posts around the world would stretch dhs beyond its capacity .

increased staffing and resources for dhs's role in visa issuances are key elements of the fy2005 budget .

in the dhs fy2005 budget request , the administration is seeking $14 million in appropriations for the bts office of international affairs and indicates that $10 million of the request would be for reviewing the visa issuance process .

the $14 million for office of international affairs has a corresponding proposal of 90 full - time equivalent ( ftes ) employees in fy2005 .

comparable fy2004 funding data are not available .

the fy2005 budget requests $909 million , an increase of $120 million over fy2004 for consular relations .

the number of ftes would increase by 123 to 4,106 ftes .

the funding for the visa activities within the bureau of consular affairs comes from the various fee accounts as presented previously in table 2 .

the department of state fy2005 budget documents specify that $185 million of the $909 million fy2005 request for consular relations would come from direct appropriations and the remainder would come from various fees , as follows: $601,249,000 from machine - readable visa ( mvr ) fees ; $5,100,000 from diversity lottery fees ; $1,000,000 from federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) fingerprint fees ; $16,800,000 from the affidavits of support fees ; and $100,000,000 from fees that would be provided under a proposed enhanced border security program .

comparable fy2004 funding data are not available .

the question of whether dhs and dos are adequately funded to process visas expeditiously while maintaining visa security procedures may arise as the fy2005 budget is debated .

the modest size of the office of international affairs with 90 ftes has led some to question how many visa security reviews and investigations it will be able to realistically handle .

some are concerned that visa - related fees , such as the mrv fees , be dedicated for use only for visa processing and issuance activities ; use of these visa - related fees for other diplomatic and consular functions has raised concerns .

on the other hand , past use of the immigration examinations fee for investigations by the office of international affairs has been called into question by those who think it should be solely used for uscis adjudications and services .

