the institute of medicine ( iom ) , the national committee on vital and health statistics ( ncvhs ) , and other expert panels have identified information technology ( it ) as one of the mostpowerful tools for reducing medical errors , lowering health costs , and improving the quality ofcare .

 ( 1 ) they recommendthat health care organizations adopt it systems to support the electronic collection and exchange ofpatient information .

the goal is for these systems to operate seamlessly as part of a national healthinformation infrastructure ( nhii ) , which would enable health care providers anywhere in the countryto access patient information at the point of care .

while supporting the delivery of high - qualitypatient care , experts emphasize that a nhii must also meet the nation's needs for public healthsurveillance , biodefense , and biomedical research , and protect the privacy of individuals .

the u.s. health care industry lags well behind other sectors of the economy in its investmentin it , despite growing evidence that electronic information systems can play a critical role inaddressing the many challenges the industry faces .

there are significant financial , legal , andtechnical obstacles to the adoption of health it systems .

the issue for congress , in which there isbroad bipartisan support for health it , is how best to create incentives for the adoption of itthroughout the health care industry .

congress and the administration have already taken a number of important steps to promotehealth it .

the 2003 medicare modernization act instructed the hhs secretary to adopt electronicprescription standards and establish a commission for systemic interoperability .

the commissionis charged with developing a comprehensive strategy for implementing data and messaging standardsto support the electronic exchange of clinical data .

on april 27 , 2004 , president bush called for thewidespread adoption of interoperable electronic health records ( ehrs ) within 10 years andestablished the office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onchit ) .

onchit has developed a strategic 10-year plan outlining steps to transform the delivery of healthcare by adopting ehrs and developing a national health information infrastructure ( nhii ) to linksuch records nationwide .

the strategic plan identifies several potential policy options for providingincentives for ehr adoption .

they include: providing grants to stimulate ehrs and regionalinformation exchange systems ; offering low - rate loans and loan guarantees for ehr adoption ; amending federal rules ( eg , medicare physician self - referral law ) that may unintentionally impedethe development of electronic connectivity among health care providers ; and using medicarereimbursement to reward ehr use .

lawmakers in the 109th congress are likely to consider legislation to boost federal investmentand leadership in health it and provide incentives both for ehr adoption and for the creation ofregional health information networks , which are seen as a critical step towards the goal ofinterconnecting the health care system nationwide .

congress laid the groundwork for establishingan nhii when it enacted the 1996 health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) .

hipaa instructed the hhs secretary to develop privacy standards to give patients more control overthe use of their medical information , and security standards to safeguard electronic patientinformation against unauthorized access , use , or disclosure .

this report summarizes recently proposed and enacted legislation to promote the use ofehrs and the development of the nhii .

it begins with a brief discussion of some of the benefits ofbroadening the application of information technology ( it ) in health care , as well as the significantfinancial , technical , and legal barriers to the adoption of health it .

that is followed by a summaryof the goals articulated in the federal government's strategic framework for health it adoption .

thereport concludes with a set of tables summarizing health it legislation in the 108th and 109thcongresses .

appendix a provides additional background information on health it , including a listof congressional hearings , gao reports , and online resources .

in its june 2004 report , revolutionizing health care through information technology , thepresident's information technology advisory committee ( pitac ) proposed a framework for a nhiicomposed of four elements .

 ( 2 ) .

the u.s. health care industry , which represents about 15% of gdp , lags far behind othersectors of the economy in its investment in it , despite growing evidence that electronic informationsystems can play a critical role in addressing many of the challenges the industry faces .

there aresignificant obstacles to the adoption of ehrs and the creation of a nhii , some of which are brieflydiscussed below .

on april 27 , 2004 , president bush called for the widespread adoption of interoperable ehrswithin 10 years and signed executive order 13335 , which established the position of nationalcoordinator for health information technology within hhs .

secretary tommy thompsonappointed david brailer , md , phd , one of the country's foremost health it experts , to serve in thenew position .

the executive order directed the national coordinator within 90 days to develop astrategic 10-year plan outlining steps to transform the delivery of health care by adopting ehrs anddeveloping a nhii to link such records nationwide .

on july 21 , 2004 , brailer and thompson released a framework for strategic action entitled , the decade of health information technology: delivering consumer - centric and information - richhealth care .

 ( 9 ) althoughthe federal government has taken the lead in setting the health it agenda , the framework sets out abottom - up approach in which the role of hhs is to promote and encourage the private sector to buildcommunity - level networks .

adopting interoperability standards will over time permit these localnetworks to connect with one another to form an nhii .

the framework identified four major goals,with strategic action areas for each: inform clinical practice .

this goal focuses on bringing ehrs into clinicalpractice by providing incentives for ehr adoption , reducing the risk of ehr investment , andpromoting ehr diffusion in rural and medically underserved areas .

interconnect physicians .

this goal centers on building an interoperable healthinformation infrastructure so that ehrs follow the patient , and clinicians have access to criticalhealth information when treatment decisions are being made .

the strategies for realizing this goalinvolve fostering community - based health information exchange projects , developing a nationalhealth information network , and coordinating federal health informationsystems .

personalize health care .

this goal involves using health it to help individualsmanage their own wellness and become more involved in personal healthdecisions .

improve population health .

the final goal requires the timely collection,analysis , and dissemination of clinical information to improve the evaluation of health care delivery,public health monitoring , and biosurveillance .

it also helps accelerate research and the translationof research findings into clinical products and practice .

the framework identifies several potential policy options for providing incentives for ehradoption .

they include: regional grants and contracts to stimulate ehrs and community informationexchange systems ; improving the availability of low - rate loans for ehradoption ; updating federal rules on physician self - referral that may unintentionallyrestrict the development of health information networks ; using medicare reimbursements to reward the use of ehrs ; and funding medicare pay - for - performance demonstrationprograms .

the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) , which thepresident signed into law on december 8 , 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) , included provisions for electronicprescribing standards .

the bill requires the standards to include not just electronic script writing,but also the patient's medication history and decision support for identifying potential drug - to - druginteractions .

in addition , the mma called for the establishment of a commission to develop acomprehensive strategy for the adoption and implementation of health it data standards .

finally,the bill authorized it grants for physicians and established demonstration projects to determine howto improve the quality of care through the adoption of it .

table 1 , beginning on page 10 , providesa summary of the it - related provisions in the mma .

in the 108th congress , the house and senate passed competing versions of the patient safetyand quality improvement act ( h.r .

663 , s. 720 ) .

despite broad bipartisansupport for the legislation , no further action took place before adjournment in december 2004 .

onmarch 9 , 2005 , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) unanimously approved a new patient safety bill ( s. 544 ) , which is identical to last year'ssenate - passed measure .

the patient safety legislation is intended to encourage the voluntaryreporting of information on medical errors by establishing federal evidentiary privilege andconfidentiality protections for such information .

for more information on the patient safetylegislation , see crs report rl31983 , health care quality: improving patient safety by promotingmedical errors reporting .

s. 544 also requires the hhs secretary to adopt voluntary , national interoperability standardsfor the electronic exchange of health care information .

h.r .

663 , in the 108th congress , containeda similar requirement , as well as several additional health it provisions , none of which are includedin s. 544 .

the house - passed bill authorized health it grants for physicians and hospitals , andmandated the creation of a medical information technology advisory board ( mitab ) .

during the 108th congress , lawmakers introduced a number of bills ( i.e. , h.r .

2915 , h.r.4880 , s. 2003 , s. 2421 , s. 2710 , s. 2907 ) to boost federal investment and leadership in it in aneffort to promote the adoption of ehrs and the development of a nhii .

with the exception of h.r.2915 , these measures also contained quality - of - care provisions .

they included devising standardizedmeasures of physician performance and using them as the basis of pay - for - performance initiatives .

so far in the 109th congress , lawmakers have introduced two health it bills .

representativegonzalez has introduced the national health information incentive act of 2005 ( h.r .

747 ) , andsenator kennedy has reintroduced s. 2907 as title ii of the affordable health care act ( s. 16 ) .

table 2 , beginning on page 12 , compares the incentives in each of those health it bills .

tables 3 and 4 provide more detailed summaries of the major provisions in the patient safety and health itbills introduced in the 108th and 109th congresses , respectively .

table 1 .

summary of health care information technology ( it ) provisions in the medicare modernizationact ( p.l.108-173 ) table 2 .

comparison of bills to encourage the adoption of health information technology ( it ) table 3 .

summary of health information technology ( it ) legislation introduced in the 108thcongress a. h.r .

663 was reported ( as amended ) by the energy and commerce committee on mar .

6 , 2003 .

the ways and means committee approved similarlegislation ( h.r .

877 , h.rept .

108-31 ) on mar .

11 , 2003 .

while the ways and means bill would amend the medicare statute and apply only tohospitals and other health care facilities and their employees that provide health care services under medicare part a , the energy and commercemeasure would amend the public health service ( phs ) act and have broader coverage .

h.r .

663 would apply to any individual or entity licensedto provide health care services .

following negotiations between members of both panels , it was agreed that the new law should be written intothe phs act and that the energy and commerce bill ( h.r .

633 ) would be brought to the floor for consideration by the full house .

b .

institute of medicine , priority areas for national action: transforming health care quality ( washington: national academy press , 2003 ) .

c. p.l .

106-129 , the healthcare research and quality act of 1999 , directed ahrq to submit to congress annually a report on "disparities in health caredelivery as it relates to racial factors and socioeconomic factors in priority populations," beginning in fy2003 .

the first national report onhealthcare disparities was released on dec. 22 .

2003 , and is available online at http: / / qualitytools.ahrq.gov / disparitiesreport / download_report.aspx .

table 4 .

summary of health information technology ( it ) legislation introduced in the 109thcongress a .

institute of medicine , priority areas for national action: transforming health care quality ( washington: national academy press , 2003 ) .

