on december 8 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

158 , the visa waiver program improvement act of 2015 , by a vote of 407 to 19 .

h.r .

158 , as passed by the house , was included in the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) , which was signed into law on december 18 , 2015 .

among other things , the act changed who can travel under the vwp .

the vwp provisions of the act are discussed in detail in " legislation in the 114th congress . .

previously , on november 30 , 2015 , the obama administration announced several new enhancements to the vwp meant to increase the security of the program .

the changes included modifying the electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) to capture information regarding past travel to countries "constituting a terrorist safe haven," as well as requiring reports from the departments of homeland security and justice to the president on topics ranging from information sharing with vwp countries , to identification of vwp countries who are "deficient in key areas of cooperation," to the delineation of possible pilot programs to collect and use biometric data on vwp travelers .

in addition , the administration will offer assistance to countries to facilitate information sharing and countering terrorist travel .

 ( for a full discussion of the november 30 press release , see " administration initiated vwp security enhancements ." ) .

the visa waiver program allows nationals from certain countries , many of which are in europe , to enter the united states as temporary visitors for business or pleasure without first obtaining a visa from a u.s. consulate abroad .

temporary visitors for business or pleasure from non - vwp countries must obtain a visa from department of state ( dos ) officers at a consular post abroad before coming to the united states .

the terrorist attacks in france and belgium , and the possible threats posed by vwp - country citizens who have radicalized , have increased congressional focus on the program .

while there tends to be agreement that the vwp benefits the u.s. economy by facilitating legitimate travel , there is disagreement on the vwp's impact on national security .

proponents of the program say the vwp strengthens u.s. national security because it sets standards for travel documents , requires information sharing between the member countries and the united states on criminal and security concerns , and mandates reporting of lost and stolen travel documents .

critics of the program argue the vwp could create a security loophole because vwp travelers do not undergo the screening traditionally required to receive a visa .

in general , temporary foreign visitors for business or pleasure from most countries must obtain a "b" nonimmigrant visa from dos officers at a consular post abroad before coming to the united states .

personal interviews are generally required , and consular officers use the consular consolidated database ( ccd ) to screen visa applicants .

in addition to indicating the outcome of any prior visa application of the alien in the ccd , the system links with other databases to flag problems that may make the alien ineligible for a visa under the "grounds for inadmissibility" of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , which include criminal , terrorist , and public health grounds for exclusion .

consular officers are required to check the background of all aliens in the "lookout" databases , including the consular lookout and support system ( class ) and tipoff databases .

under the vwp , the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , may waive the "b" nonimmigrant visa requirement for most aliens traveling from certain countries as temporary visitors for business or pleasure ( tourists ) .

eligible nationals from participating countries must use the web - based electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) to get an approved electronic travel authorization before embarking to the united states , and are admitted into the united states for up to 90 days .

the vwp constitutes one of a few exceptions under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) in which foreign nationals are admitted into the united states without a valid visa .

as of may 2016 , there were 38 countries participating in the vwp .

prior to enactment in december 2015 of the visa waiver improvement and terrorist travel prevention act ( p.l .

114-113 ) , all nationals from a vwp country were eligible to travel under the program — provided they received an esta approval .

p.l .

114-113 changed eligibility for the vwp by prohibiting people who were present in certain countries since march 1 , 2011 , with limited exceptions , from traveling under the vwp .

the specified countries include iraq and syria , any country designated by the secretary of state as having repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism under any provision of law , or any other country or area of concern deemed appropriate by the secretary of dhs .

currently , the prohibition affects those who were present in any of the following countries: iran , iraq , libya , somalia , sudan , syria , and yemen .

the statutory exceptions from this restriction apply to foreign nationals who were in one of the specified countries in order to perform military service in the armed forces of a vwp country , or to perform official duties as an employee of the vwp country .

in addition , the administration has stated that waivers are to be granted on a case - by - case basis , but that the following are general categories of travelers to these countries who may be eligible for a waiver: ( 1 ) individuals who traveled on behalf of international organizations , regional organizations , and sub - national governments on official duty ; ( 2 ) individuals who traveled on behalf of a humanitarian non - governmental organization ( ngo ) on official duty ; ( 3 ) individuals who traveled as journalists for reporting purposes ; ( 4 ) individuals who traveled to iran for legitimate business - related purposes following the conclusion of the joint comprehensive plan of action ( july 14 , 2015 ) ; and ( 5 ) individuals who have travel to iraq for legitimate business - related purposes .

in addition , anyone who is a dual national of a vwp country and one of these specified countries is ineligible to travel under the vwp .

as with the prohibition against using the vwp for those who were present in certain countries , the secretary of dhs has the authority to waive the prohibition on travel under the vwp by certain dual nationals if the secretary of dhs determines that the waiver would be in the law enforcement or national security interests of the united states .

as of the date of this report , dhs has not released any guidance on waivers for dual nationals .

although the vwp eases the documentary requirements for certain nationals from participating countries , it has important restrictions .

aliens entering with a b visa may petition to extend their length of stay in the united states or may petition to change to another nonimmigrant or immigrant status .

aliens entering through the vwp are not permitted to extend their stays except for emergency reasons and then for only 30 days .

additionally , with some limited exceptions , aliens entering through vwp are not permitted to adjust their immigration status .

an alien entering through the vwp who violates the terms of admission becomes deportable without any judicial recourse or review ( except in asylum cases ) .

the terrorist attacks in europe in 2015 and 2016 , and the possible threats posed by vwp country citizens who have radicalized and may have returned from fighting in the middle east for terrorist groups such as the islamic state , have increased congressional focus on the benefits of and risks posed by the visa waiver program .

the vwp is supported by the u.s. travel and tourism industry , the business community , and dos .

the travel and tourism industry views the vwp as a tool to facilitate and encourage foreign visitors for business and pleasure , which results in increased economic growth generated by foreign tourism and commerce for the united states .

dos argues that by waiving the visa requirement for high - volume / low - risk countries , consular workloads are significantly reduced , allowing for streamlined operations , cost savings , and concentration of resources on greater - risk nations in the visa process .

additionally , it is unclear that dos has the resources to issue b visas to all the visitors from vwp countries .

while there tends to be agreement that the vwp benefits the u.s. economy by facilitating legitimate travel , there is disagreement on the vwp's impact on national security , with some arguing that the vwp presents a significant security risk .

in addition , since terrorism does not have national boundaries , critics of the program contend that the vwp should not be based on particular countries , but should allow visa - free travel for low - risk individuals ( eg , a trusted traveler program ) .

furthermore , while the program has reduced the consular workload in program countries since the officers do not have to issue as many b visas , it has increased the workload of immigration inspectors at ports of entry by shifting the noncitizen's first encounter with a u.s. official to ports of entry .

the visa waiver program improvement and terrorist travel prevention act ( h.r .

158 ) was passed by the house on december 8 , 2015 , and enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) on december 18 , 2015 .

nonetheless , some provisions of p.l .

114-113 are controversial and there have been bills introduced subsequently to amend the newly enacted legislation .

in addition , there are several other bills that have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would change some of the vwp requirements to try to augment the security features of the program .

while some of these bills contain provisions similar to ones enacted in p.l .

114-113 , the bills also contain provisions that were not included in the act .

furthermore , bills have also been introduced that propose broad changes to the vwp by , among other things , reinstating the nonimmigrant refusal rate waiver authority , and by allowing dhs to use overstay rates to determine program eligibility .

another legislative proposal would create a new visa waiver program for the u.s. virgin islands , and allow the secretary of dhs to add poland to the vwp .

three bills , h.r .

158 , h.r .

5253 , and s. 1619 have received action .

h.r .

158 , as passed by house on december 8 , 2015 , was enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the provisions related to the vwp in p.l .

114-113 are similar to those in s. 2362 , and s. 2435 .

p.l .

114-113 requires as of april 1 , 2016 , that all foreign nationals traveling under the vwp present an electronic passport ( e - passport ) that is fraud resistant , and incorporates biographic and biometric information ( as determined by the secretary of dhs ) .

no later than october 1 , 2016 , each vwp country has to certify that it has in place mechanisms to validate machine - readable passports and e - passports at each port of entry .

this requirement does not apply to travel between countries within the schengen area .

the act also prohibits people who were present in certain countries since march 1 , 2011 , from traveling under the vwp .

the specified countries include iraq and syria ; any country designated by the secretary of state as having repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism under any provision of law , or any other country or area of concern deemed appropriate by the secretary of dhs .

in addition , anyone who is a dual national of a vwp country and one of these specified countries is ineligible to travel under the vwp .

however , if the secretary of dhs determines that the foreign national was in one of the specified countries in order to perform military service in the armed forces of a vwp country , or to perform official duties as an employee of the vwp country , the prohibition on traveling under the vwp does not apply .

similarly , p.l .

114-113 gives the secretary of dhs the authority to waive the prohibition on travel under the vwp if the secretary of dhs determines that the waiver would be in law enforcement or national security interests of the united states .

the secretary of dhs is required to submit an annual report to congress on each instance where the waiver authority was exercised .

likewise , p.l .

114-113 amended the requirement that countries report lost or stolen passports so that the reporting must be occur no later than 24 hours after a theft or loss is reported to the vwp country .

the act also requires , no later than september 13 , 2016 , that each program country with an international airport certify , to the maximum extend allowed under the laws of the country , that it is screening each foreign national who is admitted to or departs from that country , using relevant interpol databases and notices , or other means designated by the secretary of dhs .

consequently , a country that fails to screen foreign nationals arriving in or departing from that country will be terminated from the vwp .

this screening requirement does not apply to those traveling between countries within the schengen area .

p.l .

114-113 also specifies that the hspd - 6 arrangements and pcsc agreements ( discussed in the section " information sharing " ) not only have to be signed before a country can be designed as a vwp country but have to be fully implemented .

if the secretary of dhs and the secretary of state jointly determine that the vwp country is not sharing information regarding whether a citizen of that country traveling to the united states represents a threat to the security or welfare of the united states or u.s. citizens , the country will be terminated from the program .

the country will be redesignated as a program country as soon as it fulfills the information - sharing requirements .

the act also requires that dhs report biennially to congress on the national security threat posed by each program country .

the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the director of national intelligence and the secretary of state , are also required to annually evaluate program countries based on specified criteria and to identify any country for which nationals of that country present a "high risk" to u.s. national security .

the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of state , can suspend a program country based on a determination that the country presents a high risk to u.s. national security .

moreover , p.l .

114-113 allows the secretary of dhs to shorten the validity period of any esta determination , in addition to revoking the determination .

the secretary of dhs is required to collect information , through esta , on an applicant's previous or multiple citizenships , and to research opportunities to incorporate into esta technology to detect and prevent fraud or deception .

the act also requires dhs to report annually on the number of individuals ( identified by citizenship ) who were denied eligibility to travel under esta or whose eligibility to travel was revoked because they were determined to represent a security threat to the united states .

additionally , dhs is required to report within 30 days from december 18 , 2015 , on ways to strengthen the ability of esta to prevent terrorists and instruments of terrorism from entering the united states .

moreover , the act requires dhs , in consultation with the department of state , to provide assistance , in a risk - based manner , to non - vwp countries to assist the countries in submitting information on lost or stolen travel documents to interpol , and issuing and validating e - passports at ports of entry .

the act also contains a sense of congress that the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) should establish standards for e - passports and obligate the 191 member countries to utilize e - passports as soon as possible .

there are a few provisions in s. 2362 that were not included in p.l .

114-113 .

s. 2362 would require the secretary of dhs to regularly evaluate the questions being asked under esta and to report to congress after the evaluations .

s. 2362 would also require the commissioner of cbp , in consultation with the secretary of dos , to constantly assess the data collected through esta to verify the accuracy of such data .

in addition , s. 2362 would require that cbp submit a report to congress identifying ( 1 ) the five airports in europe that most closely adhere to the requirements for commencing preclearance operations ; and ( 2 ) the airports that would provide significant national security benefits if cbp officers were deployed at the airports .

in addition , under s. 2362 ( and s. 2337 discussed in the next section ) countries would be required to enter into and comply with an agreement to assist in the "operation of an effective air marshal program. .

the newly enacted provision prohibiting dual nationals of vwp countries and certain other countries , including iran , iraq , sudan , and syria , from utilizing the vwp has raised some questions and concerns about the impact on u.s. citizens with dual nationality with one of the specified countries .

some dual nationals of the united states and one of these countries have expressed concerns that they will now need to get a visa to come to the united states ( eg , dual u.s. - iranian citizens ) .

the vwp applies to foreign nationals coming to the united states ; it does not impact u.s. citizens , even those with dual nationality .

in other words , dual u.s. - iranian , u.s. - iraqi , u.s. - sudanese , or u.s. - syrian citizens still do not need a visa to travel to the united states .

however , the provision may impact the ability of such dual nationals to travel visa - free to vwp countries , especially countries that are part of the european union ( eu ) .

as discussed , the vwp is predicated on the idea of reciprocity .

while the act does not affect u.s. citizens , vwp countries may enact similar provisions prohibiting visa - free travel of certain dual national u.s. citizens ( eg , u.s. - iranian ; u.s. - syrian citizens ) to those countries .

concerns have been raised that the provisions enacted in p.l .

114-113 prohibiting dual nationals of vwp countries and specified other countries ( eg , iraq , syria ) from traveling under the vwp are discriminatory and ineffective .

the equal protection in travel act would reinstate the ability of dual nationals from vwp and any other country to travel under the vwp .

s. 2458 would amend p.l .

114-113 to allow the secretary of state , in addition to the secretary of dhs , to designate a country as an area of concern for the purpose of making those who are dual nationals of that country and a vwp country , or have recently traveled to the designated country , ineligible to be admitted to the united states under the vwp .

the bill would also add an exemption to the prohibition on using the vwp for those who were present in a country to perform official duties as an employee of an international organization .

the bill would delay implementation of the prohibition for certain dual nationals and those who traveled to specified countries for 180 days after enactment , and would allow the secretary of dhs and the secretary of state to waive the prohibition for an additional 90 days if it would be in u.s. national security interest .

in addition , on december 18 , 2020 , s. 2458 would sunset the prohibition on certain dual nationals traveling under the vwp .

only s. 2337 would prohibit people who traveled to iraq or syria during the past five years from traveling under the vwp .

the bill would also allow the secretary of dhs to prohibit a foreign national from traveling under the vwp if during the past five years the foreign national has traveled to a country in which a designated foreign terrorist organization has a significant presence and such prohibition is in the u.s. national security interest .

ninety days after enactment both bills would require that those traveling under the vwp present a machine - readable passport that incorporates biometric and document authentication identifiers that comply with the applicable standards established by the icao .

in addition , s. 2337 and s. 2377 would add certain requirements for countries to participate in the program .

the bills would specify that the hspd - 6 arrangements and pcsc agreements ( discussed in the section " information sharing " ) would not only have to be signed before a country could be designated as a vwp country but would also have to be fully implemented within a time frame determined by the secretary of dhs .

in addition , the bills would amend the requirement that countries report lost or stolen passports so that the reporting would have to be done "frequently and promptly. .

under the bills , a country that failed to fully comply with the agreements would be terminated from the vwp .

in addition , countries would be required to enter into and comply with an agreement to assist in the "operation of an effective air marshal program. .

the governments of vwp countries would also be required to comply with u.s. aviation and airport security standards , as determined by the secretary of dhs .

furthermore , the bills would specify considerations that should be used in determining whether a country should become or remain a vwp country .

these considerations include whether the government collects , analyzes , and shares with the united states information on passengers traveling by air pertaining to flights not bound for the united states to identify potentially dangerous individuals who may attempt to travel to the united states ; regularly screens the passports of air travelers against interpol's stolen and lost documents database before allowing such travelers to board a flight arriving in or departing from that country ; regularly and promptly shares information on lost or stolen travel documents with interpol ; collects and analyzes biometric and other information about individuals other than u.s. nationals who are applying for asylum , refugee , or other forms of protections from persecution , and shares such information with the united states ; and collects and shares intelligence on foreign fighters with the united states and multilateral organizations , such as interpol and europol .

in addition , s. 2337 would require foreign nationals traveling under the vwp to submit biometric information , including photographs and fingerprints , before boarding a conveyance to the united states .

the implementation of this requirement would be prioritized for vwp countries that have a significant number of nationals who have traveled to fight with or assist the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) .

the requirement to submit biometric data would take effect no later than one year after enactment , but the secretary of dhs would have the authority to delay implementation for a total of two more years for countries where an extension of the deadline would not present a significant risk to national security .

under the bill , the secretary of dhs could determine that a vwp country has met this requirement if the country signs and implements an agreement to collect and share biometric information for individuals seeking to travel to the united states through the vwp ; compare the collected biometric information against the information in the traveler's passport before the traveler boards a conveyance to the united states ; and share the results of the comparison and any other information indicating that the traveler may pose a threat with dhs before the traveler boards a conveyance bound for the united states .

s. 2377 would require the secretary of dhs to initiate a demonstration program to conduct the advance verification of biometric data from a random sample of foreign nationals entering under the vwp .

the program would be required to be completed within 15 months of enactment .

both bills would mandate that the esta fees cover the cost of administering esta , as well as the security enhancements under the bill .

h.r .

4122 would prohibit people who traveled to certain countries during the past five years from traveling under the vwp .

the specified countries include afghanistan , egypt , iraq , yemen , somalia , and nigeria ; any country designated by the secretary of state as having repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism under any provision of law ; or any other country deemed appropriate by the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretaries of dhs and treasury , and the director of national intelligence .

h.r .

4173 would prohibit those who traveled to iraq or syria in the previous five years from entering the united states under the vwp .

the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of state , would have the authority to waive the prohibition if appropriate .

h.r .

5253 was ordered reported by the house committee on homeland security on june 8 , 2016 .

in relation to the vwp , the bill would require that no later than one year after enactment , the commissioner of cbp screen electronic passports at airports by reading the passports' embedded chip , and to the greatest extent practicable , utilize facial recognition technology or other biometric technology , as determined by the commissioner , to screen travelers .

the bill would also require cbp to , in a risk - based manner , continuously screen individuals issued any visa and individuals who are present or will soon be arriving in the united states against the appropriate criminal , national security , and terrorism databases .

h.r .

1401 ( §3 ) , s. 2091 ( §3 ) , h.r .

2686 , and s. 1507 contain almost identical provisions regarding the vwp .

the bills would authorize the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of state , to designate a country as a vwp country if the country's overstay rate and / or refusal rate was less than 3% in the previous fiscal year .

the bills would also allow the secretary of dhs to waive the refusal rate requirement if certain conditions were met .

these conditions are similar to those in current law regarding the nonimmigrant refusal rate waiver .

the bills would revise the current probationary period and procedures for terminating a country's participation in the vwp if that country failed to comply with any of the program's requirements .

not later than 180 days after enactment , the bills would require that the government accountability office ( gao ) conduct a review of the methods used by dhs to track aliens entering and exiting the united states , and to detect aliens who overstay their authorized period of admission .

the bills also would require dhs to submit to congress an evaluation of the security risks of aliens who enter the united states without an approved electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) verification and description of improvements .

this report would be due no later than 90 days after the date of enactment .

the bills would also express a sense of congress that dhs should prioritize reviews of countries where circumstances indicate that review is necessary or desirable .

s. 1619 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , included a provision ( §567 ) that would have allowed the secretary of dhs to designate poland as a vwp country regardless of the statutory requirements for participation .

h.r .

2116 would create a visa waiver program for nationals from caribbean community ( caricom ) nations entering the u.s. virgin islands for a maximum of 30 days .

countries that are members or associate members of the caribbean community ( caricom ) would be eligible if their inclusion in the virgin islands visa waiver program ( vivwp ) would not represent a threat to the welfare , safety , or security of the united states or its territories and commonwealths .

the bill would allow the governor of the u.s. virgin islands to request that the secretaries of the interior and dhs add a particular country to the vivwp .

in determining whether to allow a nation to participate in the vivwp , the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretaries of the interior and dos , would have to consider all relevant factors , including electronic travel authorizations , procedures for reporting lost and stolen passports , repatriation of aliens , rates of refusal for nonimmigrant visitor visas , overstays , exit systems , and information exchange .

visa waiver pilot program the visa waiver program was established as a temporary program ( visa waiver pilot program ) by the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-603 ) .

to become a program country under the pilot program , a country must have offered reciprocal privileges to u.s. citizens , and have had an average non - immigrant refusal rate of 2% for the previous two years with neither year's refusal rate exceeding 2.5% .

participation in the pilot program was originally limited to eight countries .

congress periodically passed legislation to extend the program's authorization , expand the number of countries allowed to participate in the program , and modify the qualifying criteria .

between 1986 and 1997 , congress passed the following five laws that made changes to the visa waiver pilot program: the immigration technical corrections act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-525 ) ; the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-649 ) , which inserted further requirements for the program and removed the limit on the number of countries that could participate in the program ; the miscellaneous and technical immigration and naturalization amendments of 1991 ( p.l .

102-232 ) ; the immigration and nationality technical corrections act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-416 ) , which created a probationary status to allow countries whose nonimmigrant visa refusal rates were higher than 2% but less than 3.5% to enter the program on a probationary basis ; and the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-208 ) , which created a new type of probationary status for countries in the program that failed to meet certain criteria , and removed the probationary status that had allowed countries with nonimmigrant visa refusal rates higher than 2% but less than 3.5% to enter the program .

the pilot program was scheduled to expire on september 30 , 1997 , but temporary extensions were included in the continuing resolutions passed in the 105 th congress .

the commerce , justice , state , and judiciary ( cjs ) fy1998 appropriations act ( p.l .

105-119 ) also contained an extension through april 30 , 1998 .

in 1998 , congress passed legislation ( p.l .

105-173 ) that not only extended the program through april 30 , 2000 , but made other changes to the standard by which countries are selected ( designated ) to participate in the vwp .

by 1999 , program participation had grown to include 29 countries .

visa waiver permanent program act on october 30 , 2000 , the visa waiver permanent program act was signed into law ( p.l .

106-396 ) .

the statutory authority for the visa waiver pilot program had expired on april 30 , 2000 , but in the interim , the commissioner of the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) exercised the attorney general's parole authority to extend the program temporarily .

besides making this program's authorization permanent , the visa waiver permanent program act included provisions designed to strengthen documentary and reporting requirements .

p.l .

106-396 included provisions that mandated that by october 1 , 2007 , all entrants under the vwp must have machine - readable passports ; required that all visa waiver program applicants be checked against lookout systems ; required ongoing evaluations of participating countries ( not less than once every five years ) ; required the collection of visa waiver program arrival / departure data at air and sea ports of entry ; and required that the calculation of visa refusal rates for determining country eligibility shall not include any refusals based on race , sex , or disability .

at the time , many maintained that p.l .

106-396 balanced the competing concerns of facilitating travel and tightening immigration controls .

usa patriot act of 2001 the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) , signed into law on october 26 , 2001 , advanced the deadline for all entrants under the vwp to have machine - readable passports to october 1 , 2003 , but allowed the secretary of state to waive this requirement until october 1 , 2007 , if the vwp country could show that it was making progress toward issuing machine - readable passports .

in addition , the usa patriot act directed the secretary of state each year until 2007 to ascertain that designated vwp countries had established programs to develop tamper - resistant passports .

on september 24 , 2003 , the secretary of state extended the deadline for visitors from 21 vwp countries to present a machine - readable passport at the ports of entry until october 26 , 2004 .

at this time , an entrant under the vwp with a passport which is not machine - readable must obtain a visa to travel to the united states .

enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 ( border security act ) , signed into law on may 14 , 2002 , required all vwp countries to certify that they report in a timely manner the theft of blank passports , and required , prior to admission in the united states , that all aliens who enter under the vwp are checked against a lookout system .

the border security act also mandated that by october 26 , 2004 , the government of each vwp country needed to certify that it has established a program to issue to its nationals machine - readable passports that are tamper - resistant and incorporate a biometric identifier .

the border security act specified that any person applying for admission to the united states under the vwp must have a tamper - resistant , machine - readable passport with a biometric identifier unless the passport was issued prior to october 26 , 2004 .

the usa patriot act established the deadline for all foreign nationals entering under the vwp to have machine - readable , tamper - resistant passports , and the new requirement of biometrics in the passports did not change the deadline in the usa patriot act for the presentation of machine - readable , tamper - resistant passports .

the biometric passport requirement deadline was extended to october 27 , 2005 , by p.l .

108-299 .

thus , as of october 27 , 2005 ( the day after the new deadline ) , all entrants under the vwp were required to present machine - readable , tamper - resistant passports ( as required by the usa patriot act , and p.l .

108-299 ) , but only passports issued after october 26 , 2005 , were required to have a biometric identifier .

although congress extended the deadline for vwp countries to certify that they had a program to issue machine - readable passports with biometric identifiers , most vwp countries would have been unable to meet the new , october 26 , 2005 , deadline , especially if the biometric requirement could only have been fulfilled by countries who had electronic data chips in their passports ( e - passports ) .

in addition , there was resistance in congress to grant another extension of the biometric deadline .

as a result , the u.s. government clarified that a digitized photograph printed on a data page in the passport would count as a biometric for the october 26 , 2005 , requirement .

thus , only france and italy were unable to meet the new deadline , but have since come into compliance .

in addition , any passports used by vwp travelers issued after october 26 , 2006 , requires integrated chips with information from the data page ( e - passports ) .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 p.l .

108-458 , the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 , added the requirement that by october 26 , 2006 , as a condition of being in the vwp , each vwp country must certify that it is developing a program to issue tamper - resistant , machine - readable visa documents that incorporate biometric identifiers which are verifiable at the country's port of entry .

implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 signed into law on august 3 , 2007 , section 711 of p.l .

110-53 ( h.r .

1 ) allowed the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of dos , to waive the nonimmigrant refusal rate requirement for admission to the vwp on the date on which the secretary of dhs certified to congress that an air exit system is in place that can verify the departure of not less than 97% of foreign nationals that exit through u.s. airports .

in addition , the secretary of dhs also had to certify to congress that the electronic travel authorization system ( discussed below ) is operational , prior to being able to waive the nonimmigrant refusal rate requirement .

until june 30 , 2009 , the air exit system did not need to incorporate biometric identifiers ; however , after that date , if the air exit system is unable to match an alien's biometric information with relevant watch lists and manifest information , the secretary of dhs's authority to waive the nonimmigrant refusal rate is suspended until the air exit system has the specified biometric capacity .

for admission to the vwp , a country who receives a refusal rate waiver also has to meet all the security requirements of the program ; be determined by the secretary of dhs to have a totality of security risk mitigation measures which provide assurances that the country's participation in the program would not compromise u.s. law enforcement and security interests , or the enforcement of u.s. immigration laws ; have had a sustained reduction in visa refusal rates , and have existing conditions for the rates to continue to decline ; have cooperated with the united states on counterterrorism initiatives and information sharing before the date of its designation , and be expected to continue such cooperation ; and have , during the previous fiscal year , a nonimmigrant visas refusal rate of not more than 10% , or an overstay rate that did not exceed the maximum overstay rate established by the secretaries of dhs and dos for countries receiving waivers of the nonimmigrant refusal rate to participate in the vwp the program .

p.l .

110-53 also specified that in determining whether to waive the nonimmigrant refusal rate requirement , the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of dos , may take into consideration other factors affecting u.s. security , such as the country's airport security and passport standards , whether the country has an effective air marshal program , and the estimated overstay rate for nationals from the country .

in addition , p.l .

110-53 made several changes to the criteria to qualify as a vwp country , which were intended to enhance the security of the program .

as previously mentioned , the act mandated that the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of state , develop and implement an electronic travel authorization system ( the system ) , through which each alien electronically provides , in advance of travel , the biographical information necessary to determine whether the alien is eligible to travel to the united states and enter under the vwp .

aliens using the system are charged a fee that is required to be set at a level so that the cost of creating and administering the system is covered by the fees .

p.l .

110-53 also required the secretary of dhs , no later than one year after enactment , to establish an exit system that records the departure of every alien who entered under the vwp and left the united states by air .

the exit system is required to match the alien's biometric information against relevant watch lists and immigration information , and compare such biographical information against manifest information collected by airlines to confirm that the alien left the united states .

furthermore , under p.l .

110-53 , to participate in the vwp , countries are required to enter into an agreement with the united states to report or make available through interpol information about the theft or loss of passports .

the agreements have to specify strict time limits for the reporting of this information .

in addition , to be part of the vwp , countries have to accept the repatriation of any citizen , former citizen , or national against whom a final order of removal is issued no later than three weeks after the order is issued .

also , the countries are required to enter into an agreement with the united states to share information regarding whether a national of that country traveling to the united states represents a threat to u.s. security or welfare .

the act requires the secretary of dhs to provide technical assistance to vwp countries to assist the countries in fulfilling the requirements of the program .

in addition , p.l .

110-53 requires the director of national intelligence to conduct intelligence assessments of countries .

for new vwp countries , the reviews must occur prior to their admittance into the vwp .

for existing vwp countries , the reviews should be done in conjunction with the biannual country reviews .

the act also requires the director of national intelligence to immediately inform the secretary of dhs of any current and credible threat of imminent danger to the united states or its citizens that originates from a vwp country .

upon receiving such notification , the secretary of dhs , in consultation with the secretary of dhs , may suspend a country from the vwp without any prior notice .

once the country's participation in the vwp no longer poses a security threat , the secretary of dhs shall reinstate the country in the vwp .

