although allocation of water resources is generally a matter of state law , the federal government may also allocate water rights .

under the supreme court's 1908 winters v. united states decision , when congress creates an indian reservation , the water necessary to fulfill the reservation's purposes is reserved implicitly .

although this doctrine appears to be fairly straightforward , the scarcity of sufficient water in more arid parts of the country has resulted in contentious debate over the requirements of winters and its impact on competing water rights .

because federal reserved water rights under the winters doctrine often have not been quantified but are generally senior to other water rights , the rights of more junior water users can be affected significantly , when these federal rights are exercised .

this report provides background on indian reserved water rights under winters .

it analyzes the scope of these rights , including the water sources that may be used to fulfill the rights and the quantification standards courts commonly use to clarify the rights .

the report also examines the effect of the mccarran amendment , through which congress authorized state courts to adjudicate indian reserved water rights .

in winters , the supreme court examined tribal rights to water associated with the fort belknap reservation located in what would later become montana .

the fort belknap reservation was created by an agreement in 1888 between tribal parties and the u.s. government .

at the time , the government had a policy seeking to transform native americans from "a nomadic and uncivilized people … to become a pastoral and civilized people" by providing them lands to develop for such purposes .

by 1905 , the area experienced water shortages that ultimately resulted in the winters lawsuit being filed to enforce tribal rights to water against non - indian water users who had been diverting water from the region .

in announcing its decision , the court explained that the lands provided under the agreement for the purpose of developing an agrarian society "were arid and , without irrigation , were practically valueless. .

the court also noted that ambiguities in the agreement , such as the status of the water rights related to the land , are to be "resolved from the standpoint of the indians," as a rule of interpretation .

the court held that: the power of the government to reserve the waters and exempt them from appropriation under the state laws is not denied , and could not be .

that the government did reserve them we have decided , and for a use which would be necessarily continued through the years .

the court has continued to recognize the principle derived from winters in both indian and non - indian contexts .

in 1976 , the court noted that it "has long held that when the federal government withdraws its land from the public domain and reserves it for a federal purpose , the government , by implication , reserves appurtenant water then unappropriated to the extent needed to accomplish the purpose of the reservation. .

under the winter s doctrine , the priority and extent of indian reserved water rights is affected by the purposes of the indian reservation , the date when the indian reservation was created , the quantification of water sufficient to accomplish those purposes , and the sources of water that may be used to fulfill the particular water rights .

while the supreme court recognized indian reserved water rights in winters , it only provided that the extent of such rights were those necessary to fulfill the purpose of the reservation .

quantification of reserved rights was left for later judicial interpretation .

indian reserved water rights are subject to adjudication by federal and state courts .

federal courts have historically been authorized via federal question jurisdiction to determine indian reserved water rights under the winters doctrine .

in 1952 , however , congress enacted an appropriations rider known as the mccarran amendment that waived federal sovereign immunity in specified forms of water adjudications .

although the language does not explicitly mention indian water rights , the mccarran amendment gives consent to join the federal government in state lawsuits regarding adjudication of water rights in river systems and the administration of those rights .

the supreme court has held that the mccarran amendment allows state courts to adjudicate indian reserved water rights .

as a result , the mccarran amendment has had a significant effect on indian water law .

as evidenced in the varying outcomes of decisions related to the scope and quantification of indian reserved water rights , the states have not interpreted the requirements of winters uniformly , adding to the complexity of determining a tribe's reserved water rights .

the grant of state jurisdiction over the adjudication of indian reserved water rights has resulted in a contentious debate over the appropriate forum for such claims .

the court has explained that congress' enactment of the mccarran amendment indicated a policy supporting "the availability of comprehensive state systems for adjudication of water rights" and noted that concurrent federal proceedings may lead to duplicative and possibly contradictory judgments .

however , concerns exist regarding the expansion of jurisdiction over federal water rights to state courts .

tribes have long considered state courts to be hostile , and the prospect of having those same courts adjudicate indian reserved water rights has been one of the primary motivations for pursuing negotiated settlements .

also , some have questioned the ability of state trial courts to adjudicate indian water law issues , which often involve complicated federal legal issues .

