in the aftermath of recent key events , macedonia seeks to consolidate progress toward itseuroatlantic integration goals in 2005-2006 and hopes to receive invitations to join nato and theeu in that time frame .

macedonia continues to face internal and external challenges to these efforts .

in 2004 , macedonia's political landscape faced upheaval .

in early 2004 , president boristrajkovski , a key proponent of the power - sharing deal that ended the inter - ethnic conflict in 2001,was killed in a plane accident .

former prime minister branko crvenkovski won direct presidentialelections to succeed him in april .

his successor as prime minister resigned later in the year but wasreplaced by prime minister buckovski of the social democratic party .

later in the year , macedonia held an opposition - initiated referendum to halt thedecentralization process , a key component of the 2001 ohrid peace process to implementpower - sharing arrangements among different ethnic groups in macedonia .

on the eve of the vote,the united states formally recognized macedonia under its constitutional name , the "republic ofmacedonia," ( 1 ) in a moveto support to the multi - ethnic macedonian government and to the ohrid peace process , and thereferendum failed .

twice - postponed municipal elections were finally held in march 2005. international observers assessed them to be in accordance with international standards but marredby some serious irregularities .

notwithstanding the u.s. move on recognition , u.s. and european officials have emphasizedthe need to resolve the longstanding dispute between macedonia and greece over the namemacedonia .

u.n. - sponsored talks have continued .

in 2005 , the u.n. envoy to this process submitteda compromise proposal for consideration , but no mutually agreeable negotiated solution has yet beenreached .

macedonia is a small , land - locked country in southeastern europe , formerly part ofyugoslavia .

its population of about 2 million people includes approximately 64% slavmacedonians , a large ethnic albanian minority ( representing about 25% of the population , accordingto the 2002 census ) , as well as some ethnic turks , roma ( gypsies ) , and serbs .

for nearly a decadeafter gaining independence in 1991 , macedonia managed to avoid the kind of bloody ethnic conflictthat engulfed other former yugoslav republics , and even appeared to serve as a sort of model forethnic co - existence in the region .

nevertheless , the international community remained concernedabout the possible consequences of any "spillover" of fighting into macedonia , since it was fearedthat conflict once sparked in macedonia could spread beyond its borders and lead to a regional war .

in early 2001 , an ethnic insurgency threatened to derail macedonia's fragile stability and leadto another extended conflict in the balkans .

ethnic albanian guerrillas calling themselves the"national liberation army" ( nla , many with ties to the former kosovo liberation army ) claimedresponsibility for a series of attacks on macedonian police units .

the incidents sparked aneight - month armed conflict between the insurgents , who claimed to be fighting for improved rightsfor the ethnic albanian community , and macedonia's police and armed forces .

the conflict spreadfrom the border region with kosovo to areas around the capital , skopje .

in august 2001 , european and u.s. peace envoys achieved an agreement among macedonia'smain political parties - - both slav and ethnic albanian - - to resolve the crisis .

the ohrid frameworkagreement outlined a package of political reforms to expand the rights of the ethnic albanianminority that was to be implemented as the rebel force disbanded and disarmed under natosupervision .

key aspects of the agreement are outlined below .

implementation of the frameworkagreement at first progressed slowly and unsteadily , but consistent international support and pressurehave encouraged greater stability and political normalization .

 ( 2 ) macedonia's current multi - ethnic government remains committed to the ohrid process .

itssurrounding region has remained relatively calm , with all western balkan states seeking closerassociation with and membership in nato and the european union .

regional tensions could growin the coming months and years as deliberations begin over the disputed status of neighboringkosovo .

at the international level , since september 11 , 2001 , u.s. and international attention andresources have shifted away from the balkans and toward other troubled regions of the world,especially in the middle east .

the united states continues to support multilateral efforts to stabilizemacedonia , but has increasingly looked to the european union to play a larger international role inthe balkans , starting with macedonia .

the growing eu role includes both operational elements anda broader integration strategy .

the united states has long maintained that peace and security in the former yugoslavrepublic of macedonia is important for balkan stability and u.s. interests .

during the 1990s , theunited states remained actively engaged in multilateral efforts to prevent the spread of ethnicconflict to macedonia , bolster macedonian independence and state viability , and manage bilateraldisputes between macedonia and greece .

u.s. and other international leaders feared that anyprolonged violent conflict involving macedonia could swiftly become internationalized andimplicate neighboring states , including nato allies .

they therefore frequently expressed supportfor macedonia's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

the multi - year deployment of a smallcontingent of u.s. military forces to macedonia as part of a u.n. mission in the early 1990s - - thefirst engagement of u.s. military ground forces in the balkans - - further demonstrated the u.s.commitment to the macedonian piece of the regional stability puzzle .

when violent inter - ethnicincidents threatened to embroil all of macedonia in early 2001 , u.s. representatives played a key rolein international efforts to defuse the conflict , formulate the ohrid framework agreement for peace,and oversee post - conflict stabilization and peace implementation .

the united states and its european allies share the same broad goals for macedonia , whichforesee its full integration , along with other western balkan states , into euro - atlantic institutions anda whole and free europe at peace .

toward this end , successive u.s .

administrations have workedto achieve sustainable peace in the region and have promoted the open - ended enlargement policiesof nato and the european union .

at the same time , the united states has supported the gradualbut steady process of shifting greater international responsibility for the balkan region to theeuropean union .

the eu and its member states have provided the bulk of international financialassistance to the former yugoslavia and currently account for most of the international militaryforces in the region .

the bush administration has given greater emphasis to accelerating andsupporting this process , especially with u.s. attention and resources intensely focused on the globalwar on terrorism , iraq , and other issues .

in 2005 , the bush administration announced a renewedfocus on the region as international processes to manage the issue of kosovo get under way .

however , most observers believe that the united states must still work in concert with the europeanunion , since the eu represents the ultimate stabilizing prospect for countries in the region .

several additional u.s. policy priorities relate directly or indirectly to macedonia .

forexample , macedonia has played a small but symbolic and steady role with regard to the global waron terror and evolving situation in iraq .

prior to the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in march 2003 , foreignministers from the ten - nation vilnius group of nato candidate countries , including macedonia,signed a joint statement supporting u.s. - led efforts to disarm saddam hussein .

their positioncontrasted sharply with the opposition expressed by france and germany to military action in iraq .

in the post - war environment , the united states has sought to increase international participation inpeacekeeping efforts in iraq .

macedonia , along with most countries in east central europe andeurasia , agreed to send forces to the u.s. - led international coalition .

a special forces unit of about30 macedonian troops currently serves in iraq .

about 20 macedonian troops also serve in theinternational security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan , commanded by nato .

u.s.officials have frequently commended macedonia's support to the united states in the global war onterrorism , including defense secretary rumsfeld during a visit to macedonia in october 2004 .

without specifying individual country preferences , u.s. officials have expressed continuedsupport for nato's open door policy with regard to future candidate countries .

with nato'slatest round of enlargement in 2004 , the western balkan states are now surrounded by natomembers .

the united states has encouraged macedonia's participation in nato's membershipaction plan , which helps candidate countries prepare for nato membership .

u.s. participation inthe adriatic charter initiative reflects u.s. support for efforts by macedonia , croatia , and albaniato advance their integration into nato .

the united states maintains targeted sanctions against extremist individuals and groups thatthreaten peace and stability in the balkans .

executive order 13304 blocks the assets of 150designated persons and groups ( mostly from bosnia ) and prohibits most transactions with them .

 ( 30 ) the list extends to manydozens of individuals identified from macedonia and other western balkan countries and includesthe albanian national army , which the administration has labeled a criminal extremist group .

theunited states may also impose sanctions against countries that fail to take measures to countertransnational trafficking of persons .

the western balkan region is a transit and destination point fortrafficked women and children .

the state department's 2005 report on global trafficking in personsdesignated macedonia to be a "tier 2" country , or one whose government does not fully comply withthe minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking .

the report dropped macedonia from tier1 in 2004 to tier 2 because of its "lack of progress in strengthening its anti - trafficking efforts. .

 ( 31 ) the united states continues to provide bilateral assistance to macedonia under the supportfor east european democracy ( seed ) act .

originally authorized to assist transition efforts of thecentral european countries , seed act assistance is now almost exclusively targeted on countriesin the western balkan region .

macedonia was allocated about $39 million seed act funds infy2004 and $34 million in fy2005 .

the administration requested $39 million in seed assistancefor fy2006 .

the united states also provides security assistance ( fmf and imet ) , anti - terrorismassistance , and a peace corps program to macedonia .

u.s. programs in macedonia seek to facilitateand strengthen the reform process outlined by the framework agreement , and furtheringmacedonia's transition to a market - based economy , democratic consolidation , and integration intonato and the eu .

macedonia has nondiscriminatory trading status ( ntr ) with the united statesand is eligible for generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) benefits .

another priority for the bush administration has been to secure bilateral agreements withcountries that are parties to the international criminal court ( icc ) on exempting u.s. personnelfrom possible extradition to the icc .

congress has conditioned the provision of u.s. militaryassistance to non - allied countries on such exemption agreements ( dubbed "article 98" agreementsafter a provision in the icc's rome statute ) .

the macedonian government concluded a so - called"article 98" exemption agreement with the united states in june 2003 ; as a result , president bushwaived the prohibition on u.s. military assistance with respect to macedonia .

 ( 32 ) the administrationobligated about $8 million in foreign military financing and $0.7 million in international militaryeducation and training program funds for macedonia in fy2004 ; and $6.5 million in fmf and$0.65 in imet for fy2005 .

in contrast , the european union , whose members strongly support theicc , has opposed the u.s. effort to secure these bilateral agreements and expressed regret aboutmacedonia's agreement with the united states .

macedonia's actions on this issue suggest to someobservers continued strong u.s. political influence over macedonia's government .

many of the policy issues outlined above are of direct or indirect concern to congress .

previous congresses have generally supported , and occasionally insisted on , shifting greaterinternational responsibility for peacekeeping and reconstruction in the balkans to the europeanunion .

while members of congress may be divided on the question of a full withdrawal of u.s.forces from bosnia or kosovo , the handover of the macedonia mission from nato to eu handsin early 2003 was seemingly uncontroversial .

more controversial was the administration's movein november 2004 to recognize macedonia by its constitutional name .

for example , senatorsarbanes issued a statement calling the decision inopportune and counter - productive .

 ( 33 ) some members haveurged the parties to reach a mutually acceptable solution .

a primary issue of regional interest in congress is the future of kosovo .

many membershave gone on record in support of independence for kosovo , and such an outcome may carrysignificant implications for neighboring macedonia .

congress is also interested in the future ofnato enlargement , including nato's decisions on future candidates and the ability of candidatesstates such as macedonia to meet nato standards for membership and contribute meaningfully tothe alliance .

legislation .

in the first session of the 108thcongress , the house passed h.con.res .

209 , a concurrent resolution commending thesigning of the united states - adriatic charter , on june 23 by a vote of 381 to 1 .

the senate agreedto h.con.res .

209 with amendments on july 29 .

in february , the senate passed s.con.res .

4 , commending the support of 18 european nations , including macedonia,for iraq's full compliance with u.n. security council resolution 1441 , and their expressions ofsolidarity with the united states .

in the second session , the house passed a resolution ( h.res .

558 ) in march 2004 that welcomed the accession of seven countries intonato , called for the process of nato enlargement to remain open , and recommended a natosummit to review the applications of albania , croatia , and macedonia by 2007 .

the house andsenate passed separate resolutions ( h.res .

540 and s.res .

314 ) in march2004 expressing condolences for the untimely death of macedonian president boris trajkovski andcommemorating his leadership .

in november 2004 , the house introduced h.con.res .

530 , which encouraged greece and macedonia to continue negotiations to determine a mutuallyacceptable official name for macedonia .

