congress has played a key role in fostering the development of civilian capacity and capabilities to deal with conflicts overseas .

"first generation" efforts were the establishment in 2004 of the former office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( s / crs ) .

this office was the result of widespread concern that the u.s. government lacked appropriate civilian "tools" to help stem , stabilize , and otherwise address conflicts that were perceived as a threat to the united states after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) .

senator richard g. lugar and former senator joseph r. biden jr. provided the impetus to establish it in permanent law .

the 113 th congress may wish to play a continuing role regarding civilian capacity and capabilities by examining "second generation" efforts , which include the state department bureau of conflict and stabilization operations ( cso ) .

in november 2011 , the obama administration announced its establishment of this bureau , which integrated s / crs .

cso is intended to provide the institutional focus for policy and "operational solutions" to prevent , respond to , and stabilize crises .

the evolution from s / crs to cso appears to have responded to changing perceptions of the security environment , s / crs's perceived utility , and budget constraints .

this report provides background on the origins and development of s / crs and related capabilities .

it also discusses four issues raised during the s / crs years that may still be relevant for the cso bureau: perceptions of s / crs's effectiveness , the appropriate size for civilian response corps ( crc ) , flexible funding for stabilization operations , and funding for a reserve component .

it does not cover events or perceptions since the formation of the cso bureau and will not be updated .

for current information on cso , see crs report r42775 , in brief: state department bureau of conflict and stabilization operations ( cso ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

concerns about the need for the development of appropriate civilian capabilities to address conflict situations , particularly state - building tasks in post - conflict situations , began well over a decade before the creation of s / crs .

this concern grew from u.s. military operations in haiti , somalia , bosnia , and elsewhere , where military forces were tasked with a variety of state - building tasks , such as creating justice systems , assisting police , and promoting governance .

with the wars in afghanistan and iraq , consensus increased that the united states must develop adequate civilian organizational structures , procedures , and personnel to respond effectively to post - conflict and other "stabilization and reconstruction" ( s&r ) situations .

the george w. bush administration launched several initiatives to do just that .

the centerpiece of its efforts was the establishment of the s / crs in the office of the secretary of state .

created in mid - 2004 , s / crs was tasked with designing , and in some cases establishing , the new structures within the state department and elsewhere that would allow civilian agencies to develop effective policies , processes , and personnel to build stable and democratic states .

among other tasks , s / crs developed plans for the creation of a civilian "surge" capability that could respond rapidly to s&r emergencies .

in the early months of the obama administration , administration officials signaled their support for civilian s&r capabilities .

in her january 2009 confirmation hearings before the senate foreign relations committee , secretary of state hillary r. clinton mentioned the state department's new s&r responsibilities , citing a department need to demonstrate competence and secure funding to carry them out .

secretary of defense robert gates , while serving in that position under former president george w. bush , urged the development of civilian capabilities in major speeches .

as senator , vice president joseph biden was the co - sponsor , with senator lugar , of legislation , first introduced in 2004 , to create an office within the state department that would coordinate u.s. government s&r operations and deploy civilian government employees and private citizens to carry out state - building activities in crises abroad .

in its second session , the 110 th congress enacted legislation that "operationalized" certain groups of personnel within the department of state and other federal agencies for s&r efforts by authorizing the creation of federal civilian "response" units , as well as the creation of a volunteer s&r civilian reserve force , akin to the military reserve force .

this legislation advanced the work of previous congresses regarding bush administration initiatives to improve the conduct of ( s&r ) efforts .

with the passage in september 2008 of title xvi of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( s. 3001 / p.l .

110-417 , known as the lugar - biden bill after its sponsors ) , signed into law october 14 , 2008 , congress established s / crs as part of permanent law .

this law formally "operationalized" certain units in civilian federal agencies , most particularly the state department ; it expanded the state department's functions to include effecting change through the deployment of "on - the - ground" personnel and programs dedicated to promoting security and stability in transitions from conflict and post - conflict situations .

this was accomplished by authorizing the creation of a two component "readiness response" corps consisting of a small active unit of federal employees drawn from several agencies and a federal standby unit , and a large civilian reserve corps , analogous to the military reserve .

the state department's december 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and defense review ( qddr ) , with its broad reform agenda for state department and usaid structures and activities , addressed potential changes to s / crs , the response corps , and the reserves .

the qddr proposed reorganizing the structures to enhance the state department's ability to develop and implement policy to address crises , conflict , and stability , including endowing an expanded version of s / crs's mandate and capabilities in a new bureau for conflict and stabilization operations .

the obama administration put some of the qddr proposals into action when it established the cso bureau .

former president george w. bush's pledge , articulated in his february 2 , 2005 , state of the union address , "to build and preserve a community of free and independent nations , with governments that answer to their citizens , and reflect their own cultures" cast the once - discredited concept of building or rebuilding government institutions , economies , and civic cultures in a new light .

during the 1990s , many policymakers considered the establishment of new institutions in troubled countries to be an overly expensive , if not futile exercise .

the use of u.s. military forces for such activities , particularly in the first half of the decade , was troubling to many members .

the bush administration , in response to concerns about the threats posed by weak and fragile states , reframed both u.s. security and international development policy and initiated dramatic corresponding changes in u.s. governmental structures and practices .

these changes , the bush administration argued , would enable the united states to perform such tasks more efficiently and at a lesser cost , particularly in transitions from conflict and in post - conflict situations .

a key component of these changes was the establishment and reinforcement of new civilian structures and forces , in particular s / crs and the civilian response / reserve corps .

the bush administration made these new civilian entities a prominent feature in two initiatives: the national security presidential directive 44 ( nspd - 44 ) of december 2005 on the management of interagency reconstruction and stabilization operations and the "transformational diplomacy" reorganization of state department personnel and practices announced in january 2006 .

these initiatives were intended to enhance the united states' ability to function effectively on the world scene in the environment created by the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 .

soon after 9 / 11 , many analysts began to predict that the greatest threats to u.s. security often would emerge within states that are either too weak to police their territory or lack the political will or capacity to do so .

to respond to those threats with a new "whole - of - government" approach , in 2006 former secretary of state condoleezza rice outlined a new u.s. foreign policy strategy focusing on the "intersections of diplomacy , democracy promotion , economic reconstruction and military security" and involving extensive changes in government to carry that strategy out .

state - building ( or nation - building as it is often called ) was at the center of this strategy .

both initiatives reinforced the important role that the bush administration gave s / crs in policymaking and implementation dealing with conflict transitions and weak and fragile states .

the effort to expand civilian capabilities to perform stabilization and reconstruction tasks reached an important benchmark in october 2008 .

through title xvi of the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) , congress amended the basic foreign assistance and state department statutes to ( 1 ) authorize the president to provide assistance for a reconstruction and stabilization crisis , ( 2 ) formally establish s / crs and assign it specific functions , and ( 3 ) authorize a response readiness corps ( rrc ) and a civilian reserve corps ( crc ) .

the authority to provide assistance for a reconstruction and stabilization crisis was created by amending chapter 1 of part iii of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa , 22 u.s.c .

2734 et seq. ) .

by inserting a new section .

this authority is , however , subject to a time limitation: it may be exercised only during fy2009-fy2011 .

the new authority for s / crs , the rrc , and the crc was created by amending title i of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( 22 u.s.c .

2651a et seq. ) .

these authorities are permanent .

s / crs worked to develop the knowledge , capacity , and procedures to ably respond to the needs of countries at risk of conflict , in transitions from conflict , and in the early stages of recovery from conflict .

s / crs grew slowly from a few dozen to somewhat under 200 .

the numbers varied from time to time .

staff was largely drawn from the state department ( foreign service officers and state department permanent civil service employees ) and several contributed by other executive branch agencies , including justice , the office of the director of national intelligence , usaid , dod , the army corps of engineers , the department of agriculture , and the department of health and human services .

it also included a good number of contract employees working for s / crs , as well as fellows and interns .

s / crs carried out a wide range of activities: monitoring potential conflict , planning for u.s. responses to conflict , and evaluating and initiating programs to prevent conflict or the spread of conflict , among others .

on july 16 , 2008 , then secretary of state rice formally launched the civilian response corps active and standby components with a speech thanking congress for the passage of funding in the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 , to establish the crc .

under plans developed by the bush administration ( and continued by the obama administration ) the three - component corps would consist of a 250-member active component ( crc - a ) of u.s. government employees who could deploy within 48 hours , a 2,000-member standby component ( crc - s ) of u.s. government employees who could deploy within 30 days , and a 2,000-member reserve component ( crc - r ) of experts from other public institutions and the private sectors who would be available for deployment in 45-60 days .

under the leadership of s / crs , two other state department offices and eight other contributing departments and agencies are now recruiting the first 100 members of the crc - a , and 500 members of the standby component .

besides the state department , contributors are usaid and the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , commerce , justice , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , treasury , and transportation .

the obama administration's may 7 , 2009 , fy2010 budget request of $323.272 million for the civilian stabilization initiative ( csi ) was designed to continue bush administration plans for the establishment of a 4,250 member , three - component civilian response corps .

according to the state department request for these funds , this csi would provide "trained , equipped , and mission - ready civilian experts and institutionalized systems to meet national security imperatives , including in partnership with the u.s. armed forces. .

this corps will enable the president and secretary of state "to react to unanticipated conflict in foreign countries" while reducing or eliminating "the need for large military deployments in such crises," according to the state department request .

the requested fy2010 csi funding also was intended to support the continued development of the crc , including the establishment of a reserve component , which has yet to receive funds , and provide for the institutional structure to coordinate interagency conflict response efforts .

crc development requires not only recruitment and hiring , but the training and pre - positioning of equipment for u.s. government response personnel .

the state department broke down the uses of the requested $323 million as follows: $136.9 million to build and support an active component of 250 members and a standby component of 2,000 members , to fund up to 1,000 members of the active and standby component to deploy to s&r missions in fy2010 ; $63.6 million to establish a trained and equipped 2,000 member reserve component that will draw other public and private sector experts into u.s. s&r responses ; $12.5 million to fund the deployment of other experts during the first three months of an operation , "ensuring that critical staff such as police trainers and advisors can be deployed when ... most needed" ; $51.3 million to sustain deployed personnel and provide logistics for up to 130 responders for three months , including $7.1 million to operate and maintain a civilian deployment center ; $34.3 million to provide security for up to 130 civilian responders ( in up to three deployed field teams ) in a semi - permissive environment for three months ; and $24.7 million to augment washington - area leadership , including 10 new positions for s / crs operations and staff .

the obama administration requested an additional $40 million in the economic support fund ( esf ) account for stabilization bridge funds ( sbf ) to provide for urgent on - the - ground needs during the initial stages of a crisis .

these funds could be used while other funds are reprogrammed , transferred , or appropriated for the crisis .

under its "general provisions" request , the obama administration asks authority to transfer sbf funds into the csi account .

in response , congress provided a $50 million "complex crisis fund" under usaid .

 ( see the section on " flexible funding for s&r operations ," below. ) .

in its fy2011 budget request submitted february 1 , 2010 , the obama administration requested $184 million for the csi , to be available until expended .

this was $34 million over the total csi funding provided by congress for fy2010 .

although congress divided fy2010 csi funding between the state department and usaid , the administration requested the entire fy2011 csi budget under the state department .

under the continuing resolutions for fy2011 in effect through march 4 , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) , and through march 18 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-4 ) , total csi funding remained at the fy2010 level before rescissions .

h.r .

1 , full - year continuing appropriations , 2011 , as passed by the house february 19 , 2011 , would set the csi funding level at $40 million for state and $7 million for usaid .

the fy2011 funding request broke down planned csi allocations as follows , in bold .

the state department's planned allocations for fy2011 , based on p.l .

111-322 appropriations calculated at an annual rate , are indicated in italics .

crc active component salaries , benefits and other personnel expenses: $45.1 million ( $ 16.0 million ) .

training for crc active and standby components: $12.2 million ( $5.2 million ) .

equipment acquisition: $12.3 million ( $25.0 million ) .

deployments: $69.6 million ( $34.7 million ) .

deployment center: $4.1 million ( 0 ) .

crc operations support: $11.0 million ( $13.0 million ) .

s / crs policy and planning: $29.8 million ( $26.1 million ) .

for fy2011 , the administration also asked for $100 million for the complex crises fund , which it stated "will replace funding formerly provided through the department of defense section 1207 authority. .

according an accompanying document , the requested funds will support activities to prevent or respond to emerging or unforeseen crises that address reconstruction , security , or stabilization needs .

funding will target countries or regions that demonstrate a high or escalating risk of conflict or instability , or an unanticipated opportunity for progress in a newly - emerging or fragile democracy .

projects will aim to address and prevent root causes of conflict and instability through a whole - of - government approach and will include host government participation , as well as other partner resources where possible and appropriate .

as noted above , congress established this account in 2009 with initial funding from the fy2010 budget of $50 million , the level at which was continued under the fy2011 continuing resolutions through march 4 ( p.l .

111-322 ) and through march 18 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-4 ) .

h.r .

1 provided no funding for the ccf .

for fy2012 , the obama administration requested $92.2 million for conflict stabilization operations ( cso ) , the new name for the csi , and $75 million for the usaid complex crises fund .

the request was broken down as follows: crc active component salaries , benefits , and other personnel expenses: $31.9 million .

training for crc active and standby components: $9.6 million .

equipment acquisition: $1.0 million .

deployments: $15.5 million .

deployment center: $0.6 million .

crc operations support: $7.7 million .

headquarters policy and planning: $25.9 million .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , provided $8.5 million for conflict stabilization operations in the overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding .

during fy2012 , $21.8 million in funds for s / crs and then for cso were drawn from the state department diplomatic and consular programs account .

p.l .

112-74 provided $40 million for the ccf , $10 million in the core budget , and $30 million in oco funds .

the establishment of the new state department conflict and stabilization operations ( cso ) bureau appeared to respond to the perception that s / crs was not performing as intended .

during its seven years , s / crs encountered substantial difficulties in building its capabilities and carrying out its functions , and many analysts expressed doubts about the office's ability and capacity to carry out its mission .

some analysts blamed a perceived lack of initiative by the state department to provide s / crs with necessary personnel and responsibility on an "anti - operational" social culture of the state department , at least at first .

 ( for several years , it was also blamed on a perceived lack of sufficient funding from congress. ) .

some analysts have pointed to resistance from the regional bureaus , which traditionally have the lead on conflict response abroad , to s / crs involvement in specific crises .

some cited the lack of necessary support from top state department leadership to overcome this bureaucratic resistance and ensure that s / crs played a larger and constructive role .

many analysts have agreed that the u.s. government needs a civilian entity or entities that can effectively perform the planning and lessons learned functions assigned to s / crs by congress , as well as the coordination function for specific operations that the secretary of state may assign to the coordinator under nspd - 44 .

the question has been whether to resolve the problem by upgrading or improving s / crs , assigning operational functions to usaid , or replacing s / crs with a new organization .

some observers argued that the magnitude of the s / crs mission required improved capabilities within the office and enhanced status , if it is to provide adequate direction and personnel for an interagency response to stabilization and reconstruction crises .

"it is not clear that s / crs is large enough , well enough funded , or sufficiently high in rank to pull an interagency effort together," according to a 2008 mit security studies program report .

to provide the head of s / crs with greater clout within the state department and in dealing with other departments and agencies , some suggested that rank of that official or the status of the office itself , be upgraded .

some suggest that the coordinator's functions be assigned to an under secretary , or that s / crs become a state department bureau headed by an assistant secretary .

 ( the "coordinator" position is the equivalent of an assistant secretary , according to an s / crs official. ) .

nevertheless , others have questioned whether all of the functions assigned s / crs are appropriate for that office .

for instance , some contend that an office with the mission of mobilizing civilian personnel for stabilization and reconstruction missions would be better placed in usaid , which fields disaster response units ( the disaster assistance response teams ) and has an office of transition initiatives that has worked in post - conflict settings .

a study by a former u.s .

ambassador to senegal and to guinea , dane f. smith , jr. , now a senior associate at csis , argued that leadership for reconstruction and stabilization missions should be exercised through a state department office "like that of" s / crs , but one that incorporates a much greater number of personnel from other civilian agencies ( as well as some from dod ) and would be "a fully integrated state - usaid operation. .

ambassador smith also cited a need to establish a new balance between the regional bureaus and the s / crs - like office that would draw on their respective strengths for planning and conducting operations , and for the secretary of state to ensure effective cooperation .

another study would reassign s / crs functions to a new , independent entity , the u.s. office for contingency operations ( usoco ) , responsible to the nsc .

as proposed in a february 2010 report by the office of the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction , the usoco "would become the locus for planning , funding , staffing , and managing" stabilization and reconstruction operations , "replacing the fragmented process that now exists .

importantly , it would provide a single office whose sole mission is ensuring that the united states is ready to go when the next contingency occurs ; and it would provide someone to hold accountable for failures in planning and executions. .

another proposal would have divided s / crs's functions among the nsc , the state department policy planning office , and usaid .

as proposed by an april 2010 joint study of the brookings institution and csis , the nsc would take on "the design and management of whole - of - government coordination systems," a "more robust policy planning office at the state department," would provide the "helpful planning support that s / crs has provided to regional bureaus on a case - by - case basis," and usaid would assume the "operational responsibilities of building and maintaining the civilian response corps. .

 ( usaid might also take on the planning support if a policy and strategic planning entity were to be established there , according to the proposal. ) .

the obama administration first announced the creation of the cso bureau in the december 2010 qddr .

in line with proposals to elevate the status of s / crs functions , the qddr proposed restructuring the state department in order for it to "exercise the leadership demanded in complex political and security contingencies. .

this is to be accomplished by integrating "conflict and stabilization operations into core functions of the state department. .

under the plan set out in the qddr , s / crs would be subsumed under the new bureau for conflict and stabilization operations ( cso ) , which would "build upon but go beyond the mandate and capabilities of s / crs," serving "as the institutional locus for policy and operational solutions for crisis , conflict , and instability. .

under this plan , the assistant secretary leading the cso bureau "will coordinate early efforts at conflict prevention and rapid deployment of civilian responders as crises unfold , working closely with the senior leadership of usaid's bureau of democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance. .

in addition , this bureau would be placed under a new under secretary for civilian security , democracy , and human rights .

the qddr set forth five other functions of the cso bureau .

in respect to interagency work , the cso bureau would bear responsibility , in cooperation with other state department bureaus and usaid , to ( 1 ) build the capabilities and systems of the crc , other interagency surge teams , and other deployable assets ; ( 2 ) provide expertise and operational guidance for the development of policies and strategies to prevent and respond to crises and conflicts ; and ( 3 ) provide specialists in crisis , conflict , and state fragility to regional bureaus in order to serve as cso liaisons and to integrate conflict prevention work across the state department .

in relation to other countries and international organizations , the cso bureau would be responsible for institutionalizing an international operational crisis response framework , and coordinating efforts among key allies and other partners to build civilian capacity , strengthening interoperability , and cooperation .

as part of this restructuring , the state department promised in the qddr promises to ensure that the new cso bureau would be staffed with personnel with the requisite expertise and experience in conflict management and prevention , and draw others with needed expertise in other areas from elsewhere in state , as well as usaid and other u.s. government agencies .

the cso bureau would also create a new cadre of senior diplomats trained and experienced in conflict resolution and mediation to deploy to conflict zones and at - risk weak states .

the state department would also develop a quick , flexible contracting mechanism to deploy people and resources to the field .

in parallel with the creation of the cso bureau , the state department would also revamp related usaid capabilities .

the qddr calls for expanding usaid's office of transition initiatives ( oti ) , enhancing its field presence , and augmenting its staff abroad and in washington .

the qddr promises that the state department will work more closely with oti , and signals oti's risk - taking , problem solving , and innovative organizational culture as a model for state's crisis response and stabilization .

it also states that the cso bureau will work with oti leadership to ensure effective design and start - up of the new bureau .

other improvements are proposed , including an expansion of usaid's capacity for conflict programs and transitions from relief to development .

some policymakers and analysts have questioned whether the crc active and standby components are large enough to perform effectively their intended functions .

others might wonder whether the united states should be supporting such a corps even at its current size in the current constrained budget environment .

one 2008 study , prepared by the national defense university ( ndu ) center for technology and national security policy , argued that the crc should be considerably larger , with 5,000 total in the active and standby components and 10,000 in the reserve component .

an active / standby component of that size "would provide a fairly large pool of trained experts in each category" if personnel were "properly distributed," according to the study .

"this sizable , diverse pool , in turn , would help provide the flexibility , adaptability , and modularity to tailor complex operations to the missions and tasks at hand in each case , without worrying that the act of responding effectively to one contingency would drain the force or expertise in key areas needed to handle additional contingencies. .

this study also stated that a combined active and standby force numbering 2,500 ( compared to the 2,250 now planned ) "should be backed by a reserve force of 4,500 personnel , not 2,000. .

another study envisioned the possibility of a larger corps than currently contemplated by the obama administration , but somewhat smaller than that proposed in the ndu study .

co - sponsored by the american academy of diplomacy and the stimson center , this study found that the "magnitude of growth beyond fy2010 will depend largely on the experience gained based on deployments in that year .

for the purposes of projection , we propose that the active response team would grow to 500 by fy2014 , the standby response corps would remain at 2,000 , and the civilian reserve would grow to 4,000. .

some members of congress , however , questioned in authorization and appropriations reports whether the crc active and standby units were being expanded too rapidly , at the cost of effectiveness .

in the senate appropriations committee ( sac ) report accompanying its fy2011 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill , 2011 ( s. 3676 , s.rept .

111-237 , july 29 , 1010 ) , the sac expressed its concerns: the committee continues to believe that the success of csi can best be achieved through a gradual stand up and implementation and is concerned that csi has not been adequately integrated into the overall united states response to crises and disasters , including in haiti and kyrgyzstan .

the committee is also concerned that the timelines for hiring , training , and deployment of its civilian corps have been overly ambitious and unrealistic .

the sac also noted approval that the administration did not request reserve component funding , stating that it would consider such funding "only after the csi has established a record of effective operations and can demonstrate programmatic accomplishments. .

for many years , proponents of "operational" civilian capabilities for s&r operations have urged congress to provide the state department with a flexible conflict or crisis response fund that would allow u.s. government civilian agencies to respond rapidly to s&r emergencies .

the bush administration repeatedly requested such a fund , and proposals for a flexible , replenishable fund were included in early versions of the lugar - biden legislation and subsequent related legislation .

but congress , which has long resisted the provision of "blank check" pots of money as an abdication of constitutional appropriation and oversight powers , turned down several bush administration requests for more flexible s&r funding mechanisms in the state department budget .

the first session of the 111 th congress , on the other hand , took a first step in providing flexible funding by creating a usaid complex crises fund with a $50 million appropriation in the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act ( division f of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , p.l .

111-117 ) , although this is less money than many analysts would argue is necessary .

this fund was congress's response to the obama administration's fy2010 budget request for a total of $116 million in flexible funding for s&r purposes: $40 million for a stabilization bridge fund under the economic support fund account ( mentioned above ) , and $76 million for a rapid response fund under the usaid transition initiatives ( ti ) account "to provide flexible funding to respond to emerging opportunities to divert conflict in new and fragile democracies. .

as stated by the conferees on the bill , this "new account provides greater flexibility to usaid to prevent or respond to emerging or unforeseen complex crises overseas , and … consolidates the budget request for a rapid response fund and a stabilization bridge fund to provide greater efficiency and oversight by the administration and congress of these activities. .

 ( the conferees defined "complex crisis" for the purposes of this account as "a disaster or emergency , usually of long - term duration , that includes a combination of humanitarian , political and security dimensions which hinders the provision of external assistance." ) .

proponents of flexible funding argue that it is needed because many crises that demand a u.s. rapid response cannot be foreseen and thus planned for in annual budget submissions .

in addition , they argue , the existing mechanisms for transferring funds to an emergency situation are too time - consuming to provide an immediate response .

some proponents have argued for a mechanism like the automatically replenishable emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) emergency relief account , funded through foreign operations appropriations .

many proponents suggest that erma provides a model for a response fund to be used for conflicts or related crisis situations .

several bills were introduced that would , among other provisions , permanently establish a conflict response fund , but none passed congress .

in december 2007 , the help commission recommended the establishment of two rapid - response crisis funds .

one would be a permanent humanitarian crisis response fund to meet the needs of natural disasters .

the other would be a foreign crisis fund to meet security challenges .

no recommendation was made regarding the agency responsible for these funds .

from 2006 to 2010 , the funding for security and stabilization activities that congress made available through the dod budget served as a de facto response fund for small s&r projects carried out by personnel from the state department and usaid .

section 1207 of the conference version of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 , h.r .

1815 / s. 1042 ; signed into law january 6 , 2006 , and subsequently amended ) authorized the secretary of defense to provide the secretary of state with up to $100 million in services , defense articles , and funding for reconstruction , security , or stabilization assistance to a foreign country per fiscal year .

although "section 1207" authority was repeatedly extended , congress allowed it to expire at the end of fy2010 .

similarly , defense appropriators signaled their expectation that dod's section 1207 funding would not be provided for another year .

in their report on the fy2010 department of defense appropriations act ( p.l .

111-118 , h.rept .

111-380 ) , conferees recommended an allocation of $97.09 million ( from the overall defense security cooperation agency appropriation ) , but stated that the establishment of the complex crises fund "will enable usaid and the department of state to meet emergent requirements that fall under their purview without relying on the department of defense. .

nevertheless , they argued for continued dod participation in the planning process for small - scale security and stabilization projects , directing the secretaries of defense and state and the director of usaid "to maintain and strengthen the interagency process created from the section 1207 program when formulating , reviewing , and approving future projects that would have been funded through section 1207. .

in creating the complex crises fund , conferees on the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) urged the state department and usaid to develop additional capacity in order to replace section 1207 dod funding with additional complex crises funding .

"usaid and the department of state should continue to establish and bolster crisis prevention and response capabilities in order to assume most , if not all , of the functions currently funded" by dod under section 1207 authority , they wrote .

much like the defense appropriations conferees , the foreign operations conferees also specified that "usaid and the departments of state and defense shall continue to consult on the formulation and implementation of stabilization and security assistance , as appropriate , whether through the utilization of section 1207 or funds appropriated by this act. .

as noted above , the administration requested $100 million for the ccf from the fy2011 budget , stating that this will replace funding previously provided under section 1207 authority .

the fy2011 continuing resolutions through march 4 and march 18 , 2011 , provided fy2011 funding for the ccf at the $50 million fy2010 level , but the final fy2011 appropriations bill provided no ccf funding .

fy2012 appropriations for the ccf totaled $40 million: $10 million in the core account in $30 million in oco funds .

the obama administration initially planned to implement bush administration plans for a crc civilian reserve component , but in the 2010 state department / usaid qddr announced plans to proceed instead with the development of a civilian expert roster , from which the u.s. government could select and hire non - federal personnel on a temporary basis to deploy as needed .

a roster system would be quite different from the original proposal for a civilian reserve akin to the u.s. military reserve ( which encompasses the national guard ) .

plans for a reserve corps were part of the initial 2004 lugar - biden civilian stabilization capability legislation ( title xvi , p.l .

110-417 ) , embraced by the bush administration .

in his january 23 , 2007 , state of the union address , former president bush pointed to the need for a civilian reserve corps as a tool in the generational struggle against terrorism .

"such a corps would function much like our military reserve," he said .

"it would ease the burden on the armed forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve on missions abroad when america needs them .

it would give people across america who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining struggle of our time. .

in 2008 , congress provided authorization for the establishment of a civilian reserve corps ( p.l .

110-417 , see above ) that could substitute for military troops in a wide variety of state - building activities .

the bush administration's 2008 csi proposal called for the establishment of a crc reserve component of 2,000 ; the obama administration's 2009 csi proposal called for the same .

nevertheless , congress did not provide funds to establish a civilian reserve .

in considering the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill , 2010 ( h.r .

3081 and s. 1434 ) , house and senate appropriators denied the obama administration's request for funding for the csi reserve component .

in their respective reports ( h.rept .

111-187 and s.rept .

111-44 ) , both committees indicated their desire for a gradual build - up of the civilian response corps components , with the focus now on the active and standby components .

proponents of the creation of a civilian reserve corps have cited a variety of advantages from the creation of such a corps .

dod promoted the concept on the grounds that it would free military personnel from state - building tasks during military operations , thus increasing the personnel available for combat and other more strictly military tasks .

proponents also view such a corps as a means to enhance prospects for success in s&r operations , as the personnel who would be sent to perform such tasks would in general have a much higher level of expertise and depth of experience than soldiers and could , unlike many military personnel assigned to such tasks , perform at peak efficiency from the outset .

many view this as particularly true at the national level , where extensive experience with developing national - level structures is desirable over the long run .

 ( although military civil affairs officers are largely reservists whose civilian jobs are relevant to state - building tasks , many analysts state that there are too few civil affairs personnel to provide the depth needed to deploy the appropriate person in most circumstances. ) .

many argue that civilian personnel are also preferable for symbolic reasons , as they may signal a greater commitment to the construction of a democratic state .

skeptics look at the concept of a civilian reserve as untested and potentially unfeasible .

some wonder whether qualified experts would sign up in sufficient quantities to make the corps an effective replacement for military troops in s&r operations .

some question whether the existence of such a corps would provide an incentive to interventions of various types that the united states otherwise would not have undertaken .

cost may well have been a major factor in the decision to switch to a roster system .

in 2008 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) assembled a cost estimate for the bush administration's csi .

its estimate for the recruiting , screening , enrolling , training , and equipping the 2,000 members contemplated by the csi was $87 million in fy2009 and $47 million in 2010 .

 ( the cbo estimate of first - year costs is considerably higher than the obama administration's $63.6 million fy2010 request to establish the reserve. ) .

although some may view the potential cost of the civilian corps as high , some proponents argue that the costs of deploying civilian personnel would result in a net savings to the military .

 ( it is likely , however , that any possible savings would depend on the circumstances in which such civilian personnel were deployed and the effect of their deployment on the number of military personnel needed. ) .

proponents also maintain that even if high , the monetary cost to maintain and deploy civilian reservists would still be relatively inexpensive when compared to the multiple costs , both tangible ( such as money and lives ) and intangible ( such as domestic and international political support and loss of strategic leverage ) of prolonged or failed military interventions .

the qddr proposed replacing the reserve with "a more cost - effective 'expert corps' consisting of an active roster of technical experts. .

according to the qddr , this expert corps roster could be composed of current temporary hires who have served successfully in iraq , afghanistan , pakistan , and elsewhere , as well as other civilians with critical skills who have not been previously deployed .

other countries , such as canada and germany , and international organizations , such as the united nations and the organization for security and cooperation in europe , use roster systems for civilian deployments to nation - building and post - conflict missions .

the roster concept is substantially different from the csi concept of a reserve corps modeled after the military reserves and national guard .

under that concept , a reserve component of more than 2,000 members , civilians from outside government with various types of expertise , would be in reserve status for four years with a required deployment of up to one year .

unlike the concept for a reserve corps , roster members would not be obligated to deploy to critical conflict zones .

however , neither would roster members be provided with re - employment rights , as was contemplated for reserve corps members .

the qddr stated that the administration would request funding and needed authorities for the expert corps .

the administration expected the roster to be less costly than the more elaborate reserve corps .

according to the qddr , the budget would support actual deployments , rather than support and maintenance for a large reserve .

still , some costs , such as equipment acquisition , might remain .

and while some savings would most likely accrue from eliminating benefits such as pensions and from the costs of an intensive training regime , some analysts might argue that certain benefits , such as health coverage , should be offered to recruit quality personnel , and that a good training program is essential to effective performance .

