the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimates that influenza ( "flu" ) , aviral respiratory illness , causes 36,000 deaths and more than 200,000 hospitalizations in the unitedstates each year .

for many years , vaccination has been urged for those at highest risk of seriousillness from flu , such as older persons and those with chronic illnesses .

peculiarities of flu vaccineproduction , especially its finite shelf life ( it is good only for the one season for which it is produced ) ,have led to supply and demand imbalances in recent years .

overall demand for flu vaccine hasgrown over the past decade .

but cdc reports that there have been vaccine surpluses each of the pastfive winters , and unused vaccine has been discarded .

 ( see table 1. ) .

within a season,maldistribution of vaccine may lead to shortages at particular times and places , despite an overallsurplus .

gauging demand from year to year in what is mostly a private - sector market is a matter ofboth art and science , an exercise fraught with difficulty .

the shortage of flu vaccine in the fall of 2004 renewed discussion of the fragility of thenation's system for providing this potentially life - saving product .

some have expressed concern thatthis situation bodes ill for national preparedness for an influenza pandemic or a large - scalebioterrorism event .

this report will describe the current system of flu vaccine production anddelivery , the causes of supply problems , and options for improvement .

influenza circulates around the globe every year , changing slightly each yearso that healthy adults have partial immunity to new strains .

the virus , its genome inconstant flux , typically makes healthy people sick , but not too sick , each year .

nowand then , usually several times in a century , the virus changes enough that there is nopartial immunity .

this event , called an influenza pandemic , results in severe illnessand death , even in healthy people .

the cdc estimates that in the united states,while an annual flu season results in 36,000 deaths , on average , a pandemic couldcause more than 200,000 .

the extent and severity of illness , and the disabling impacton healthy young people , could cause serious disruptions in services and social order .

some have expressed concern that the 2004 flu vaccine shortage presagesproblems for a national response to an influenza pandemic .

the shortage was insome ways a relevant drill for pandemic preparedness , but in other ways wasdifferent .

in the face of the shortage , many were concerned with the logistics offinding available vaccine and vaccinating high - risk individuals .

others wereconcerned about fairness in the way that companies and federal , state and localagencies handled the situation .

many of these concerns about limited resources and equity in their allocationwill be writ large during a flu pandemic .

potentially , a vaccine could not beproduced until a pandemic virus strain is actually circulating .

for this and otherreasons , severe vaccine shortages are expected during an influenza pandemic .

thewho and hhs each have published plans for influenza pandemicpreparedness .

 ( 43 ) both stress the role of basic infection controlpractices and have expanded guidance for handling large numbers of victims , suchas expanding capacity for isolation and enacting plans to keep people at home .

the who says that with current technology , worldwide production capacityfor influenza vaccine would cover only 5% of the world's population .

countries areadvised to consider how they would apportion this scarce resource .

who notes thatbecause healthy individuals may become severely ill , or may even die from infectionwith a pandemic flu strain , consideration should be given to maintaining essentialservices by prioritizing vaccine delivery to critical service providers such ashealthcare , public health and public safety workers .

americans are accustomed todeferring to those who are most vulnerable in situations where risk of death is low,as they have been asked to do for the current flu vaccine shortage , but a pandemicmay require a different message .

 ( see the previous section on "vaccine rationing"for further discussion. ) .

some in congress have expressed concern that a portion of the u.s. fluvaccine supply is produced in a foreign facility .

the concern is that during a flupandemic or other emergency , foreign governments may seize vaccines andproduction facilities within their borders .

the international federation ofpharmaceutical manufacturers associations reports that in 2003 , more than 95% ofthe world's flu vaccine was produced in nine countries: australia , canada , france,germany , italy , japan , netherlands , the united kingdom , and the united states .

 ( 44 ) the globalflu vaccine market is a confusing patchwork of companies and subsidiaries that maybe based in one country , producing vaccine in another , and marketing in multipleother countries .

aventis and chiron are the only companies currently licensed by thefda to produce injectable flu vaccine for the u.s. market , though other companieshave expressed interest in having their products licensed in the future .

while both the who and hhs plans also stress the use of antiviral drugsduring a pandemic , these are likely to be in very short supply as well .

a similarproblem may arise with access to healthcare facilities and providers .

a flu pandemiccould result in mass casualty situations , and while these may be isolated in time andplace , they may force what is referred to as degradation of care , the circumstance inwhich a standard of care is lowered in the face of overwhelming resource constraintsin order to maximize overall survival .

providers are concerned about theramifications on social order and liability , and have sought federal guidance on thismatter .

the 2004 flu vaccine shortage demonstrates the concept of dual use in publichealth preparedness , in which plans , systems and protocols for one event areapplicable to others as well .

cdc's flu vaccine reallocation plan , which coordinatedinformation about vaccine availability , unmet need , and circulating virus , is a usefulmodel for any number of natural or intentional public health emergencies , includingpandemic influenza .

in addition , efforts to bolster bioterrorism preparedness haveyielded bonuses for pandemic preparedness , such as the development of communitymass - vaccination plans .

generally , advancements in the development of vaccinesfor pandemic influenza will benefit annual flu vaccine production , and vice versa .

the response of the public to government recommendations during the 2004shortage is illustrative .

according to cdc surveys ( discussed in an earlier section"shortage to surplus ? .

" ) , persons not in designated priority groups mostly deferredvaccination , while a small number of them reported that they sought vaccination butwere unsuccessful .

of particular concern were findings that significant numbers ofhigh - risk individuals did not seek vaccination because they doubted they could getit , and that willingness to be vaccinated dropped off when the vaccine wasinvestigational and required signing a consent form .

these findings remind publicofficials of an important premise for public health preparedness: that imperfectcompliance with recommendations is expected and should be taken into account inplanning .

serious questions remain about the exercise of federal authority during aninfluenza pandemic .

many of these questions were raised in the face of the 2004 fluvaccine shortage .

should the federal government have , or exercise , authority toidentify and control doses of scarce flu vaccine ? .

should the federal governmenthave , or exercise , authority to control administration of vaccine by healthcareproviders ? .

is the current model , which leverages state authorities with federalassistance , adequate for the current shortage , or for pandemic influenza or otherpublic health emergencies ? .

given that the federal government has overarchingemergency authorities but has not used them , will federal officials know how toconduct themselves if such authorities were invoked in an emergency ? .

the fluvaccine shortage presents a small study of these important questions .

it is intuitively appealing to think that federal officials , when faced with apublic health emergency , could take charge of information and assets , and assure thatremedies and burdens were equitably and efficiently distributed .

actually , theshortage of flu vaccine illustrates two serious challenges that the federal governmentfaces in a public health emergency .

law and tradition place much of theresponsibility for preventing or managing the shortage either with the states , or withthe private sector , and the threshold over which the federal government would wrestcontrol from either appears high .

the federal government does not dictate thepractice of medicine or compel companies to do business .

as a result , in situationslike this one , free market forces operate , the public health system responds in adecentralized fashion , efforts may seem disorganized , and the federal governmentmay appear unresponsive .

since the terror attacks of 2001 , some barriers have been overcome withoutsubstantial changes in the legal landscape .

an example is state preparednessplanning with uniform guidance , so that states aim for the same targets in planningfor mass drug distribution , or in overhauling their emergency public healthauthorities .

decentralization of public health authority to states is less of a problemif all of them can respond capably and in a consistent fashion .

another example isthe government use of proprietary information , such as drug store sales , to conductsurveillance for unusual health events .

the flu vaccine shortage has prompted furtherexamination of the coordination of these partners in response to a national challenge,posed another opportunity to explore creative solutions , and offered another chancefor lessons learned .

crs report rl31793 , vaccine policy issues for the 108th congress , by susanthaul .

crs report rs21507 , project bioshield , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32549 , project bioshield: legislative history and side - by - sidecomparison of h.r .

2122 , s. 15 , and s. 1504 ,by [author name scrubbed] and eric fischer .

crs report rs21747 , avian influenza: multiple strains cause different effectsworldwide , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31333 , federal and state isolation and quarantine authority , byangie a. welborn , ( discusses state and federal authority for public healthemergencies ) .

crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the contextof bioterrorism , by [author name scrubbed] and sarah lister .

gao - 05-177t , flu vaccine: recent supply shortages underscore ongoingchallenges , testimony , november 18 , 2004 .

gao - 04-1100t , infectious disease preparedness: federal challenges inresponding to influenza outbreaks , testimony , september 28 , 2004 .

gao - 04-458t , public health preparedness: response capacity improving , butmuch remains to be accomplished , testimony , february 12 , 2004 .

gao - 02-987 , childhood vaccines: ensuring an adequate supply poses continuingchallenges , report , september 13 , 2002 .

gao - 01-786t , flu vaccine: steps are needed to better prepare for possible futureshortages , testimony , may 30 , 2001 .

gao - 01-624 , flu vaccine: supply problems heighten need to ensure access forhigh - risk people , report , may 15 , 2001 .

iom , the threat of pandemic influenza: are we ready ? .

a workshop summary november 16 , 2004 , at http: / / www.iom.edu / report.asp ? id=23639 .

iom , immunization safety review: influenza vaccines and neurologicalcomplications , october 6 , 2003 , at http: / / www.iom.edu / report.asp ? id=15625 .

iom , financing vaccines in the 21st century: assuring access and availability , august 4 , 2003 , at http: / / www.iom.edu / report.asp ? id=14451 .

iom , board on health care services , calling the shots: immunization financepolicies and practices , june 16 , 2000 , at http: / / www.iom.edu / report.asp ? id=5508 .

hhs national vaccine program office home page: general information on vaccines,and the draft pandemic influenza preparedness and response plan .

http: / / www.hhs.gov / nvpo / .

cdc influenza home page: information for health professionals and the generalpublic , including guidelines related to the current vaccine shortage , http: / / www.cdc.gov / flu / .

cdc , prevention and control of influenza , recommendations of the advisorycommittee on immunization practices ( acip ) , mmwr recommendationsand reports , may 28 , 2004 , recommendations prior to announcement of thevaccine shortage for 2004-2005 .

cdc national immunization program home page: information about cdc - fundedvaccine purchases and related information , http: / / www.cdc.gov / nip / .

cdc public health law program home page: information on state authorities andactions taken to assure priority distribution of flu vaccine , http: / / www.phppo.cdc.gov / od / phlp / influenza.asp .

fda center for biologics evaluation and research , influenza virus vaccine2004-2005 home page: information about chiron , aventis , and medimmunevaccine production , http: / / www.fda.gov / cber / flu / flu2004.htm .

hrsa national vaccine injury compensation program ( vicp ) home page , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / osp / vicp / index.htm .

nih national institute of allergy and infectious diseases influenza home page: http: / / www.niaid.nih.gov / dmid / influenza / .

who influenza home page at http: / / www.who.int / csr / disease / influenza / en / .

f.a .

sloan et al. , "the fragility of the u.s .

vaccine supply," new england journalof medicine , 351:2443-2447 , dec. 2 , 2004 .

j. treanor , "weathering the influenza vaccine crisis," new england journal ofmedicine , 351:2037-2040 , nov. 11 , 2004 .

r. giffin et al. , "childhood vaccine finance and safety issues," health affairs , 23 ( 5 ) : 98-111 , sept. / oct .

2004 ( despite the title , a general overview offederal / state / private vaccine financing and distribution issues ) .

national vaccine advisory committee , "strengthening the supply of routinelyrecommended vaccines in the united states: recommendations from thenational vaccine advisory committee," jama 290 ( 23 ) , dec. 17 , 2003 , pp.3122-3128 .

