the corporate scandals of the early 21 st century have sparked much speculation as to their cause , and much work by legislators and regulators to set in place reforms to prevent them from recurring .

explanations for these events seem to rely on one of two distinct models .

one theory claims that collapses such as these are cyclical and may be an inevitable adjunct to prolonged bull markets .

when the good times are rolling , virtually all investments are buoyed by the rising market .

investors have less incentive to monitor the firms they invest in , and regulators tend to become less vigilant when investor losses are rare .

in this atmosphere , fraud can prosper , and even established , respectable firms may see little harm in embellishing their accounting results to provide the endless stream of good news that the overheated market demands .

eventually the party ends , investor skepticism and regulatory zeal return , and the market's self - cleansing forces restore the balance .

until the next time .

another explanation — which may be called the "perfect storm" theory — holds that the confluence of several unique historical circumstances in the late 1990s enabled rogue managers and companies to commit fraud on a scale far grander than the cyclical explanation would have predicted .

among the factors that combined to form the perfect storm were a booming new technology sector based on the internet , the creation and enthusiastic adoption of new financial strategies and instruments , the demographic impact of baby boomers beginning to save for retirement , changes in the relationship between auditors and their clients , and , of course , a stock market driven to "irrational exuberance" by year after year of double - digit returns .

in examining these theories , this report focuses on the internal controls on american corporations ( including corporate governance , business ethics , managerial structure and compensation , internal counsel , and whistleblowers ) , as well as external controls ( government regulation , external auditors and accountants , and the judicial process ) .

this report surveys the barriers to corporate fraud within the context of the competing explanations: the cycle vs. the perfect storm .

the explanation one chooses will affect the preferred public policy response .

if the series of corporate scandals that began with enron represents an unfortunate result of a unique set of market conditions , one might conclude that the restraints now in place are sufficient to prevent outbreaks of fraud under normal circumstances .

on the other hand , if fraud is cyclical and can be expected to reappear once stock prices begin to climb again , one might conclude that the post - enron scandals have revealed fundamental weaknesses in law and regulation .

this was arguably congress's frame of mind when it passed the sarbanes - oxley act — the most significant amendments to securities law since the 1930s — during the worst of the scandals .

some observers characterize that law as an over - reaction , while others see it as a first step .

the 109 th congress may consider proposed laws and regulations that affect mutual funds , stock options accounting , hedge funds , insurance companies , government - sponsored enterprises , and other financial institutions .

this report provides a broad perspective for considering major issues in antifraud law and regulation .

companies possess another potentially powerful internal barrier to fraud — employees .

it is a great advantage to anti - fraud efforts if employees feel a responsibility to report fraud within a corporation .

sociologists have identified a number of characteristics that make a business environment , or corporate culture , more conducive to whistleblowing .

employees must trust that they will be protected from reprisals and that their reports will be taken seriously and acted upon .

the recent wave of corporate scandals , combined with dramatic changes in technology and financial markets , has renewed focus on the role of government agencies in detecting and preventing corporate fraud .

aside from the theoretical and political debates over the appropriate role of government in regulating private enterprise , there are many disagreements over how regulators should do their job once they have been vested with regulatory authority .

in basic terms , the objective of government regulation is to change the behavior of private individuals and corporations in order to protect consumers , competitors , suppliers , distributors , and workers .

once congress has crafted legislation and vested an agency with regulatory authority , congress and the president also decide the levels of resources to appropriate in order that agencies have the ability to carry out their legal mandate .

this section examines some of the critical issues related to the effective detection and prevention of fraud by federal regulatory agencies including regulatory agency missions , budgets , and jurisdiction .

investors have traditionally looked to research analysts employed by investment banks to help decide which stocks to buy ( or sell ) .

for investment banking firms in the business of selling securities to the public , the temptation to use analyst reports as a sales tool is clearly a potential source of conflicts of interest .

since the 1960s , sec regulations have required firms to enforce a separation between investment bankers and analysts to maintain the objectivity of analysts .

these regulations became known as the "chinese wall" because they were meant to create a barrier as effective as the great wall of china between the two operations .

chinese wall arrangements limited contacts between bankers and analysts ; most large securities firms made sure that their investment banking and research departments were located on different floors in company headquarters .

in the wake of the collapse of internet and other technology stocks , and the discoveries of control fraud at enron and other prominent companies in 2001 , serious questions were raised about analyst objectivity .

not only did analysts fail to see the trouble ahead at many firms , they continued to give stocks a "buy" rating even after the issuing corporation had been publicly linked to scandal .

new york attorney general eliot spitzer launched an investigation into analyst conduct at new york investment banks .

spitzer took advantage of new york's seldom - used martin act , which gives the attorney general broad authority to go after brokers who promote stocks "beyond reasonable expectations or unwarranted by existing circumstances. .

in april 2002 , spitzer filed an affidavit in new york state court alleging that stock analysts from merrill lynch issued positive research reports on technology companies whose stock merrill was selling , even though the analysts' private opinion of the firms' prospect was strongly negative .

to support his charges , spitzer released internal e - mails by merrill analysts , including henry blodgett , a tech - stock analyst who became a media star during the late 1990's for his bullish predictions .

a company that received top ratings in published research might be described in - house as "a piece of junk" or worse .

one analyst worried that regular investors "are losing their retirement" because of misleading advice , but went along with the game .

soon after spitzer's charges against merrill lynch were made public , the sec launched a formal inquiry into potential conflicts of interest facing wall street analysts .

several states also joined spitzer and the sec in an expanded investigation of wall street firms .

the investigations resulted in a global settlement , involving a dozen of the largest investment banking firms , besides merrill lynch .

under the terms of the settlement , the firms agreed to pay fines totaling about $1.4 billion , to change their analyst compensation practices , to make new disclosures in analyst reports , and to institute other reforms .

to address analyst conflicts of interest , title v of the sarbanes - oxley act directed the sec to adopt new rules to restrict the prepublication clearance of research or recommendations by investment bankers not directly responsible for investment research , limit the supervision and compensatory evaluation of research personnel to officials not engaged in investment activities , and protect securities analysts from retaliation or threats of retaliation by investment banking staff because of unfavorable research reports .

the act specified that the rules must also require a stock analyst to disclose the extent to which he owns stock being discussed , whether he or his employer has received any income from the company whose stock is being discussed , whether his employer has had any business dealings within the past year with the company , and whether the analyst's compensation was tied to investment banking revenue .

in february 2003 , the sec adopted regulation analyst certification ( "regulation ac" ) .

regulation ac requires that brokers , dealers , and certain persons associated with a broker or dealer include in research reports certifications by the research analyst that the views expressed in the report accurately reflect his or her personal views , and disclose whether or not the analyst received compensation or other payments in connection with his or her specific recommendations or views .

broker - dealers would also be required to obtain periodic certifications by research analysts in connection with the analyst's public appearances .

a 2004 study finds that the settlement and sec reforms have had a measurable effect on analyst recommendations .

kadan , wang , and zach report that while analysts employed by investment banks still tend to be more optimistic than independent analysts , the difference is significantly less marked than before the reforms .

while analyst bias probably played a very minor role in the broad scheme of corporate scandals and stock market boom - and - bust , the issue illustrates how abusive practices can persist as an "open secret" among market participants .

the fact that spitzer , with his small staff , uncovered crooked practices that the sec had apparently failed to notice raised questions about whether the federal agency had become too accommodating of the securities industry .

was the sec's lack of aggressive action the result of the hyperbolical market climate of the 1990s , when stocks that traditional valuation models would have scorned continued to soar year after year ? .

or does it reflect a more basic problem that regulators face: by focusing on individual acts of egregious misbehavior , they may miss systemic problems "hidden in plain sight" that gradually evolve into business as usual .

criminal prosecutions related to corporate fraud exert considerable fascination , based partly on puzzlement .

why do corporate managers , already well - compensated , seek ill - gotten gains that put their reputations , families , and social positions at risk ? .

edwin sutherland coined the term "white - collar crime" in a 1939 speech he gave to the american sociological society .

he found in his research that crime could not always be associated with poverty , dysfunctional family life , or mental illness because these factors did not explain the many large privately owned companies that participated in criminal activity .

sutherland defined white - collar crime as "a crime committed by a person of respectability and high social status in the course of his occupation. .

the combination of wealth , respectability and social status creates a high hurdle for a prosecutor seeking to bring this type of criminal to justice .

the threat of prosecution by the criminal justice system can act to deter corporate boards , officers , or other employees from committing fraud .

the civil legal system provides additional deterrents .

the government , through federal and state agencies , can launch civil litigation against corporations or individuals .

for example , the sec can levy civil damages against offending ceos and bar them from gaining similar future employment with a publicly - held company .

another type of civil action is private — one brought by an individual or entity against another individual or entity for a breach of contract or breach of some other legal duty .

the threat of civil suits by an individual plaintiff , class of plaintiffs , or other private entity also acts as a potential deterrent to corporate fraud .

civil penalties from such actions can include monetary fines for damages , loss of employment and / or disbarment , and can sometimes be more costly to an individual than criminal penalties .

recent trends in jurisprudence and legislation , however , have tended to increase the protections corporate officers and boards enjoy from civil liability .

it remains to be seen whether recent corporate scandals like enron will reverse this protectionist trend .

time will tell as many pending civil suits reach trial .

this report has examined several systemic problems that contributed to the recent wave of corporate scandals .

failures occurred both within companies and among the external actors who were supposed to be regulating or watching them .

using enron as a case study , the system failures can be summarized as follows .

the capture of auditors , analysts , and banks and regulators through personal and professional contacts — enron effectively suborned or mystified merrill lynch , arthur anderson , the bond rating agencies , and regulators such as ferc and the cftc , with the result that watchdog institutions — public and private — either missed the fundamental problems at the firm or actively participated in covering them up .

systems capacity issues at the sec and other regulatory agencies .

a lack of resources and staff expertise at federal agencies led regulators to overlook enron's complicated and fraudulent financial schemes .

the inability of the media to serve as watchdog .

the business media reports on problems at a company only if wall street analysts seem worried .

captured or biased analysts means that there is no bad news to report .

the board and auditors had incomplete information .

management withheld documents regarding transactions between enron and special purpose entities and concealed the nature of the partnerships set up to run the spes .

the corporate culture was a pressure cooker of entitlement , teamwork , and a star system .

employees were constantly scrambling to create something new and be noticed by top management .

they were repeatedly told that they were the best and brightest , and part of the enron team .

the peer review system simultaneously created a cutthroat environment where undercutting team members was often the way to save one's own job .

whistleblowing was strongly discouraged by fear of losing one's job and a fierce devotion to the company and the prospect of future wealth .

hubris .

enron's management was apparently unable to grasp that its arcane financial maneuvers would actually be the firm's downfall , making them unwilling to issue accounting restatements ( or listen to internal objections ) .

the board wasn't paying attention .

though technically independent , enron's directors repeatedly allowed management to make legally risky decisions .

lack of information and undue trust in management's ability to sustain the company's meteoric rise made directors' decisions little more than rubber stamps .

many of these problems have existed at other companies , during other periods in time .

in order to effectively detect and prevent fraud in the future , it is important to understand some of the reasons why the recent wave of control fraud came when it did .

some possible explanations that may be unique to this period in history are listed below: the long bull market allowed companies to conceal financial difficulties , because stock analysts , regulators , and ( above all ) investors were willing to believe in company financials that defied traditional , rational explanation .

in addition , the technology and internet booms created furious investor demand for new companies with rosy forecasts but no revenues .

the conventional wisdom was: if you can make money at it , great ! .

the increasing acceptance of financial innovations in both the business and accounting fields created an environment in which accounting creativity was rewarded .

auditing was a loss leader as consulting became the major profit center for big accounting firms .

therefore , the pressure was strong for accounting companies to overlook audit irregularities in order to help sell the client their consulting services .

an alternative view is that accounting and management scandals are to be expected whenever a long period of market exuberance winds down .

if the phenomenon is seen as primarily cyclical , the unique circumstances of the 1990s listed above may have influenced the scope and particular features of the scandals , but the underlying dynamics have appeared before and will return .

finally , some observers , whose faith in market discipline has not been shaken by the outbreak of fraud , would say that the post - enron reaction is simply evidence of the system working by purging the markets of bad apples .

