the first amendment provides that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. .

in some cases , the right to exercise one's religion conflicts with the government's need to enforce a uniform set of laws to ensure a civilized society .

the constitutional standard by which laws that burden free exercise are measured has evolved over the last half - century through u.s. supreme court decisions .

in sherbert v. verner and wisconsin v. yoder , the court considered laws that placed a burden on individuals' free exercise rights under a standard that is often referred to as strict scrutiny .

under strict scrutiny , government actions that burden religious exercise must ( 1 ) serve a compelling public interest and ( 2 ) use the least restrictive means possible .

in sherbert , the court held that a state could not deny unemployment compensation benefits to a person who was fired because she refused to work on her sabbath .

the supreme court held such a denial would violate the free exercise clause , unless it served a compelling interest .

similarly , in yoder , the supreme court held that compulsory school attendance for amish students was a violation of their free exercise rights due to the amish belief that attendance beyond the eighth grade would expose children to worldly influences dangerous to their salvation .

the supreme court stated , "there are areas of conduct protected by the free exercise clause of the first amendment and thus beyond the power of the state to control , even under regulations of general applicability. .

in 1990 , the supreme court significantly altered its interpretation of the free exercise clause .

in employment division v. smith , the court abandoned the requirement that laws burdening religious exercise have a compelling governmental interest with respect to neutral statutes .

in smith , two employees claimed their free exercise rights were violated when they were fired and denied unemployment compensation after ingesting peyote ( a hallucinogenic substance regulated by controlled substances laws ) for religious purposes .

however , the supreme court found the controlled substances law was a general criminal provision , neither aimed at inhibiting religious beliefs nor creating an exception for religious practice .

the court held that a compelling interest analysis was an inappropriate constitutional test for neutral laws of general applicability .

congress responded to the smith decision by enacting the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ; p.l .

103-141 ) of 1993 .

rfra statutorily reinstated the strict scrutiny standard in all circumstances where government actions burdened religious exercise .

rfra provided that the government could substantially burden a person's exercise of religion only if the burden ( 1 ) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest and ( 2 ) is the least restrictive means of furthering that interest .

as originally enacted , rfra applied the strict scrutiny standard for governmental action at the federal , state , and local levels .

congress justified applying strict scrutiny to the states as an exercise of power under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment , which grants "congress the power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article [guaranteeing individuals equal protection and due process of law]. .

in ex parte virginia , the supreme court explained section 5 of the fourteenth amendment as follows: whatever legislation is appropriate , that is , adapted to carry out the objects the amendments have in view , whatever tends to enforce submission to the prohibitions they contain , and to secure to all persons the enjoyment of perfect equality of civil rights and the equal protection of the laws against state denial or invasion , if not prohibited , is brought within the domain of congressional power .

the court has described congress's power under section 5 as a "remedial" power because it extends only to "enforc[ing]" the provisions of the fourteenth amendment .

in city of boerne , texas v. flores , the supreme court held rfra unconstitutional as it applied to states and localities because the statute exceeded congress's remedial powers to enforce rights under the fourteenth amendment .

in boerne , the court considered whether rfra could exempt a church from local zoning requirements in a historic district .

the supreme court held that "by enacting rfra , congress had exceeded [its remedial authority under section 5] by defining rights instead of simply enforcing them. .

the court explained that congress's powers under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment were limited to the extent that there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be remedied and the law adopted to that end .

in order to satisfy the court's "congruence and proportionality" test , congress must limit the scope of the remedial measure to only those instances where the record clearly demonstrates a pervasive pattern of violations of the fourteenth amendment .

the court was unable to find a pattern of the use of neutral laws of general applicability to disguise bigotry and animus against religion , and therefore struck down rfra as an overbroad response to a relatively non - existent problem .

in the wake of boerne , congress enacted the religious land use and institutionalized persons act of 2000 ( rluipa ; p.l .

106-274 ) .

although similar to rfra in its restoration of strict scrutiny analysis to free exercise cases , congress significantly restricted rluipa's application in order to conform to the court's ruling in boerne .

the protections of rluipa apply only where states or localities place a substantial burden on religious exercise as a result of a land use regulation , or on the religious exercise of institutionalized persons .

the language of rluipa broadly defines "religious exercise" as "any exercise of religion , whether or not compelled by , or central to , a system of religious belief. .

rluipa's land use provisions ( section 2 ) are triggered only where the substantial burden is imposed in a program that receives federal funding , affects interstate commerce , or occurs as the result of a land use decision involving an individualized assessment .

the protections for institutionalized persons ( section 3 ) are triggered only where the institution receives federal funding or the substantial burden affects interstate commerce .

thus , to avoid the broad exercise of power invalidated by boerne , congress specifically delineated the narrow application of the rluipa protections in order to ground the statute in congress's powers under the spending clause , the commerce clause , and the fourteenth amendment .

although grounded under different constitutional authority than rfra , rluipa provides the same two - part standard of protection .

that is , government actions that impose a substantial burden on religious exercise must ( 1 ) serve a compelling government interest and ( 2 ) use the least restrictive means to achieve that interest .

the party asserting the violation under rluipa must prove that the government has placed a substantial burden on religious exercise .

the u.s. supreme court has interpreted a "substantial burden" as a burden that requires an individual to modify his behavior in violation of his religious beliefs in order to comply with legal requirements .

once a substantial burden is proven , the government must show that the imposition of the burden furthers a compelling governmental interest and is the least restrictive means of furthering that interest .

rluipa specifically includes the "use , building , or conversion of real property for the purpose of religious exercise" in its definition of religious exercise .

in part , congress enacted rluipa to address challenges to zoning ordinances based on religious exercises .

congress recognized that places of assembly are needed to facilitate religious practice , and that zoning regulations may be used to prevent religious groups from using land for such purposes .

rluipa's legislative history shows that congress had amassed a record containing numerous instances of targeted discrimination against religious groups evidenced by denial of conditional building permits through discretionary individual assessments and land use regulations .

unlike the institutionalized persons portion of rluipa , which only applies when the institution receives federal funding or where the burden affects interstate commerce , the land use portion of rluipa also applies wherever the substantial burden is imposed as a result of a land use regulation involving individualized assessments .

though the proponents of rluipa recognized the possibility of frivolous lawsuits , they nevertheless believed it was necessary to give heightened protection to religious practice by institutionalized persons: far more than any other americans , persons residing in institutions are subject to the authority of one or more local officials .

institutional residents' right to practice their faith is at the mercy of those running the institution and their experience is very mixed .

it is well known that prisoners often file frivolous claims ; it is less well known that prison officials sometimes impose frivolous or arbitrary rules .

whether from indifference , ignorance , bigotry , or lack of resources , some institutions restrict religious liberty in egregious and unnecessary ways .

the institutionalized persons provisions of rluipa apply to any facility that accepts federal funding .

as of 2005 , every state accepted federal funding for its prison system .

although most challenges under these provisions arise from incarcerated individuals , the statute also covers any federally funded pre - trial detention facility , juvenile detention center , long term care center , or institution for the mentally ill , disabled , retarded , chronically ill , or handicapped .

courts generally have upheld rluipa as a valid use of congress's power under the commerce clause , spending clause , or section 5 of the fourteenth amendment , and have rejected challenges to the law under the tenth amendment and the establishment clause .

the supreme court has played a limited role in rluipa litigation — holding only that the institutionalized persons provisions of the statute do not violate the establishment clause .

as of the date of this writing , no appellate court has struck down the provisions of rluipa on constitutional grounds , and with the absence of a circuit split on the topic at this time , it appears unlikely that the supreme court will consider rluipa in the near future .

