a succinct provision in an 1866 statute known as "r.s .

2477" granted rights of way acrossunreserved federal public lands: and be it further enacted , that the right of way for theconstruction of highways over public lands , not reserved for public uses , is hereby granted .

 ( 1 ) this provision was repealed in 1976 by the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) , an act that also protected valid rights of way established by that time .

what definitions,criteria , and law should be applied to confirm or validate the existence of these pre - 1976 r.s .

2477rights of way has been controversial for over a decade .

the issues are important to states andcommunities whose highway systems are affected .

also , the rights of way may run either throughundeveloped federal lands that might otherwise qualify for wilderness designation or across landsthat are now private or within federal reserves ( such as parks or national forests ) created after thehighways might have been established .

many such rights of way have not been controversial because their construction andacceptance as highways was clear .

other asserted rights of way are controversial either because theirtimely completion is not clear , the standards by which their validity should be determined aredebatable , or because of the location of the asserted rights of way .

the potential impacts of claimedr.s .

2477 rights of way on the management of federal and non - federal lands and on state roadsystems could be significant .

 ( 2 ) validated roads could continue across private lands as well,possibly to the surprise of current landowners .

 ( 3 ) still other rights of way may threaten water quality if they passthrough critical watersheds .

 ( 4 ) on the other hand , others assert that motorized access to the federallands , which comprise about 44 percent of utah , is important for ranching , recreation , mining , andother economic activities deemed vital to rural utah and that the roadways will promote economicprosperity generally .

 ( 5 ) incommenting on a bill in the 104th congress that would have legislated a validation process verydifferent from that proposed in regulations , sen. hatch stated: [t]his matter is critical to communities and citizens inthe rural west .

in many cases , these roads are the only routes to farms and ranches ; they providenecessary access for schoolbuses , emergency vehicles , and mail delivery .

the interior departmentregulations would significantly confound transportation in the western states , jeopardizing thelivelihoods of many citizens and possibly their health and safety as well .

 ( 6 ) on january 6 , 2003 the department of the interior published new final regulations on"disclaimers of interest. .

 ( 7 ) a disclaimer is a recordable document in which the united states declares that it does not have aproperty interest or interests in lands .

the issuance of a disclaimer can help remove a cloud fromland title because it has the same effect as though the united states had conveyed any interest it has .

on april 9 , 2003 , the department of the interior and utah entered into a memorandum ofunderstanding ( mou ) to establish a process to acknowledge as valid certain r.s .

2477 highwayrights of way within that state and to disclaim the interest of the united states in valid rights of way .

apparently , this means that the united states would disclaim its interest in the highway easement,but not title to the underlying lands .

the new disclaimer regulations were issued under â§ 315 of the federal land policy andmanagement act of 1976 ( flpma ) , ( 8 ) one part of which authorizes the issuance of disclaimers if aninterest or interests of the united states in lands has "terminated by operation of law or is otherwiseinvalid. .

the amended disclaimer regulations at 43 c.f.r .

part 1860 , subpart 1864 , allow states,state political subdivisions , and others to apply for disclaimers of interest by the united states,regardless of whether they are the property owner of record , as was required by the previousregulations .

the amended regulations provide exceptions to the 12-year statute of limitations thatapplied to all applications under the previous regulations and that would also apply to all plaintiffs,except states , if they were to pursue claims in court under the quiet title act .

some comments on the proposed changes to the disclaimer regulations expressed concernthat disclaimers would be used to confirm many more r.s .

2477 rights of way through thatmeans .

 ( 9 ) the explanatorymaterials accompanying the final regulations state that "[a] significant number of comments askedabout the relationship between the proposed rule and r.s .

2477," and conclude that â§ 315disclaimers are appropriate in the r.s .

2477 context if their issuance would help remove a cloud onthe title to lands or interests in lands arising from unrecorded rights of way .

 ( 10 ) the explanatory materials go on to discuss that the rule does not provide standards forrecognizing , managing , or validating r.s .

2477 rights of way and therefore do not violate â§ 108 of p.l .

104-208 , which prohibited rules "pertaining" to recognition of r.s .

2477 rights of way .

 ( 11 ) by what process r.s .

2477rights of way will be validated and by applying what criteria are controversial issues .

for years,property disputes involving claims to federal lands were resolved by the congress in individuallegislation or by the courts under the quiet title act .

disclaimers have been used when there is nodispute that the united states does not own a property .

the issuance of disclaimers spares partiesthe time and expense of going to court under the quiet title act .

however , given the significantissues over what law applies to r.s .

2477 rights of way and what constitutes lawful r.s .

2477validity criteria , use of disclaimers as part of a process for validating such rights of way withoutcongressional or judicial guidance on how such claims should be evaluated and resolved maygenerate further controversy .

the administration asserts that disclaimers will only be used inreference to "obvious" r.s .

2477 claims ( 12 ) or claims that "satisfy the statutory requirement of 'construction'and 'highway' under almost any interpretation of those statutory terms. .

 ( 13 ) however , as will bediscussed , some of the terms of the utah mou may be controversial - - e.g .

it expressly equates"highway" with "road," possibly broadening the rights of way that may qualify by eliminating onedebatable element of the 1866 grant from consideration .

the possible relationship between the new disclaimer regulations and r.s .

2477determinations is important because congress in â§ 108 of p.l .

104-208 stated that no rules"pertaining to" recognition or validity of r.s .

2477 rights of way could be effective unless authorizedby congress .

explanatory materials published with the amended disclaimer rules assert that theissuance of federal disclaimers is completely separate from determining the validity of claims ofhighway rights of way under r.s .

2477 .

but , apparently , disclaimers could be an essential part ofa new process for finalizing claims found to be valid through application of a variety ofadministrative standards .

the mou with utah establishes an "acknowledgment process" wherebyr.s .

2477 rights of way claimed by that state can be validated and disclaimers to the rights of wayissued by the united states .

some counties in utah and one county in california , and the states ofalaska , colorado , idaho , oregon , have indicated interest in developing separate mous regardingr.s .

2477 rights of way , and other states may follow .

 ( 14 ) any additional mous may or may not be similar to that withutah .

 ( 15 ) whether thispotential for disparate approaches to validating r.s .

2477 rights of way comports with the policiesset out in flpma to retain the remaining public lands and to establish uniform procedures for themanagement and disposal of the public lands ( 16 ) raises other issues .

additional questions may arise even if allvalidation agreements prove to be uniform .

neither the utah mou nor the supplemental blm guidance for implementing it sets out thecriteria that will be used by the united states to determine the validity of asserted r.s .

2477 claims .

the articulation of criteria and the definitions of key terms are central issues that have generatedcontroversy in the past .

for many years as the west was being settled , there was little attention paidby the united states to r.s .

2477 grants .

meanwhile , state courts applying state laws establishedtheir own standards by which to judge whether a grant had been accepted by each state for publicmaintenance and liability .

in some instances , state law or judicial interpretation went beyonddetermining when a right of way was accepted by a state or county for those purposes to alsoarticulating what constituted "construction" or a "highway" for purposes of determining when thefederal grant was completed however , these cases typically did not involve the federal governmentas a party , and after the repeal of the 1866 act in 1976 , attention was increasingly focused on theelements of the federal grant: the "construction" of "highways" over "public lands" "not reserved" - - as matters of federal law .

congress has addressed the r.s .

2477 controversy several times .

in 1991 the house passedh.r .

1906 , a bill that would have imposed a cutoff date for claims and specified how thedepartment of interior was to process them , but no senate action was taken .

then , in conferencereport language on p.l .

102-381 , congress deleted a prohibition on using funds to process r.s .

2477rights of way in favor of directing the department to prepare a report on r.s .

2477 , and to developvalidity criteria that are "consonant with the intent of congress both in enacting r.s .

2477 andflpma , which mandated policies of retention and efficient management of the public lands. .

 ( 17 ) the department's reportwas completed in june , 1993 .

one of the recommendations in the report was that regulations bepromulgated to establish a single uniform system for validating r.s .

2477 claims , and secretarybabbitt proposed such regulations in 1994 .

 ( 18 ) however , these proposed regulations were controversial ( 19 ) and elicited congressionalprohibitions against new regulations .

 ( 20 ) these were followed by the prohibition in â§ 108 of p.l .

104-208 ( an appropriations act ) , against rules "pertaining to" r.s .

2477 becoming effective until approvedby congress .

 ( 21 ) similarlanguage had been proposed for the interior appropriations act for fy1998 ( p.l .

105-83 ) , but wasdeleted in reliance on an opinion of the comptroller general that â§ 108 was permanent law .

 ( 22 ) several bills addressing r.s .

2477 were introduced in 1995 and 1996 , including s. 1425 , which would have put the burden of disproving validity of claims on theunited states and directed that determinations be made by applying state law .

many opposed theseprovisions too , and no position garnered sufficient support to enact a bill .

as part of the compromisein the 104th congress , the administration pledged to send a legislative proposal to the hill , and aproposal was sent in august of 1997 , but no legislation based on it was introduced .

on january 22 , 1997 , secretary babbitt revoked a 1988 policy on r.s .

2477 and put in placean interim policy that directed that r.s .

2477 determinations be postponed unless necessitated bycompelling circumstances , thereby giving congress more time to resolve the issues .

language wasadded to the fy1997 supplemental appropriation bill to nullify the 1997 policy and to again requirethat state law be used in evaluating r.s .

2477 claims ; however , this language was eliminated afterthe bill was vetoed .

since that time very few administrative determinations have been completed,and disputed claims have been addressed in the courts under the quiet title act .

now , with the utahmou as precedent , new administrative "acknowledgment processes" could use the amendeddisclaimer regulations to validate r.s .

2477 rights of way under as - yet - unstated criteria .

r.s .

2477 issues may be suitable for resolution by congress because so many interests couldbe affected , and because the law and standards that should be applied are debatable .

h.r.1639 in the 108th congress , again proposes a legislated system for evaluating anddetermining claims , and defines crucial terms .

in addition , the house approved an amendment tothe fy2004 doi appropriations bill ( h.r .

2691 ) , that would have prohibitedimplementation of the amendments to the disclaimer regulations in national monuments , wildernessstudy areas , or units of the national park system , national wildlife refuge system , or the nationalwilderness preservation system .

this language was adopted instead of a more general prohibitionon implementation .

the senate bill , as reported , did not contain a provision on disclaimers and theprovision was eliminated in conference .

if there is no legislated resolution of r.s .

2477 issues , thecourts will continue to consider disputed claims as they arise , and use of the newacknowledgment / disclaimer process may also be challenged .

this report discusses the disclaimer provision of flpma , the recent amendments to thedisclaimer regulations , and the utah mou .

it also provides background on the r.s .

2477 grant toconstruct highways , administrative and judicial interpretation of it , and several questions involvingits interpretation that are not settled .

the relationship of the amended disclaimer regulations to thatstatute and to the prohibition against rules that "pertain to" r.s .

2477 is also discussed .

finally , h.r.1639 and other actions in the current congress also are discussed .

this report will beupdated as circumstances warrant ; see crs report for congress rs21402: federal lands,"disclaimers of interest," and r.s .

2477 , for a discussion of recent events .

the connection between the recent amendments to the disclaimer of interest regulations andr.s .

2477 rights of way has recently been clarified by the execution of a memorandum ofunderstanding ( mou ) on april 9 , 2003 , between the secretary of the interior and the state of utahto establish an "acknowledgment process" for recognizing some r.s .

2477 rights of way in that state .

it is expressly stated in paragraph 4 of the mou that the acknowledgment process that thedepartment "shall use" to acknowledge eligible roads is "flpma's recordable disclaimer of interestprocess. .

"the utah state director of the bureau of land management will issue a recordabledisclaimer of interest if the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations , and the terms ofthis mou , have been satisfied. .

the current mou is to apply to only some of the many claims utah may have .

for example,the mou precludes consideration of rights of way within congressionally designated wildernessareas or wilderness study areas designated on or before october 21 , 1993 , under section 603 offlpma ( thereby facially eliminating any that might result from the wilderness reevaluationconducted by secretary babbitt ) ; roads that lie within the boundaries of any unit of the national parksystem ( although most national monuments are within the national park system , the grandstaircase - escalante national monument is not - - because it is managed by blm , and hence it is notprotected from claims under the mou ) ; roads within a unit of the national wildlife refuge system ; or roads administered by another agency unless that agency consents to the use of theacknowledgment process .

the mou does not set out the criteria by which the validity of claimed rights of way will bedetermined .

as discussed in connection with the analysis of â§ 108 of p.l .

104-208 , supra , this maybe to comport with the desire of congress to itself legislate regarding standards for validating r.s.2477 claims .

however , the subtitle of the mou refers to state and county "road"acknowledgment .

the word "road" is footnoted as follows: "[f]or purposes of this mou , the terms"a road" and "a highway" shall be deemed synonomous. .

 ( sic ) the r.s .

2477 grant was for the"construction of highways across public lands not reserved. .

arguably , the equating of highway androad in the title of the utah mou eliminates one major issue - - that the 1866 grant was for "highways" and not all "roads. .

there is no elaboration in the mou on how "construction" or "notreserved" will be interpreted .

it is stated that eligible roads are those: ( 1 ) that existed prior toenactment of flpma and which "are in use at the present time ; " ( 2 ) identifiable by centerlinedescription or other appropriate legal description ; ( 3 ) documented by information sufficient tosupport a conclusion that the road meets "the legal requirements of a right - of - way granted under r.s.2477 ; " and requires that ( 4 ) "the road was and continues to be public and capable of accommodatingautomobiles or trucks with four wheels and has been the subject of some type of periodicmaintenance. .

paragraph 7 states that the 1997 [babbitt] policy is inapplicable to acknowledgment requestssubmitted in accordance with the mou .

this is presumably because that policy directed that r.s.2477 rights of way only be validated in compelling circumstances .

the 1997 policy repealed anearlier 1988 ( hodel ) policy .

there is no clarification in the mou as to whether the department ispresuming that the 1988 policy will now guide these determinations in utah , and therefore whetherthe 1988 definitions of construction and other elements will apply .

paragraph 7 states that otherstates and counties may wish to propose mou's for consideration by the department that are"generally consistent with the principles set out in this agreement. .

this raise the issue of whethercertain r.s .

2477 validity policies and criteria will apply in some states or counties as to someclaims , but not in others as additional states and counties negotiate various mous .

alaskareportedly has sought negotiations for an agreement ( 75 ) and other states may follow .

it has been noted that the utahmou was negotiated and finalized without public participation , but it is unclear whether those thatmay follow will also be completed in this manner .

if a closed and varied approach is taken withrespect to the new disclaimer process for r.s .

2477 claims , resulting agreements may be challengedas not comporting with the policies of flpma that establish uniform management for the publiclands and direct that the secretary "in administering public land statutes and exercising discretionaryauthority granted by them ... establish comprehensive rules and regulations after considering theviews of the general public. .

 ( 76 ) in a recent letter responding to a question posed by the general accounting office as to whatadditional guidance for processing applications for r.s .

2477 disclaimers might be available , thedepartment responded that the june 25 , 2003 memorandum from the deputy director of blm tothe state director of blm in utah was the only additional information expected to be issued .

 ( 77 ) the letter further statesthat the guidance implements blm's authority under the disclaimer regulations and the mou , wasnot subject to notice and comment rulemaking , and was not published in the federal register orelsewhere .

the june 25 , 2003 guidance summarizes some of the terms of the mou and states that:"[t]hrough the mou , interior and the state have agreed to focus their limited resources onacknowledging these r.s .

2477 rights - of - way , that satisfy the statutory requirements of"construction" and "highway" under almost any interpretation of those statutory terms. .

however,as indicated above , there may be differences of opinion regarding essential elements .

the guidance sets out what should be in an application , including information demonstratingthat the claimed right of way existed prior to october 21 , 1976 , and that it was in use as of april 9,2003 ; and details as to appropriate description and location information .

the application also shoulddescribe any "improvements such as bridges or culverts and other ancillary features existing as ofapril 9 , 2003 . .

 ( emphasis added. ) .

why this is the relevant date to demonstrate whetherimprovements existed that might demonstrate "construction" of a highway , rather than october 21,1976 - - the date of statutory repeal of the grant - - is not explained .

examples of helpful informationmentioned in the guidance include: a narrative as to when the claimed right of way was constructedand supporting evidence ; affidavits and / or other legally cognizable documents evidencing how theclaimed right of way was established , its history and usage ; and historic maps and photographs ofthe claimed right of way ( pre - october 21 , 1976 ) .

there is no information as to what criteria blmwill apply in evaluating this supporting evidence regarding adequacy of "construction. .

paragraph 5 of the mou states that a disclaimed right of way will be of "a sufficient widthto allow the state or county to maintain the character , usage , and travel safety of the road existing at the date of this mou . .

the guidance indicates that a draft decision on an application will beprepared that will describe the right of way , including its width .

"the width of the road asserted andthe width of the road disclaimed shall not exceed the width of ground disturbance that existed forthe road as of april 9 , 2003 , the date of the mou. .

in this context too , no explanation is given asto why the date of the mou is used to determine the baseline width of the road , rather than october21 , 1976 .

paragraph 6 of the mou also states that "where the state or a county wishes to substantiallyalter a road that is subject to the acknowledgment process in a way that is outside the scope ofordinary maintenance , it will do so only after notifying blm of its intentions and giving blm anopportunity to determine that no permit or other authorization is required under federal law ...." the june 25th guidance discusses the public notice of an application that will be required ( notice is required under both the statute and the regulations ) , and states that only the applicant orclaimant has the right to appeal a decision to the interior board of land appeals , and that no otherform of appeal is available to other persons .

this reflects the disclaimer regulations which requirepublication of notice when an application is filed for a disclaimer , ( 78 ) but include no requirementfor a comment period and allow only an applicant to appeal .

 ( 79 ) the june 25th guidancewith respect to the implementation of the utah mou clarifies that the blm , in consultation with theapplicant , will review all timely comments received on a disclaimer application under that mou anddocumentation will be placed in the case file responding to all "relevant , substantive issues" raisedby commenters .

the utah mou may raise many questions as to the interpretation of the r.s .

2477 grant .

ananalysis of the history of the r.s .

2477 grants , the elements of the grant , and their administrative andjudicial interpretation is essential to evaluating the utah mou and future actions of the departmentregarding r.s .

2477 .

h.r .

1639 in the 108th congress would establish a window of time to presentr.s .

2477 claims , beyond which time such claims would be deemed to have been abandoned , ( 231 ) and would establishuniform definitions and a procedure for validating such claims .

the bill would define "construction" and "highway" as: [a]n intentional physical act or series of intentionalphysical acts that were intended to prepare , and that accomplished preparation of a highway by adurable , observable , physical modification of the land along the entire claimed route to facilitate thesafe and efficient passage of four - wheeled highway vehicles .

a thoroughfare along a specific identified route that,prior to the latest available date , was used by the public , without discrimination against anyindividual or group , for the passage of four - wheeled highway vehicles carrying people or goods fromone inhabited place to another inhabited place .

the house approved an amendment to fy2004 interior and related agencies appropriations ( h.r .

2691 ) that would have prohibited implementation of the disclaimer regulationamendments in national monuments , wilderness and wilderness study areas , national parks , andnational wildlife refuges .

the senate bill did not contain a similar provision and it was eliminatedin conference .

 comparison of various definitions relating to r.s.247 .

