estimates of military spending by foreign nations are available from a number of sources .

thiscrs report lists and compares military expenditures of the united states and foreign countries usingtwo of the most commonly cited and readily available publications: the military balance , publishedin october of each year by the london - based international institute for strategic studies ( iiss ) andworld military expenditures and arms transfers ( wmeat ) , published about annually by the u.s.department of state , bureau of arms control .

 ( 1 ) although the iiss and u.s. state department aim to provide figures that are as consistent and accurate as possible , cross - national comparisons of defense spending are inherently imperfect .

available sets of figures are useful for comparative purposes , but often do not correspond with oneanother for a variety of reasons .

this report provides two sets of figures from widely recognizedsources in order to offer congress a sample of the data published on this topic .

in the military balance , military expenditures are defined as the cash outlays of a central orfederal government to meet the costs of national armed forces .

the term "armed forces" includesstrategic , land , naval , air , command , administration , and support forces .

it also includes paramilitaryforces such as the gendarmerie , as well as customs service and border guards if these are trained inmilitary tactics , equipped as a military force and operate under military authority in the event of awar .

 ( 2 ) the iiss produces the most current estimates of foreign military expenditures .

the 2003-2004 edition of the military balance contains military expenditure figures from 2002 , while the mostrecent edition of the u.s. state department's wmeat contains military expenditure figures from1999 .

the iiss obtains its figures using data from national governments , the north atlantic treatyorganization ( nato ) , the united nations , the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , and the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

however , consistent and accurate data formany countries are not available even from these sources , as many countries neither publish theirmilitary expenditures nor report them accurately to these organizations .

in these cases , the iissestimates military expenditures "based on information from several sources. .

 ( 3 ) such cases aremarked with an "e" on table 1 and table 2 in this report .

for most countries , the iiss converts budget data into dollars using current exchange rates in us dollars .

for countries where basic economic data are hard to obtain , such as former commandeconomies like china , russia , or countries in conflict , the iiss uses purchasing power parity ( ppp ) estimates for its conversions .

ppps measure the relative purchasing power of different currenciesover equivalent goods and services .

this method accounts for the substantial differences inestimated prices for defense goods .

the u.s. state department bureau of arms control's world military expenditures and armstransfers ( wmeat ) report , most recently published on february 6 , 2003 , provides figures for theten - year period from 1989 to 1999 .

 ( 4 ) wmeat usesthe world bank's average 1999 market exchangerates in order to calculate military expenditures for most countries .

 ( 5 ) in cases where no appropriateexchange rate is available , wmeat uses ppp estimates .

for nato members , wmeat measures military expenditures according to a common definition that includes military retired pay and military - type expenditures of defense ministries .

inthis definition , a ) civilian - related expenditures of defense ministries are excluded and military - relatedexpenditures of other ministries are included ; b ) grant military assistance is included in theexpenditures of the donor country ; c ) purchases of military equipment for credit are included at thetime the debt is incurred , not at the time of payment .

for most other countries , figures represent the expenditures of the ministry of defense .

when these are known to include the costs of internal security , an attempt is made to remove suchexpenditures .

a wide variety of data sources is used for these countries , including the publicationsand data resources of other u.s. government agencies , standardized reporting to the united nationsby country , and other international sources .

 ( 6 ) for russia , china , and many current or former communist countries , wmeat estimates military expenditures in different ways .

figures for china are based on u.s. government estimatesof the yuan costs of chinese forces , weapons , programs , and activities .

wmeat warns that figuresfor chinese military spending should be treated as having a wide margin of error .

 ( 7 ) estimates for most states comprising the former soviet union and warsaw pact are made by establishing the ratio of military expenditures to gross national product ( gnp ) in nationalcurrencies and then multiplying this ratio by the world bank's estimate of gnp in dollars asconverted to international dollars by estimated ppps and reported in the world bank atlas 1997 .

 ( 8 ) using the iiss and wmeat data , this report presents the following tables and figures: table 1: u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by rank ) : data from the iiss and u.s. department of state ( countries ranked according to wmeatfigures ) table 2: u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by country ) : data from the iiss and u.s. department of state figure 1: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of the top 10 defense - spending countries , 2002 ( iiss figures ) figure 2: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of the top 10 defense - spending countries , 1999 ( wmeat figures ) figure 3: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of the top 25 defense - spending countries , 2002 ( iiss figures ) figure 4: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of the top 25 defense - spending countries , 1999 ( wmeat figures ) figure 5: defense expenditures as a percentage of gdp: top 25 countries , 1999 ( wmeat figures ) figure 6: defense expenditures as a percentage of gdp: top 25 countries , 2002 ( iiss figures ) table 3: nato defense expenditures: data from the iiss and u.s. department of state ( countries ranked according to iiss figures ) figure 7: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of nato defense expenditures , 1999 ( wmeat figures ) figure 8: u.s. defense expenditures as a percentage of nato defense expenditures , 2002 ( iiss figures ) figure 9: nato defense expenditures as a percentage of gdp , 1999 ( wmeat figures ) figure 10: nato defense expenditures as a percentage of gdp , 2002 ( iiss figures ) table 1 .

u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by rank ) : data from the iiss and u.s. department of state ( current year u.s. dollars inmillions ) * these figures are based on purchasing power parity ( ppp ) estimates .

ppps measure the relative purchasing power of different currencies over equivalent goods and services .

this method betteraccounts for the substantial differences in relative prices for defense goods .

e these figures were estimated by iiss and not based on reported data from the individual country .

table 2 .

u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by country ) : datafrom the iiss and u.s. department of state ( current year u.s. dollars inmillions ) * these figures are based on purchasing power parity ( ppp ) estimates .

ppps measure the relative purchasing power of different currencies over equivalent goods and services .

this method betteraccounts for the substantial differences in relative prices for defense goods .

e these figures were estimated by iiss and not based on reported data from the individual country .

*countries #2 - #10: china , russia , france , united kingdom , germany , italy , india , japan , saudiarabia * countries #2 - #10: china , russia , france , united kingdom , germany , italy , japan , saudiarabia,china - taiwan *countries #2 - #25: china , russia , france , japan , united kingdom , germany , italy , saudi arabia,india , south korea , brazil , israel , turkey , spain , canada , australia , china - taiwan , netherlands,indonesia , greece , mexico , iran , ukraine , n. korea *countries #2 - #25: china , japan , france , united kingdom , russia , germany , italy , saudi arabia , china - taiwan , south korea , india , turkey , brazil , israel , canada , spain , australia , netherlands,poland , iran , greece , sweden , dem .

rep. of congo , ukraine note: the united states , with defense spending at 3.0% of gdp in 1999 according towmeat,would rank #50 on this chart .

note: the united states , with defense spending at 3.3% of gdp in 2002 according to theiiss,would rank #47 on this chart .

table 3 .

nato defense expenditures: data from the iiss and u.s. dept .

of state ( current year u.s. dollars in millions ) *non - u.s. nato: united kingdom , france , germany , italy , turkey , greece , czech republic,norway , portugal , poland , italy , netherlands , hungary , denmark , germany , belgium , canada,spain , luxembourg , iceland *non - u.s. nato: united kingdom , france , germany , italy , turkey , greece , czech republic,norway , portugal , poland , italy , netherlands , hungary , denmark , germany , belgium , canada,spain , luxembourg , icelan .

