the scientific , economic , and political questions surrounding climate change have long been with us .

this report focuses instead on a relative newcomer: the legal debate .

though the first court decision related to climate change appeared 19 years ago , the quantity of such litigation has mushroomed in recent years .

one observer counts 118 lawsuits and petitions for government action filed on climate change issues through the end of 2008 — 41 lawsuits filed in 2007 alone .

representatives of some suing organizations and states acknowledge that a prime cause for this litigation surge is the inaction of congress and the executive branch during the george w. bush administration with regard to mandatory constraints on greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , and their perception that litigation might help to prompt such action .

early signs are that the pace of new filings during the obama administration may be tapering off .

the principal court cases , decided and pending , arise in eight contexts — a number that continues to grow .

first and most important is the clean air act ( caa ) .

in april , 2007 , the supreme court held in massachusetts v. epa that the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has authority under the caa to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles .

the second context for climate change litigation is the federal wildlife statutes , raising the issue of whether statutes like the endangered species act can be used to limit ghg emissions based on their contribution to climate - climate - related alterations of wildlife habitat .

third is the federal energy statutes , such as the energy policy and conservation act and outer continental shelf lands act , which also raise questions as to whether climate change impacts must be considered in their spheres .

the fourth context for litigation is federal information statutes such as the national environmental policy act , exploring the extent to which they can be used to compel government analysis of and dissemination of information about climate change .

fifth is common law tort theories such as nuisance and whether they be used successfully by state and private plaintiffs to force cutbacks in ghg emissions , or payment of damages ? .

sixth is federal preemption of state regulation of ghg emissions .

this category breaks down into efforts by states and environmentalists to reverse epa's refusal to waive clean air act preemption , and auto industry efforts to impose preemption under non - clean air act theories , such as the "cafe standards" under the energy policy and conservation act .

seventh , chiefly with respect to coal - fired power plants , is state utilities laws .

and eighth is whether general liability insurance policies cover harms and liabilities caused by climate change .

sections i through viii of this report address these eight areas of litigation in turn .

most known cases , decided and pending , are mentioned — omitted cases are those that raise climate change issues in only the most marginal way or only implicitly , and some state cases .

looking beyond the domestic lawsuits , section ix surveys international law arguments that might be used to induce ghg emission reductions from the united states and other countries that are major ghg emitters , and the few international law claims filed against the united states to date .

finally , section x offers overall comments .

much of the climate change litigation is based on statutory requirements that the government generate , compile , or disclose information .

the widely diverse injuries predicted from climate change mean that a comparably diverse spectrum of plaintiffs and defendants could become involved in common law tort litigation based on such injuries .

possible plaintiffs include property owners ( farmers dealing with reduced rainfall , owners of oceanfront homes dealing with rising sea level or increased storm activity ) , nonowner users of natural resources ( ski resort operators , commercial fishermen ) , and state attorneys general bringing private or public nuisance claims ( the former for injury to state - owned land , the latter on behalf of the state's citizenry to protect public health and well - being ) .

possible defendants include the companies that produce the fossil fuels whose combustion produces ghg emissions , entities that emit ghgs ( chiefly fossil - fuel - fired powerplants , but many other sources also ) , and companies that manufacture or market products whose use creates ghg emissions ( chiefly the automakers ) .

several of these potential plaintiff and defendant categories are represented in the five climate - change - related tort cases known to be filed thus far ( four discussed in the following text , one in footnote 130 ) .

thus far , all of those tort actions that have produced court decisions have failed , either due to lack of standing or the political question doctrine , or both .

three are on appeal , however .

the first climate - change decision involving state statutes ( other than nuisance statutes ) appears to be matter of quantification of environmental costs , 578 n.w.2d 794 ( minn. app .

1998 ) .

this case involved a state law requiring the state's public utilities commission to determine environmental cost values for each method of energy generation , and to use those values in proceedings before the commission .

the commission set values for six pollutants , including co 2 .

petitioners' challenge to the co 2 value was rejected on the grounds that ( a ) notwithstanding the speculative nature of some of the data , the alj conducted a careful review based on sufficient evidence in the record , ( b ) the determination that co 2 negatively affects the environment was proper , and ( c ) the determination as to co 2 value otherwise comported with the governing statute .

in 2000 , the city of seattle adopted a goal of meeting its electricity needs with "no net greenhouse gas emissions. .

to achieve this goal , the city ordered the city - owned electric utility to offset its ghg emissions by paying others to reduce their ghg emissions .

the utility did so , largely through agreements paying other entities to use cleaner fuels .

this made the utility ( according to its press release ) "the first large electric utility in the country to effectively eliminate its contribution of harmful greenhouse gas emissions. .

in okeson v. city of seattle , 150 p.3d 556 ( wash. 2007 ) ( en banc ) , however , the utility's ratepayers argued that this offset arrangement was not authorized by the state's utility enabling act .

the washington supreme court agreed , explaining that the purchase of ghg offsets was not impliedly authorized by the enabling act in that the offset contracts were not proprietary because they were not part of the services for which ratepayers are billed , nor were they within the enabling act's purposes .

a pair of cases deals with permit applications by electric utilities seeking to build new facilities .

in in re otter tail power co . , 744 n.w.2d 594 ( s.d .

2008 ) , environmental intervenors urged the south dakota public utilities commission to deny a permit to build a coal - fired energy conversion facility , in light of the substantial co 2 it would emit .

notwithstanding , the commission granted the permit , and the state supreme court sustained .

the commission , it held , was not clearly erroneous in finding that the added co 2 threatened no "serious" injury to the environment , the state's statutory standard .

deference to the commission was particularly appropriate , it said , because the co 2 from the facility would increase national co 2 emissions by only .07% , and neither congress nor the state had chosen to regulate co 2 emissions .

by contrast , the permit was initially denied in kansas .

after applying for a psd construction permit for two 700-megawatt coal - fired power plants , the sunflower electric power corp. initially received a favorable response from the state agency , which asserted it would not consider co 2 in connection with the application owing to the national and international character of climate change .

later , however , the agency invoked a state law providing it with emergency powers when emissions present a substantial endangerment to the health of persons or the environment .

using this authority , and specifically citing the large volume of co 2 from the proposed plants , the agency denied the permit in 2007 .

three times in 2008 and once in 2009 the kansas legislature passed laws that would have required sunflower's application to be evaluated without taking co 2 emissions into account , but each was vetoed by governor sebelius .

in response to the 2008 vetoes , sunflower filed several suits now pending in state and federal court .

in federal court , in sunflower electric power corp. v. sebelius , no .

08-2575 ( d. kan. filed november 17 , 2008 ) , sunflower alleged first that the permit denial violates equal protection because it prohibits co 2 emissions from the proposed plants when the state has authorized , and continues to authorize , other co 2 sources in kansas .

second , sunflower claims a violation of the dormant commerce clause in that the permit denial was allegedly motivated by the fact that much of the electricity to be generated by the proposed plants would be sold out of state .

with the arrival of a new governor , however , a deal was struck on may 4 , 2009 , allowing one 895-megawatt coal - fired power plant to be built .

reportedly the deal includes sunflower's dismissal of the federal suit .

research reveals only one lawsuit contesting insurance policy coverage of injuries or liability arising from climate change , though the future is likely to see more .

one of the energy companies sued in tort by the village of kivalina ( see section v ) is now being sued by the insurance company holding its commercial general liability policy .

steadfast insurance co. v. the aes corporation , no .

2008-858 ( va. county ct. filed july 9 , 2008 ) .

the insurance company seeks a declaratory judgment that , it hopes , will decree it is not obligated under the policy to provide either defense or indemnity coverage to the energy company in the litigation brought by the village of kivalina .

the insurer's arguments are three: ( 1 ) the policy applies only to an "accident," which is not the basis of the suit against the energy company by the kivalina plaintiffs ; ( 2 ) the policies do not apply to injury that began before the earliest of the insurance policies ( september 2003 ) , which the injuries here did ; and ( 3 ) all of the conditions for avoiding the policy's pollution exclusion have not been met ( eg , the pollution alleged by the kivalina complaint was not unexpected ) .

more significant than the coverage of current liability and casualty policies is the long - term challenge posed by climate change to the insurance industry .

reports suggest that the successor to the kyoto protocol may contain provisions by which wealthy industrialized nations contribute to the adaptation costs of developing countries affected by climate change .

lurking in the background , however , is the question whether the major ghg emitting nations can be sued in international fora for the adverse effects of climate change .

gauging the viability of such claims involves a good deal of guesswork , as they lie on the frontiers of international law .

this report , concerned primarily with actually filed claims , notes only a few highlights , taken mostly from what appears to be the most pertinent article in the area .

the article suggests that the international court of justice ( icj ) might be one forum for resolution of climate change claims , with jurisdiction established through treaties that specifically provide for dispute resolution before the court .

a problem with the icj approach is that the treaties most likely to be invoked are friendship , commerce , and navigation or similar treaties , which focus on how each party within its own country treats the other country's nationals and property .

a climate change suit , by contrast , likely would have an extraterritorial focus .

another icj possibility would be for the court to render an advisory opinion , at the request of a body authorized under the u.n. charter to request one .

other possibilities include voluntary submission of a climate change dispute to any of several international arbitral forums or resort to the specialized dispute resolution systems created under various treaties .

an example of the latter , reportedly being actively considered , is a fisheries conservation agreement under the un law of the sea convention , presumably on the argument that increased ocean temperatures from climate change imperil certain fish stocks .

some principles that might be applied to a claim alleging ghg - caused injury might be taken from the international law of transboundary pollution .

for example , the restatement ( third ) of foreign relations law describes an international law principle under which a nation must "take such measures as may be necessary , to the extent practicable under the circumstances , to ensure that activities within its jurisdiction or control ... are conducted so as not to cause significant injury to the environment of another state...." similarly , the trail smelter arbitration decision , probably the seminal ruling on state liability for transboundary pollution , declared that "[a] state owes at all times a duty to protect other states against injurious acts by individuals from within its jurisdiction. .

of course , as with the domestic common law litigation described in section v , daunting hurdles confront the claimant in making the link between climate change in general and specific environmental harms , and in apportioning how much of such harms are attributable to the charged party or parties , in this instance the united states .

research reveals only one climate - change - related international law action filed against the united states .

not surprisingly , it was filed by a group based in the arctic , where the temperature rise from climate change has been among the fastest .

in 2005 , the chair of the inuit circumpolar conference , on behalf of herself and all affected inuit of the arctic regions of the united states and canada , filed a petition against the united states with the inter - american commission on human rights , the investigative arm of the organization of american states ( oas ) .

the petition alleged that the united states , through its failure to restrict its ghg emissions and the resultant climate change , has violated the inuit's human rights — including their rights to their culture , to property , to the preservation of health , life , and physical integrity , and so on .

inuit culture is described in the petition as "inseparable from the condition of [its] physical surroundings. .

generally , the inter - american commission on human rights is empowered to recommend measures that contribute to human rights protection , request states in urgent cases to adopt specific precautionary measures to avoid serious harm to human rights , or submit cases to the inter - american court of human rights .

the united states , however , has not accepted the jurisdiction of this court , so the inuit petition sought only to have the commission prepare a report declaring the responsibilities of the united states and recommending corrective measures .

in 2006 , the inuit petition was rejected , with no reasons given ( as is customary for the commission ) .

however , at the request of petitioners the commission held a hearing on march 1 , 2007 on the generic issue of climate change and human rights .

one may speculate that the commission felt more comfortable with the hearing format than the petition because the former did not single out the united states .

or that the commission was concerned the petition took it into a realm of global scale , orders of magnitude vaster than the typical human rights petition it receives .

in 2005-2006 , five petitions were submitted to the intergovernmental committee for the protection of the cultural and natural heritage of outstanding universal value ( world heritage committee ) , part of unesco .

the petitions request that various designated world heritage sites be placed on the list of world heritage in danger owing to alleged impacts of climate change .

the sites covered by the petitions are waterton - glacier international peace park ( u.s. / canada ) , sagarmatha national park ( nepal ) , belize barrier reef reserve system ( belize ) , huascaran national park ( peru ) , and the great barrier reef ( australia ) .

only the waterton - glacier petition was filed by entities within the united states ( 12 environmental groups ) and involves a natural resource within the united states .

as a party to the world heritage convention , the united states is obligated to "do all it can ... to the utmost of its own resources and , where appropriate , with any international assistance and cooperation" to protect its cultural and natural heritage .

in 2006 , the world heritage committee acknowledged the five petitions but appeared desirous of shifting the debate toward the use of existing committee mechanisms at individual sites to adapt to the threat of climate change .

since then , a few additional petitions to place sites on the danger list have been filed , most interestingly a petition titled "the role of black carbon in endangering sites threatened by glacial melt and sea level rise. .

this petition notes that "[r]ecent scientific studies identify black carbon , a component of fine particulate matter , as a key climate forcing agent…. .

it then asserts that high latitude and high altitude glaciers and low - elevation sites are the world heritage sites most vulnerable to climate change , and lists 15 sites ( including those in the preceding paragraph ) that should be placed on the danger list .

waterton - glacier remains the only site mentioned in a petition for placement on the list of world heritage in danger that is in the united states .

thus far , no international law claims have been brought by low - lying nations likely to be inundated by the sea level rise predicted to accompany climate change .

a recent scientific report asserts that sea level rise is likely to be larger than previously predicted , affecting as many as 600 million people on low - lying pacific islands and southeast asia delta areas .

gauging the prospects of the pending climate change lawsuits is a precarious venture ; for many of the suits , there is little precedent .

it is clear , however , that success in the conventional sense — obtaining a judgment for the environmental plaintiff — is not the only objective of many of these suits .

some of the climate change litigation almost certainly has a long - range strategic purpose — to keep climate change on the political front burner and make it difficult for government and ghg emitters to ignore the problem .

in the conventional sense of the term , plaintiffs' successes have been rare in cases seeking relief directly from ghg emitters .

a court may be reluctant to impose expensive measures to address a global problem on a defendant that is a proportionately minor contributor ( which almost all defendants are , given the vast number of ghg emitters ) , using statutory provisions or common law principles that were not formulated with global problems in mind , against a backdrop of scientific uncertainty as to the precise consequences ( if not the general cause ) of climate change .

by contrast , the environmental side recently has scored major wins where governmental remedies were sought .

in a string of 2007 decisions under the clean air act , energy policy and conservation act of 1975 , foreign policy authority of the united states , and nepa , courts have shown increased willingness to authorize or require government consideration of climate change .

as this report shows , standing has been a persistent issue for environmental plaintiffs , though of late the tide appears to be shifting in their favor .

and at least for states , the supreme court decision in massachusetts v. epa is likely to work a sea change in improving plaintiffs' prospects .

as noted earlier , the big question is the extent to which the supreme court decision finding standing will be seen by the lower courts to generalize to nonstate plaintiffs , other statutory and common law contexts , and injuries ( as from weather events ) not as clearly attributable to climate change as massachusetts's loss of shore land .

causation is not only a component of the threshold standing test but a component of the plaintiff's case on the merits .

several writers have identified proof of causation as a key obstacle to a tort action seeking relief from climate change injury .

and at the remedy stage , allocation of damages among specific defendants will likely present both factual and legal challenges .

in either the standing or case - in - chief contexts , the climate change issues in private - remedy actions reprise an intractable problem in environmental law: imposing liability for harms that are remote in time and place from the pollution sought to be abated , particularly where the pollution comes from multiple sources .

lawmakers of yesteryear encountered this same redistributive conundrum in tackling the problem of acid rain , where pollution cause and effect are separated by hundreds of miles and weeks or months .

imposing liability for harm from exposure to toxic chemicals is of the same ilk: exposure to contamination from multiple sources may result in ill effects manifested only a decade or two later .

perhaps because of these hurdles under existing law , and the resistance of the george w. bush administration to regulatory approaches to climate change , new directions have been explored .

within the united states , several states have adopted their own ghg emission controls , citing , among other things , inaction at the federal level .

twenty - three states have joined one of the three regional ghg reduction initiatives ( western climate initiative , midwestern regional greenhouse gas reduction accord , and in the northeastern states , regional greenhouse gas initiative ) .

some states have explored the idea of emissions trading with europe .

at least 40 states and multiple canadian provinces have partnered to form a climate registry to support voluntary and mandatory schemes for reporting ghg emissions in those states and provinces .

california and the united kingdom signed an agreement on july 31 , 2006 , committing both parties to implement market - based mechanisms , to share results from studies to quantify the economic impacts of climate change , collaborate on research , etc .

also internationally , this report noted the unsuccessful inuit petition filed with the inter - american commission on human rights and the pending petitions before the world heritage committee .

reportedly , the low - lying pacific nation of tuvalu threatened to sue the united states and australia years ago in the icj , but held off for unspecified reasons .

in the corporate world , use of the shareholder proposal process and sec disclosure requirements have been suggested as ways of forcing the issue .

new categories of litigation also may emerge .

for example , the head of the california air resources board has predicted a court challenge to her state's cap - and - trade system to regulate ghgs ( expected to take effect in 2012 ) .

such a challenge , she said , might argue that the cap - and - trade system's fee on ghg emissions imposes a new tax , which requires a 2 / 3 vote of the state legislature .

as another example , rising sea levels may prompt lawsuits seeking a judicial blessing for the landward migration of the public's beach access rights .

and of course , any climate change legislation enacted by congress is likely to spawn its own generation of litigation .

whether these new paths will yield results , only time will tell .

it is clear , however , that if there is to be a government response to climate change at all , a solution from the political branches is more likely to be comprehensive and fully reflective of societal priorities than the typically narrowly targeted results of litigation .

many proponents of litigation or unilateral action by the states freely concede that such initiatives are make - do efforts that , while making a small contribution to mitigating climate change , are also aimed at prodding the national government to act .

