the legislation contains extensive changes to medicare's ffs program , including paymentincreases and , in certain instances , decreases ; development of competitive acquisition programs ; implementation or refinement of other prospective payment systems ( notably , the development ofan end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) basic payment system ) ; expansion of covered preventive benefits ; establishment of demonstration programs ; and required studies .

the anticipated financial impactof these changes on any individual provider , physician , or supplier will vary depending on manyfactors , such as the unique characteristics of the individual or entity participating in medicare as wellas the number and type of services provided to the medicare beneficiaries they serve .

selectedhighlights of the ffs payment provisions and those establishing preventive care benefits anddemonstration programs will be briefly described .

selected rural provider provisions .

generally , medicare payments to certain rural providers are expected to increase ; many of the rural provisions will benefit urban providers as well .

cbo estimates that the rural provisions in titleiv of the bill will increase medicare's direct spending by $9.3 billion from 2004 through 2008 andby $19.9 billion from 2004 though 2013 .

it should be noted that other provider payment provisionsin h.r .

1 can impact rural providers , but their effect on medicare payments to ruralproviders has not been specifically identified .

hospitals in rural areas and those in small urban areas will receive a permanent 1.6% increase to medicare's base rate or per discharge payment ; the payment limit for rural andsmall urban hospitals that qualify for disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) adjustment will increasefrom 5.25% to 12% ; hospitals in low - wage areas ( those with wage index values below 1 ) willreceive additional payments through a decrease from 71% to 62% in the labor - related portion of thebase payment rate ; and small rural hospitals with less than 50 beds will receive cost reimbursementfor outpatient clinical laboratory tests .

in addition , rural hospitals with less than 100 beds will beprotected from payment declines associated with the hospital outpatient prospective payment system ( opps ) for an additional 2 years ; these opps hold harmless provisions will be extended to solecommunity hospitals for services from 2004 through 2006 .

cbo estimates that these provisions willincrease direct medicare spending by $15.6 billion over the 10-year period .

critical access hospitals ( cahs ) will have their bed limit increased from15to 25 ; there will be no restriction on the number of these beds that can be used for acute care servicesat any one time .

cahs will be able to establish distinct part rehabilitation and psychiatric units ofup to 10 beds that will not be included in the cah bed count .

cost reimbursement of cah serviceswill increase to 101% of reasonable costs , starting january 1 , 2004 .

periodic interim payments forcahs will be authorized .

state authority to waive the 35-mile requirement for new entities toqualify as a cah will be eliminated as of january 1 , 2006 .

cbo estimates that these provisions willincrease direct medicare spending by $900 million over the 10-year period .

physicians in newly established scarcity areas will receive a 5% increase inmedicare payments .

physicians in certain low - cost areas with geographic adjustment factors below1 will receive payment increases so as to increase this factor to 1 , starting in 2004 through 2006 .

cbo estimates that these provisions will increase direct medicare spending by $1.7 billion over the10-year period .

practitioners in rural health clinics and federally qualified health centers willbe able to bill separately for services provided to beneficiaries in skilled nursing facilities .

cboestimates that these provisions will increase direct medicare spending by $100 million over the10-year period .

home health providers in rural areas will receive a 5% increase in medicarepayments for one year beginning april 1 , 2004 .

cbo estimates that this one - year increase willincrease direct medicare spending by $100 million over the 10-year period .

selected acute hospital provisions .

generally , medicare payments to hospitals will increase under the conference report .

specifically , acute hospitals paid under the inpatient prospective payment system ( ipps ) will receive the full increase in the market basket ( mb ) index as an update in 2004 .

from 2005through 2007 , hospitals that submit data on specified quality indicators will receive the mb as anupdate ; those hospitals that do not submit such data will receive the mb minus 0.4 percentage pointsfor the year in question .

cbo expects that this provision will reduce direct spending 0.2 billion from2004 through 2008 .

teaching hospitals will receive an increase in their indirect medical educationadjustment from 2004 through 2006 that cbo projects will increase spending by $400 million .

a one - time , geographic reclassification process to increase hospitals' wageindex values for 3 years that is expected to increase payments by $900 million from 2004 through2008 is established .

low volume hospitals with fewer than 800 discharges that are 25 road milesaway from similar hospitals may qualify for up to a 25% increase in medicare payments for anexpected cost of $100 million from 2004-2013 .

changes in payment methods for covered prescription drugs provided inoutpatient hospital departments is expected to increase payments by $700 million from fy2004through fy2008 .

a redistribution of unused resident positions will increase both direct andindirect graduate medical education spending by an anticipated $200 million from fy2004 thoughtfy2008 and by $600 million from fy2004 through fy2013 .

certain teaching hospitals with high per resident payments will not receive apayment increase from fy2004 through fy2013 ; this provision was scored by cbo as a reductionin medicare spending of $500 million from fy2004 through fy2008 and $1.3 billion from fy2004through fy2013 .

for 18 months from the date of enactment , physicians will not be able to refermedicare patients to specialty hospitals in which they have an investment interest .

this provisionwill not apply to hospitals that are in operation or under development before november 18 , 2003 .

both medpac and hhs are to complete required studies on specialty hospitals within 15 monthsof enactment .

selected physician provisions .

the impact of the legislation on medicare's spending for physician spending is difficult to determine .

although physicians will receive a 1.5% update in 2004 and 2005 which is expected toincrease spending by $2.8 billion from fy2004 through fy2007 ; subsequently , from fy2008through fy2012 , the provision is expected to result in a decline of $2.8 billion in medicarespending .

over the 10 year period from 2004 through 2013 , cbo expects the update provisions toincrease medicare spending by $200 million .

medicare's payments for some practice expenses , particularly the administration of covered drugs , will increase starting in 2004 .

a transitional adjustment to the drug administration paymentsof 32% in 2004 and 3% in 2005 is also established .

these payment increases are expected to becounterbalanced by a decrease in medicare's payments for covered outpatient drugs provided in adoctor's office .

medicare's payment for covered outpatient drugs furnished incident to a physician's service will change during 2004 as follows: many covered outpatient drugs furnished in 2004 will be reimbursed at 85% of the average wholesale price ( awp ) .

certain of these drugs may be paid as low as 80% of theawp ( in effect as of april 1 , 2003 ) .

blood clotting factors and other blood products , drugs or biologicals ( drugproducts ) that were not available for payment by april 1 , 2003 , covered vaccinations , drug productsfurnished in during 2004 in connection with renal dialysis services , drugs provided through covereddurable medical equipment will be paid at a higher rate during 2004 .

the decline in payments for covered outpatient drugs in 2004 can only be implemented concurrently with the increased payments for the administration of the drugs .

starting in 2005 , medicare's payment for many covered outpatient drugs will be based on average sales price methodology , that uses different pricing and cost data , depending on theprescription drug .

generally , multiple source drugs will be paid 106% of the average sales price ; single source drugs will be paid 106% of the lower of the average sales price or the wholesaleacquisition costs , unless the widely available market price or the average manufacturer price forthose drugs exceeds a certain threshold .

starting in 2006 , physicians will have the option ofobtaining covered part b drugs from selected entities awarded contracts for competitively biddabledrug products under a newly established competitive acquisition program .

selected provisions affecting other providers and practitioners .

the follow provisions affecting other providers and practitioners are included in the legislation: ambulatory surgical centers .

payments to ambulatory surgical centers ( ascs ) are expected to be lower by $800 million from fy2004 throughfy2008 and by $3.1 billion from fy2004 through fy2013 as a result of the legislation .

ascs willreceive an update of the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) minus 3.0 percentagepoints starting april 1 , 2004 and will receive a o percent update for services provided startingoctober 1 , 2004 through december 31 , 2009 .

therapy caps .

application of the caps on outpatient therapy services provided by non - hospital providers is suspended from the date of enactment and forthe remainder of 2003 , in 2004 and 2005 .

cbo estimates that the therapy cap moratorium willincrease direct medicare spending by $700 million over the 10-year period .

durable medical equipment ( dme ) .

competitive bidding for dme will be phased - in beginning in 2007 in 10 of the largest metropolitan statisticalareas and may be phased in first for the highest cost and highest volume items and services .

theupdate for most dme items and services and for prosthetics and orthotics is 0 in 2004 , 2005 , 2006,2007 , and 2008 .

for 2005 , payment for certain items , oxygen and oxygen equipment , standardwheelchairs , nebulizers , diabetic lancets and testing strips , hospital beds and air mattresses will bereduced by an amount calculated using 2002 payment amounts and the median price paid by thefederal employees health benefit program .

 ( 2 ) beginning january 1 , 2009 , items and servicesincluded in the competitive acquisition program will be paid as determined under that program andthe secretary can use this information to adjust the payment amounts for dme , off - the - shelforthotics , and other items and services that are supplied in an area that is not a competitiveacquisition area .

class iii items ( devices that sustain or support life , are implanted , or presentpotential unreasonable risk , eg , implantable infusion pumps and heart valve replacements , and aresubject to premarket approval , the most stringent regulatory control ) receive the full increase in theconsumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) in 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 and subsequentyears .

the secretary will determine the update in 2007 .

cbo scored the dme provisions of thebill as reducing spending by $6.8 billion over the 10-year period .

home health .

home health agency payments are increased by the full market basket percentage for the last quarter of 2003 ( october , november , anddecember ) and for the first quarter of 2004 ( january , february , and march ) .

the update for theremainder of 2004 and for 2005 and 2006 is the home health market basket percentage increaseminus 0.8 percentage points .

cbo estimates that this provision will reduce direct medicarespending by $6.5 billion over the 10-year period .

the legislation suspends the requirement thathome health agencies must collect the outcome and assessment information set ( oasis ) data onprivate pay ( non - medicare , non - medicaid ) until the secretary reports to congress and publishes finalregulations regarding the collection and use of oasis .

selected fee - for service demonstration projects .

the legislation establishes numerous demonstration projects for the medicare program .

several demonstrations address aspects of disease management for beneficiaries with chronic conditions .

chronic care improvement under fee - for - service .

the legislation requires the secretary to establish and implement chronic care improvementprograms under fee - for - service medicare to improve clinical quality and beneficiary satisfaction andachieve spending targets specified by the secretary for medicare for beneficiaries with certainchronic health conditions .

participation by beneficiaries is voluntary .

the contractors are requiredto assume financial risk for performance under the contract .

cbo has estimated that thisdemonstration will increase direct medicare spending by $500 million over the 10-year period .

chronically ill beneficiary research , demonstration .

the legislation requires the secretary to develop a plan to improve quality of care and to reduce thecost of care for chronically ill medicare beneficiaries within 6 months after enactment .

the plan isrequired to use existing data and identify data gaps , develop research initiatives , and proposeintervention demonstration programs to provide better health care for chronically ill medicarebeneficiaries .

the secretary is required to implement the plan no later than 2 years after enactment .

coverage of certain drugs and biologicals demonstration .

the secretary is required to conduct a 2-year demonstrationwhere payment is made for certain drugs and biologicals that are currently provided as "incident to"a physician's services under part b .

the demonstration is required to provide for cost - sharing in thesame manner as applies under part d of medicare .

the demonstration is required to begin within90 days of enactment and is limited to 50,000 medicare beneficiaries in sites selected by thesecretary .

homebound demonstration .

the secretary is required to conduct a 2-year demonstration project where beneficiaries with chronic conditions would bedeemed to be homebound in order to receive home health services under medicare .

adult day care .

the secretary is required to establish a demonstration where beneficiaries could receive adult day care services as a substitute for a portion of home health services otherwise provided in a beneficiary's home .

expansion of covered benefits .

the legislation contains a number of provisions that expand coverage beginning january 1 , 2005 , including the following: initial physical examination .

medicare coverage of an initial preventive physical examination is authorized for those individuals whose medicarecoverage begins on or after january 1 , 2005 .

cbo estimates that this provision will increase directmedicare spending by $1.7 billion over the 10-year period .

cardiovascular screening blood tests .

medicare coverage of cardiovascular screening blood tests is authorized .

cbo estimates that this provisionwill increase direct medicare spending by $300 million over the 10-year period .

diabetes screening tests .

diabetes screening tests furnished to an individual at risk for diabetes for the purpose of early detection of diabetes areincluded as a covered medical service .

in this instance , diabetes screening tests include fastingplasma glucose tests as well as other tests and modifications to those tests deemed appropriate bythe secretary .

cbo estimates that this provision will increase direct medicare spending less than$50 million over the 10-year period .

screening and diagnostic mammography .

screening mammography and diagnostic mammography will be excluded from opps and paid separately .

cbo estimates that this provision will increase direct medicare spending by $200 million over the10-year period .

intravenous immune globulin .

the bill includes intravenous immune globulin for the treatment in the home of primary immune deficiency diseasesas a covered medical service under medicare .

cbo estimates that this provision will increase directmedicare spending by $100 million over the 10-year period .

the bill contains two provisions which change the beneficiary premiums and deductibles .

income - relating the part b premium .

the legislation increases the monthly part b premiums for higher income enrollees beginning in 2007 .

beneficiaries whose modified adjusted gross income exceed $80,000 and couples filingjoint returns whose modified adjusted gross income exceeds $160,000 will be subject to higherpremium amounts .

the increase will be calculated on a sliding scale basis and will be phased - inover a five - year period .

the highest category on the sliding scale is for beneficiaries whose modifiedadjusted gross income is more than $200,000 ( $400,000 for a couple filing jointly ) .

those amountsare increased beginning in 2007 by the percentage change in the consumer price index .

cboestimates that direct medicare spending will be reduced by $13.3 billion over the 10-year period2004 through 2013 .

indexing the part b deductible .

the medicare part b deductible will remain $100 through 2004 , increase to $110 for 2005 , and in subsequent years the deductible will be increased by the same percentage as the part b premiumincrease .

specifically , the annual percentage increase in the monthly actuarial value of benefitspayable from the federal supplementary medical insurance trust fund will be used as the index .

title x of the legislation makes some changes to medicaid and other programs .

omitted fromthe agreement were two provisions contained in s. 1 , including a provision to amendthe age discrimination in employment act of 1967 to allow an employee benefit plan to offerdifferent benefits to their medicare eligible employees than to their non - medicare eligibleemployees , and a provision to allow states to cover certain lawfully residing aliens under themedicaid program .

cbo estimates the medicaid and other provisions included in the bill to increase direct spending by $5.7 billion between fy2004 and fy2013 .

the following general points can be madeabout the medicaid and miscellaneous provisions included in title x of the bill: the legislation temporarily increases states' disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) allotments to erase the decline in these medicaid amounts that occurred after a special rulefor their calculation expired .

the legislation includes several other medicaid provisions , including raisingthe floor on dsh allotments for "extremely low dsh states," providing dsh allotment adjustmentsimpacting hawaii and / or tennessee , increasing reporting requirements for dsh hospitals , andexempting prices of drugs provided to certain safety net hospitals from medicaid's best price drugprogram .

miscellaneous provisions in title x of the legislation include funding federalreimbursement of emergency health services furnished to undocumented aliens , and fundingadministrative start - up costs for medicare reform , various research projects , work groups andinfrastructure improvement programs for the health care system .

this report contains a detailed side - by - side comparison of the relevant provisions of the legislation , s. 1 , as passed the senate , and h.r .

1 , as passed the house .

certain of the provisions can be found in one or more of the sections .

for example , the home healthhomebound demonstration ( section 702 ) is listed in the home health section and the demonstrationprojects section .

also included in this side - by - side , are provision that were included in the houseand / or senate bill which were dropped in conference .

hospital services .

allied health and graduate medical education payments .

skilled nursing facility ( snf ) and hospice services .

other part a provisions .

physician and practitioner services .

hospital outpatient department ( hopd ) , ambulatory surgery center ( asc ) , and clinic services .

covered part b outpatient drugs ( not provided by a hopd ) .

covered drugs and services at a dialysis facility .

durable medical equipment ( dme ) and related outpatient drugs .

ambulance services .

other part b services and provisions .

home health services .

chronic care improvement .

medicare secondary payor ( msp ) .

other medicare a and b provisions .

medicare demonstration projects and studies .

