the president and vice president of the united states are chosen indirectly by a group of persons elected by america's voters .

these officials are known as electors , and the institution is referred to collectively as the electoral college .

article ii , section 1 of the constitution ( 1787 ) , as modified by the twelfth amendment ( 1804 ) , provides the constitutional framework for the process , which , together with an array of subsequent federal and state laws and political party practices , comprises the electoral college system as it exists today .

it has been criticized by some as an undemocratic anachronism , but praised by others as a pillar of political stability and american federalism .

this report focuses on the institutions and procedures associated with the contemporary electoral college system .

it opens by noting four rarely occurring electoral college eventualities that took place in connection with the 2016 presidential election .

these included the election of a president and vice president who received fewer popular votes than their major opponents ; the actions of seven "faithless electors," who voted for candidates other than those to whom they were pledged ; the split allocation of electoral votes in maine , which uses the district system to choose its electors ; and challenges to electoral votes in the joint session of congress at which they are counted .

the report also examines the constitutional origins of the electoral college system and identifies the additional components and processes that are the product of federal and state law , party requirements , and political tradition , explaining their role in presidential elections .

it provides a timeline for operation of the electoral college system for the 2020 presidential election , a brief examination of alternative reform measures , including constitutional amendment proposals and non - governmental initiatives , such as the national popular vote initiative ( npv ) , and closes with concluding observations on the state of the electoral college system and prospects for change .

the 2016 presidential election will be recorded as the first in modern history in which four electoral college eventualities that have occurred separately in the past occurred during the same election cycle .

the constitutional convention of 1787 considered several methods of electing the president , including selection by congress , by the governors of the states , by the state legislatures , by a special group of members of congress chosen by lot , and by direct popular election .

none of these alternatives , however , proved satisfactory to the convention delegates .

late in the convention , the matter was referred to the committee of eleven on postponed matters , which devised the electoral college system in its original form .

this plan , which met with widespread approval by the delegates , was incorporated into the final document with only minor changes .

as devised by the committee , the electoral college met several standards .

it sought to reconcile and balance differing state and federal interests ; give the state legislatures the authority to provide their preferred means of choosing the electors , including by popular vote , selection by the legislature itself , or any other method ; by providing the "constant two" "senatorial" or at - large electors , afford the "smaller" states some additional leverage , so the election process would not be totally dominated by the more populous states ; preserve the presidency as independent of congress for election and reelection ; and generally insulate the election process from political manipulation .

in the final analysis , the electoral college method of electing the president and vice president was perhaps the best deal the delegates felt they could get — seemingly the only one on which a consensus could be formed — and one of many compromises that contributed to the convention's success .

alexander hamilton expressed the delegates' satisfaction with the electoral college method , and perhaps reflected their relief at reaching an acceptable solution , when he wrote this of the electoral college in the federalist: the mode of appointment of the chief magistrate of the united states is almost the only part of the system , of any consequence , which has escaped without severe censure , or which has received the slightest mark of approbation from its opponents... .

i venture somewhat further , and hesitate not to affirm that if the manner of it be not perfect , it is at least excellent .

it united in an eminent degree all the advantages the union of which was to be wished for .

notwithstanding the founders' efforts , the electoral college system almost never functioned as they intended , but , as with so many constitutional provisions , the document prescribed only the system's basic elements , leaving ample room for development .

as the republic evolved , so did the electoral college system ; by the late 19 th century the following range of constitutional requirements , federal and state legal provisions , and political party practices that make up the contemporary system were in place .

this timeline for the 2020 presidential election relies on existing procedures governing the election process .

it does not anticipate any major changes that might be effected between this time of this writing ( may 2017 ) and then .

may - august 2020 ―in each state , party organizations and other groups that are eligible to be included on the general election ballot , including minor parties and independent candidacies , will nominate a ticket of candidates for elector for president and vice president in their states , following procedures outlined earlier in this report at "nominating elector - candidates: diverse state procedures. .

november 3 , 20 20 ―general election day .

voters cast one ballot for the joint ticket of their preferred candidates for president and vice president .

these are actually votes for the electors committed to those candidates .

december 8 , 2020 ―the "safe harbor" deadline .

as noted earlier , if , on or before election day , a state has provided by law for determination of controversies or contests over the electors and electoral votes , and if these procedures have been applied , and results have been determined on or before this date , these results are considered to be conclusive , and will govern in the counting of the electoral votes .

december 14 , 2020 ―the electoral college meets .

state delegations of electors meet separately in their respective states at a place designated by the state legislature .

in practice , the electors usually meet in the state capital , often in the state house or capitol building .

the electors vote "by ballot"―paper ballot―separately for president and vice president .

certificates of the results are then transmitted to the president of the u.s. senate ( one copy ) , the archivist of the united states ( two copies ) , the secretary of state or equivalent officer of the state in which the electors met ( two copies ) , and the judge of the u.s. district court of the district in which the electors met ( one copy ) .

december 23 , 2020 ―certificates must be delivered to the officers specified earlier in this report ( see under "the electors convene and vote" ) not later than the fourth wednesday in december .

january 6 , 2021 ―on this date , or another date designated by congress , the senate and house of representatives assemble in joint session to count the electoral votes .

the announcement of the state of the vote is deemed sufficient declaration of the persons elected president and vice president .

january 20 , 20 21 — the president and vice president are inaugurated .

the electoral college and the various federal and state laws and political party practices that comprise the nation's presidential election system have been subject to controversy from the earliest days under the constitution .

the electoral college system has demonstrated both durability and adaptability during more than two centuries of government under the u.s. constitution .

although its constitutional elements have remained largely unchanged since ratification of the twelfth amendment , the electoral college has never worked as the founders planned .

the historical record reveals that they intended it to be an indirect , deliberative selection process , carefully filtered from political considerations , with the degree of voter participation left to the discretion of the state legislatures .

instead , it accommodated the demands of an increasingly democratic and political party - dominated presidential election system , ultimately evolving into an improvised yet enduring assemblage of constitutional provisions , state laws , political party practices , and traditions .

the constitution sets the size of the electoral college , the allocation of electors among the states , the margin of votes needed to win , and procedures for contingent election .

federal law establishes the quadrennial schedule that prescribes the times when presidential elections are held , and when electoral votes are cast in the states and then counted and recorded in congress .

it also sets federal procedures for each of these stages in the election process .

state law provides who shall vote for electors , how elector - candidates shall be nominated , how electoral votes shall be awarded , and , in some states , seeks to prohibit or discourage faithless electors .

while this arrangement may not work as the founders intended , its defenders would note the electoral college system has elected the presidential candidate who arguably enjoyed the greatest public support in 53 of 58 elections under the constitution — a "success rate" of 91.4% .

at the same time , opponents could note the 2016 contest , in which a president was elected with an electoral college majority , but fewer votes than his principal opponent .

to this they might add the election was also characterized by the largest number of faithless electors in recent history .

the 2016 election has contributed to renewed interest in reform proposals in congress , particularly direct popular election , but the prospects for legislative action remain uncertain .

notwithstanding the results of the 2016 presidential contest , however , electoral college reform does not appear to be an urgent public issue at present .

given the stringent requirements faced by all proposed constitutional amendments , changing opinion of the electoral college system among republican poll respondents , the slow progress of the national popular vote initiative , and particularly the failure of the reform issue to command the substantial congressional support and attention , the electoral college system seems likely to remain in place unless or until its alleged failings become so compelling that a broad consensus in favor of reform or abolition emerges among the public and in congress and the states .

