major africa commitments at gleneagles included the following: increasing official developmentassistance to africa by $25 billion per year by 2010,doubling assistance as compared to2004 ; developing and implementing "apackage for hiv prevention , treatment , and care , with theaim as close as possible to universal access to treatment forall those who need it by 2010" ; ( 1 ) increasing investment in thedevelopment of an hiv / aids vaccine , and "taking forwardwork" on market incentives for the development ofvaccines , microbicides , and drugs to combat aids,tuberculosis , malaria , as well as other neglecteddiseases ; investing in improved health systemsand helping africa train and retain doctors , nurses , andcommunity health workers ; and contributing an additional $1.5 billionper year to preventing and treatingmalaria .

in addition , the g8 reaffirmed a number of commitments made prior to the 2005 summit,including a june 2005 recommendation by g8 finance ministers that foreign debt be canceled forfourteen african countries that have reached the "completion point" in the world bank / internationalmonetary fund ( imf ) heavily indebted poor countries initiative ( hipc , see below ) .

moreover,the g8 welcomed a june 30 agreement by the paris club of official bilateral lenders to relievenigeria of its $30 billion foreign debt .

under the agreement , the lending governments would writeoff $18 billion in nigerian debt , while nigeria would pay back its arrears as well as the remaining$12 billion in debt .

the g8 confirmed a pledge made at the 2004 g8 summit at sea island , georgia,to train and equip 75,000 peace support troops worldwide by 2010 , with a sustained focus on africa .

the summit's final communique summarized several earlier pledges by g8 members toincrease aid to africa , including a may 2005 promise by the european union countries to provide.7% of gdp as development aid by 2015 , with an interim target of .56% by 2010 ( see below ) .

atleast 50% of this additional aid would go to africa .

the communique noted that the united stateshas proposed to double aid to africa by 2010 , as compared to 2004 , through such initiatives as themillennium challenge account , the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , andthe five - year , $660 million global peace operations initiative .

u.s. officials are estimating 2004bilateral and multilateral assistance to africa at $4.3 billion .

 ( 2 ) on june 30 , 2005 , presidentbush had announced that he would seek $1.2 billion to fight malaria in africa over five years as wellas additional aid for education and combating violence against women .

with respect to trade barriers that inhibit africa's exports , the g8 took no specific action butaffirmed that "we are committed to substantially reducing trade - distorting domestic support andsubstantially improving market access. .

in addition , the g8 stated that a "credible end date" shouldbe set for ending export subsidies and reiterated their commitment to duty - free and quota - free accessfor products originating in the least developed countries .

according to the g8 , the current round ofworld trade organization ( wto ) talks on reducing trade barriers should be concluded by the endof 2006 , and the wto ministerial meeting in hong kong in december 2005 will be a "criticalstepping stone" toward that goal .

 ( 3 ) in addition , the g8 promised africa and other developing countriesadditional help in building trade capacity and raising agricultural productivity .

the summit communique welcomed efforts by african institutions , particularly the africanunion and the new partnership for africa's development ( nepad , see below ) to strengthengovernance , democracy , and human rights .

the g8 promised to support to these institutions andother efforts to promote transparency in africa , while pledging to enforce their own laws againstbribing foreign officials .

prime minister tony blair and his chancellor of the exchequer ( treasury ) , [author name scrubbed],prior to the gleneagles summit , launched a major diplomatic effort aimed at marshaling theresources they see as needed to eradicate extreme poverty in sub - saharan africa .

their objectiveis the realization , in africa , of the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) .

the goals were set atthe 2000 u.n. millennium summit and consist of a number of development targets to be attainedby 2015 , including universal primary education , halving the proportion of people living on less than$1 per day , and halving the proportion of people who suffer from hunger .

prime minister blair assumed the rotating presidency of the g8 group of nations in january2005 , and sought to use the july summit , which he chaired , to push his africa developmentinitiative .

 ( 13 ) specifically , blair and brown sought a substantial aid increase for africa through the iff , 100%forgiveness of african debt , and the removal of barriers to african exports .

the blair / brownproposals may also be discussed in september , when the u.n. general assembly holds a plenarysession , attended by heads of state and government , to consider progress toward achieving themdgs .

climate change was the second focus of the g8 meeting .

the purpose of the remainder of this report is to provide background on africa , the g8 , andthe gleneagles summit .

it outlines the british proposals and the u.s. reaction to them before thesummit .

in addition , it briefly reviews the problems that have inhibited african development andthe response to those problems at previous g8 meetings .

for additional information , see crs report rl32489 ( pdf ) , africa: development issues and policy options , and crs issue brief ib95052 , africa: u.s. foreign assistance issues .

prime minister blair has championed a "marshall plan" for sub - saharan africa for severalyears .

in october 2001 , addressing the challenges of a post 9-11 world , blair said that "the state ofafrica is a scar on the conscience of the world" and called for a new partnership with the region: on our side: provide more aid , untied to trade ; write offdebt ; help with good governance and infrastructure ; training to the soldiers , with un blessing , inconflict resolution ; encouraging investment ; and access to our markets so that we practice the freetrade we are so fond of preaching .

but it's a deal: on the african side: true democracy , nomore excuses for dictatorship , abuses of human rights ; no tolerance of bad governance , from theendemic corruption of some states , to the activities of mr. mugabe's henchmen in zimbabwe .

propercommercial , legal , and financial systems.... ( 14 ) in february 2004 , blair appointed a 17-member commission for africa and asked it toundertake a comprehensive assessment of africa's development problems .

members included bobgeldof ; prime minister meles zenawi of ethiopia ; president benjamin mkapa of tanzania ; formeru.s .

senator nancy kassebaum baker ; and the british chancellor of the exchequer ( treasury ) ,[author name scrubbed] .

on march 11 , 2005 , the commission issued a 450-page report ( 15 ) that helped set thegleneagles agenda .

the report analyzes the reasons for africa's poverty ; endorses the main elementsof the blair initiative ; and makes recommendations on governance , conflict prevention andpeacekeeping , education , health , and other issues .

blair and brown mounted a public relations campaign aimed at winning support for their initiative .

at the january 2005 world economic forum in davos , switzerland , blair called for a"quantum leap" in aid and trade to spur african development .

german chancellor gerhardschroeder and french president jacques chirac endorsed his efforts to help africa , and chiracproposed a small international tax on financial transactions or air travel to fund the initiative .

former president bill clinton , bill gates , and bono added their voices at davos in support of newefforts to end poverty in africa .

italy had earlier endorsed blair's plans .

some argued that the bush administration should endorse blair's initiative as well , not onlyto help africa but also to reciprocate the strong support blair has given the administration in itspolicy toward iraq and in the war on terrorism .

 ( 16 ) others argued that the united states has competing prioritiesand no compelling reason to sign on to the prime minister's initiative .

the administration distanceditself from blair's proposal for the iff africa and put forward a different approach to achievingfurther debt relief .

both the bush administration and the european union ( eu ) were already onrecord in favor of a sharp reduction in trade barriers , as blair urges , but this proposal faces strongdomestic opposition both in europe and the united states .

chancellor brown is sometimes portrayed as a political rival of blair's , but he played a keyrole in formulating blair's g8 initiative .

in january 2005 , brown made several speeches on africandevelopment and undertook a high - profile trip through the sub - saharan region to highlight theprincipal british proposals .

prime minister blair's initiatives on africa reflect widespread concerns over africa's failureto develop , despite a rich endowment of resources .

 ( 36 ) these include extensive deposits of petroleum , diamonds , andmetals ; wide areas of rich agricultural lands ; and the potential for tourism lying in africa's beaches,game reserves , and ancient cultures .

yet average gdp per capita in the sub - saharan region stoodat $585 in 2003 , according to the world bank , barely above the 1963 figure of $509 , measured inconstant dollars .

over the same period , economies in south and southeast asia , which started at theafrican level , achieved extremely rapid growth , with many reaching middle income status .

morethan 25 million of sub - saharan africa's 700 million people are infected with hiv , and lifeexpectancy , which reached a peak of about 50 years in 1992 , has since fallen to about 46 .

 ( 37 ) child malnutrition,illiteracy , and lack of access to clean water are serious problems throughout the region .

a january2005 report by the united nations millennium project argued that africa stood no chance ofmeeting the millennium development goals without a massive infusion of aid: $48 billion in 2006,rising to $74 billion in new aid by 2015 .

 ( 38 ) a vast scholarly literature exists on the reasons for africa's failure to develop .

many blamefactors over which african and africans have little control , such as a tropical environment thatimposes a heavy disease burden and leads to rapid depletion of soils .

africa's population has tendedto concentrate inland , where higher altitudes make for a healthier climate , but this means manycountries lack large concentrations of people in port cities where export - based industry could readilylocate .

the long era of the slave trade , ending only in 1870 , took away millions in their mostproductive years , just as the aids epidemic does today ; while the colonial era left a legacy ofauthoritarian government and a region divided into 48 countries , many of them small and / orlandlocked .

other scholars tend to blame african governments for the difficulties the continent faces .

corruption , a poor quality of governance , and economic policies that discourage free markets havecome in for particular criticism .

a wide range of countries have freed up markets in varying degreesand undertaken governance reforms since the late 1980s under pressure from the world bank , theimf , and bilateral donors ; but corruption remains a problem .

kenya , for example , had been thesource of much optimism for africa's future after free and fair elections were held in december2002 , but recently both the u.s. and british ambassadors have criticized the government of presidentmwai kibaki for failing to tackle corruption .

the united states has suspended an anti - corruptionassistance program in kenya in response to the problem .

 ( 39 ) some also feel that african leaders have done too little on a regional basis to deal with thecontinent's problems .

in 2001 , african leaders launched the new partnership for africa'sdevelopment ( nepad ) , intended to improve governance , strengthen institutional capacity , andreduce corruption .

 ( 40 ) nepad includes an african peer review mechanism ( aprm ) designed to assure accountabilityin governance and economic policy .

skeptics of africa's efforts often point to the seemingreluctance of neighboring countries to deal with the ongoing human rights and governance problemsin zimbabwe as evidence that nepad standards are not being upheld .

a march 31 , 2005parliamentary election in zimbabwe was widely rejected as not free and fair by western critics , butaccepted and even praised by official observers from south africa and the southern africandevelopment community .

in short , a number of observers feel that too many african governments are failing to live upto their end of the deal proposed by prime minister blair in october 2001 .

they point out that africahas received substantial amounts of assistance over the years , with official development assistancereaching nearly $24 billion in 2003 ( see below ) .

from their perspective , the principal responsibilityfor africa's development now lies with africa's leaders who must assure that their countries enterthe ranks of the "good performers .

u.n. millennium project head jeffrey sachs takes a somewhatdifferent view .

though a strong supporter of sound economic policies in africa , he believes thecontinent is caught in a "poverty trap" - - so poor that few want to invest even in countries where realattempts at reform are being made .

the millennium project report , which he directed , argues thatmany countries in africa are well governed , considering the extent of their poverty , and wouldbenefit from a "big push" in foreign assistance to strengthen education , health care , infrastructure,and other sectors .

this "rapid scale - up," in his view , would create viable economies attractive toinvestors , and help africa escape the poverty trap .

proponents of a third view acknowledge that committing large new amounts of aid to africais risky , given the continent's many difficulties , but maintain that the risk is worth taking since intheir view the amounts of aid being proposed by blair , brown , and sachs could readily be affordedby the g7 countries working together .

in return , some argue , the g7 might gain new markets , assureaccess to africa's oil and other resources over the long term , and create an environment in whichviolence and terrorism are less likely to emerge .

g8 meetings in the 1990s often dealt with many of the same themes expected to be raised atgleneagles .

the g8 first emphasized in those years that sub - saharan africa faces specialdevelopment challenges , and summit communiques acknowledged that "substantial" developmentassistance was needed to help sub - saharan africa grow .

 ( 41 ) debt relief for the poorest countries was another major theme .

the 1994 naples summit encouraged wider cancellation of bilateral debt , and the 1996 summit atlyons helped launch the heavily indebted poor countries initiative ( hipc ) to reduce poor countrydebt owed to the world bank and imf .

at cologne in 1999 , the g8 agreed on an expanded hipcprogram that would offer "deeper , broader , and faster" debt relief .

toward the end of the 1990s , g8meetings also began to reflect the view that the least developed countries needed expanded accessto developed country markets .

beginning with the 1997 denver summit , the g8 repeatedly calledfor expanded efforts to combat hiv / aids and other infectious diseases afflicting africa as well asother impoverished regions .

also at denver , the g8 expressed their support for "long - term effortsto promote rapidly deployable african peacekeeping capacities. .

while pledging support for africain these areas , the g8 have consistently emphasized the other half of the blair "deal. .

for example,at lyons in 1996 , the g8 stated that the developing countries have a fundamentalresponsibility for promoting their own development .

this means conducting sound and consistenteconomic and social policies , promoting a political and legal environment conducive to thedevelopment of the private sector , and encouraging domestic and foreign investment .

 ( 42 ) the genoa and kananaskis , canada meetings in 2001 and 2002 saw an intensification of thefocus on africa .

three sub - saharan presidents were invited to genoa to report on new africanefforts to promote development , and african leaders have attended each subsequent g8 meeting .

presidents thabo mbeki of south africa , olusegun obasanjo of nigeria , and abdoulaye wade ( wahd ) of senegal were present at kananaskis as the g8 issued its africa action plan promisinga new africa partnership .

under the plan , support was offered in several priority areas: promotingpeace and security ; strengthening institutions and governance ; fostering trade , investment , growth,and sustainable development ; implementing debt relief ; improving health and confrontinghiv / aids ; increasing agricultural productivity ; and improving water resource management .

thissupport was to be closely linked to progress in africa in implementing nepad objectives withrespect to improving governance , strengthening institutional capacity , and reducing corruption.mbeki , obasanjo , and wade are regarded as the principal authors of nepad .

prior to the gleneagles meeting , kananaskis represented the high water mark of g8 attentionto africa .

however , at the 2003 summit in evian , france , the g8 affirmed their commitment to thehipc initiative and announced a g8 action plan against famine , especially in africa .

in june2004 , the u.s. - hosted summit at sea island , georgia , issued a number of statements related toafrica's needs , including commitments to stopping polio forever and combating corruption innigeria , as well as action plans on science and technology for sustainable development and onending the cycle of famine in the horn of africa .

another action plan , reaffirmed at gleneagles,called for training and , where appropriate , equipping 75,000 peace support troops worldwide by2010 , with a sustained focus on africa .

prime minister blair reportedly advanced a proposal at seaisland for 100% debt forgiveness for the world's poorest countries , but no agreement was reached .

whether g8 summits have responded adequately to africa's needs has been the subject ofa lively debate .

many feel that the g8 have not done nearly enough .

after the 2003 evian meeting,for example , omar kabbaj , president of the african development bank , wrote that there had beensome good initiatives with respect to aid , but sub - saharan africa required $50 billion per year toachieve sustainable , broad - based growth .

 ( 43 ) jeffrey sachs has argued repeatedly for a vastly expandeddeveloped country aid program for africa , most recently in the millennium project report notedabove .

after the sea island summit , the jubilee usa network and the 50 years is enough network,leading advocates of debt relief , expressed their "outrage" that the g8 had not acted on 100% debtcancellation for the poorest countries .

 ( 44 ) many have questioned the g8 commitment to peace andsecurity , criticizing as inadequate , for example , the response of the developed countries to theconflict and human rights crisis in sudan's darfur region .

in may 2004 , on the eve of the sea island summit , the new york - based council on foreignrelations issued a report that took something of a middle ground on g8 performance .

the reportpointed out that the g8 donors had indeed launched or expanded initiatives in key priority areas ofthe kananaskis africa action plan .

 ( 45 ) with respect to strengthening institutions and governance , thereport noted that united states has undertaken an africa anti - corruption initiative to combat bothpublic and private corruption , while canada is using part of its fund for africa to promotepublic - service reform and decentralization .

the council singled out the u.s. agoa program as animportant effort by a g8 member to boost african trade and investment .

moreover , the report notedthat developed country aid to africa is increasing .

according to data released subsequently by theorganization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) official developmentassistance ( oda ) to sub - saharan africa is indeed growing , reaching $23.7 billion in 2003 , up from$18.4 billion in 2002 and $13.8 billion in 2001 .

u.s. assistance to the region would reach $3.9billion under the fy2006 budget request , not including indirect assistance channeled through theworld bank and u.n. agencies , or disaster assistance likely to be provided as emergencies arise .

aid in fy2002 was $2.5 billion .

 ( 46 ) the council on foreign relations praised the hipc initiative , and noted that peace andsecurity are being promoted through u.s. , british , canadian , and other efforts to supportpeacekeeping and train peacekeepers .

in keeping with the sea island decisions , the bushadministration's fy2006 budget request seeks funds to begin a new global peace operationsinitiative to train foreign peacekeeping troops , with an emphasis on africa .

 ( 47 ) at the same time , thecouncil's report cited several areas in which it said the g8 needed to do more , including increasedsupport for nepad , a review of proposals for ending agricultural subsidies and quotas , additionalassistance for health infrastructure , and further debt relief .

