this report presents information on two federal entitlement programs administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) that provide income support to individuals with severe , long - term disabilities: social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) and supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

ssdi is a social insurance program that provides monthly cash benefits to nonelderly disabled workers who paid social security taxes for a sufficient number of years in jobs covered by social security and to their eligible dependents .

in contrast , ssi is a public assistance program that provides monthly cash benefits to aged , blind , or disabled individuals ( including children ) who often have little or no work experience in covered employment and whose assets and other income are below certain limits .

enacted in 1956 under title ii of the social security act , ssdi is part of the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program , commonly known as social security .

oasdi is a form of social insurance designed to protect against the loss of income due to retirement , disability , or death .

like old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) , ssdi replaces a portion of a worker's lost earnings based on the individual's career - average earnings in jobs covered under social security .

specifically , ssdi provides monthly benefits to insured workers under the full retirement age who meet the statutory test of disability and to their eligible dependents .

the ssdi and oasi programs are funded primarily through a payroll tax levied on current workers who are in jobs covered by social security .

in august 2016 , 10.7 million individuals received ssdi benefits , including 8.9 million disabled workers , 137,000 spouses of disabled workers , and 1.7 million children of disabled workers .

ssi , which went into effect in 1974 , is a need - based program that provides cash payments assuring a minimum income for aged , blind , or disabled individuals who have limited income and assets .

this program is often referred to as a program of "last resort" because individuals who apply for benefits are also required to apply for all other benefits for which they may be eligible ( eg , social security retirement or disability benefits , pensions , earnings ) .

although the ssi program is administered by ssa , it is funded through general revenues — not by payroll taxes .

the federal benefit provided through this program , unlike through the ssdi program , is a flat amount ( reduced by other countable income ) , and it is not related to prior earnings .

in addition to the federal ssi payment , many states provide supplements to certain groups or categories of ssi recipients .

in august 2016 , 8.3 million individuals received federally administered ssi payments , including 1.2 million children under the age of 18 , 4.9 million adults aged 18-64 , and 2.2 million seniors aged 65 or older .

the application process for ssdi and ssi disability benefits is similar .

although ssdi and ssi are federal programs , both federal and state offices are used to determine eligibility for benefits .

the process begins when an individual files an initial application in person at a ssa field office , by telephone , by mail , or online ( ssdi claims only ) .

to make an initial determination , ssa employs a five - step sequential evaluation process to verify that a claimant meets the medical and other eligibility criteria for ssdi or ssi benefits ( see figure 1 ) .

the five steps are listed below: step 1 .

work t est .

is the individual working and earning over sga ? .

if yes , the application is denied .

if no , the application moves to step 2 .

step 2 .

severity t est .

is the applicant's condition severe enough to limit basic work activities for at least one year or to result in death ? .

if yes , the application moves to step 3 .

if not , the application is denied .

step 3 .

medical listings t est .

does the condition meet ssa's medical listings , or is the condition equal in severity to one found in the medical listings ? .

if yes , the application is accepted and benefits are awarded .

if not , the application moves to step 4 .

step 4 .

previous work t est .

can the applicant do the work he or she had done in the past ? .

if yes , the application is denied .

if not , the application moves to step 5 .

step 5 .

any work t est .

does the applicant's condition prevent him or her from performing any other work that exists in the national economy ? .

if yes , the application is accepted and benefits are awarded .

if not , the application is denied .

field offices are responsible for validating the non - medical eligibility requirements such as age , employment , marital status , income , resources , and insured status ( step 1 ) .

field office staff will also interview claimants to obtain relevant medical and work - history information , as well as to make certain that required forms are completed .

applications that meet the non - medical eligibility criteria are then forwarded to a state disability determination service ( dds ) for a medical determination ( steps 2-5 ) .

ddss , which are fully funded by the federal government , are state agencies tasked with developing medical evidence and issuing the disability determination .

the medical determination for both types of disability benefits is made based on evidence gathered in an individual's case file .

state disability examiners — with the help of medical and psychological consultants — typically use medical evidence collected from the claimant's treating sources ( i.e. , a physician , psychologist , or other acceptable medical source ) to determine the severity of the claimant's impairment ( s ) .

ordinarily , there is no personal interview with the applicant on the part of the state personnel who decide the claim .

claimants who do not meet the criteria in the medical listings ( step 3 ) proceed to a more individualized assessment that examines their residual functional capacity to perform work .

residual functional capacity ( rfc ) is a function - by - function assessment based upon all of the relevant evidence of an individual's ability to do work - related activities .

at step 4 , the state dds evaluates a claimant's rfc to complete past relevant work .

if the claimant cannot perform past relevant work , his or her application is forwarded to the final step of the determination process .

at step 5 , the state dds uses a claimant's rfc along with vocational factors , such as age , education , and work experience to determine whether he or she can perform any work that exists in the national economy .

claimants who are unable to perform such work are found to be disabled .

after a determination has been made , the state dds returns the case to the field office for appropriate action .

if a claimant's application for benefits is denied at any point during the disability determination process , the claimant has the right to appeal the decision .

during the appeals process , claimants may present additional evidence or arguments to support their case , as well as appoint a representative to act on their behalf ( either an attorney or non - attorney ) .

the appeals process includes three levels of administrative review through ssa before a case can be appealed to the u.s. court system , in the following order: step 1 .

reconsideration .

in most states , claimants who are dissatisfied with the initial determination may request to have their case reconsidered by a different examiner from the state dds office .

the disability examiner will reexamine the evidence from the original decision , along with any new evidence submitted with the appeal .

after a review of the evidence , the claimant is notified in writing of the decision .

if the claimant disagrees with the reconsideration decision , he or she may proceed to step 2 .

step 2 .

administrative hearing .

claimants who are dissatisfied with the reconsidered judgment ( or who disagree with the initial determination and reside in a state where the reconsideration step has been eliminated ) may request a hearing before an administrative law judge ( alj ) .

during a hearing , an alj will investigate the merits of an appeal by informally questioning the claimant , as well as any scheduled witnesses such as medical or vocational experts .

a claimant and his or her representative may also present additional evidence , examine evidence used in making the determination under review , introduce witnesses , question witnesses , and present oral or written arguments in support of a favorable decision .

because ssa is not represented as the hearing , the proceeding is considered non - adversarial .

after the hearing , the claimant is notified in writing of the alj's decision .

if the claimant disagrees with the hearing decision , the case can be appealed to step 3 .

step 3 .

appeals council .

claimants dissatisfied with either the alj's decision or the dismissal of a hearing request may request a review before the appeals council ( ac ) .

the ac may dismiss or deny the request for review , or the ac may grant the request and either issue a decision or remand the case to an alj .

the claimant is notified in writing of the ac's decision or reason for denial of the review .

if the claimant disagrees with the ac's decision or denial , he or she may proceed to step 4 .

step 4 .

u.s. district court .

if a claimant is dissatisfied with the ac's decision or if the ac decides not to review the case , the claimant may file a lawsuit in u.s. district court .

a district court may issue a decision or remand the case to the ac .

the ac may , in turn , either assume jurisdiction and issue a decision or remand the case to an alj for further proceedings and a new decision .

at each stage of the appeals process , claimants or their representatives must request an appeal , in writing , within 60 days of receiving notice of the prior decision .

on rare occasions , disability cases are appealed beyond u.s. district court to the u.s. court of appeals and , ultimately , the u.s. supreme court .

ssa conducts periodic program integrity reviews to ensure ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients continue to meet each program's respective eligibility criteria .

the ssdi program is funded primarily through the social security payroll tax , a portion of which is credited to a disability insurance trust fund .

by contrast , the ssi program is funded through annual appropriations from general revenues .

the social security payroll tax rate on covered wages and self - employment income is 12.40% , which is split equally between employees and employers , up to the taxable maximum of $118,500 in 2016 ( self - employed individuals bear the full tax ) .

of the 12.4% , 10.03% is paid to the oasi trust fund and 2.37% is paid to the di trust fund under current law .

funding for each trust fund is prescribed in the social security act , and the two funds may not borrow from one another under current law .

in addition to the payroll tax contributions , the di and oasi trust funds receive some revenues from the taxation of social security benefit payments .

these combined revenues are invested in special issue ( non - marketable ) , interest - bearing u.s. government securities .

 ( the interest earned is also deposited in the trust funds. ) .

the resources in the di trust fund are used to pay for ssdi benefits and the cost of administering the program .

in fy2016 , the di trust fund is estimated to have paid out more than $149.2 billion in benefits .

the ssi program is financed through the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

appropriations for ssi benefits and program administration are considered mandatory spending .

in fy2016 , the ssi program is estimated to have paid out $59.6 billion in federal benefits .

