the rental assistance programs authorized under section 8 of the united states housing act of 1937 ( 42 u.s.c .

§1437f ) — section 8 project - based rental assistance and section 8 tenant - based vouchers — have become the largest components of the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) budget , with combined appropriations of $27 billion in fy2013 .

the rising cost of providing rental assistance is due , in varying degrees , to expansions in the program , the cost of renewing expiring long - term contracts , and rising costs in housing markets across the country .

the most rapid cost increases have been seen in the voucher program .

partly out of concern about cost increases , and partly in response to the administrative complexity of the current program , there have been calls for reform of the voucher program and its funding each year since 2002 .

in response , congress has enacted changes to the way that it funds the voucher program and the way that phas receive their funding .

congress has considered program reforms , but has not enacted them .

in order to understand why the program has become so expensive and why reforms are being considered , it is first important to understand the mechanics of the program and its history .

this paper will provide an overview of the section 8 programs and their history .

for more information , see crs report rl33929 , the section 8 voucher renewal funding formula: changes in appropriations acts ; crs report rl34002 , section 8 housing choice voucher program: issues and reform proposals ; and crs report r41182 , preservation of hud - assisted housing , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the section 8 program is named for section 8 of the united states housing act of 1937 .

the original program , established by the housing and community development act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-383 ) , consisted of three parts: new construction , substantial rehabilitation , and existing housing certificates .

the 1974 act and the creation of section 8 effectively ended the nixon moratorium .

in 1978 , the moderate rehabilitation component of the program was added , but it has not been funded since 1989 .

in 1983 , the new construction and substantial rehabilitation portions of the program were repealed , and a new component — section 8 vouchers — was added .

in 1998 , existing housing certificates were merged with and converted to vouchers .

today's section 8 program is really two programs , which , combined , serve almost 3.5 million households .

the combined section 8 programs are the largest direct housing assistance program for low - income families .

with a combined fy2013 budget of $27 billion , they reflect a major commitment of federal resources .

that commitment has led to some successes .

more than three million families are able to obtain safe and decent housing through the program , at a cost to the family that is considered affordable .

however , these successes come at a high cost to the federal government .

given current budget deficit levels , congress has begun to reevaluate whether the cost of the section 8 programs , particularly the voucher program , are worth their benefits .

proposals to reform the program abound , and whether the current section 8 programs are maintained largely in their current form , changed substantially , or eliminated altogether are questions currently facing congress .

