the international law of armed conflict , in particular , those parts relating to belligerentoccupation , applies in iraq .

 ( 4 ) the four geneva conventions of 1949 ( 5 ) and the hagueregulations ( 6 ) play animportant role .

other international law relevant to human rights and to the treatment of prisonersmay also apply .

for example , the international covenant on civil and political rights prohibits"cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment. .

 ( 7 ) the convention against torture ( cat ) is also relevant .

 ( 8 ) .

it was established during the nuremberg tribunals after world war ii that persons whocommit war crimes or crimes against humanity may be held individually accountable , whether theyare members of the military or civilians .

 ( 58 ) .

in addition to criminal punishment of those responsible for torture , there may also be a legalright to compensation for the victims .

this section briefly summarizes international law regardingthe right to compensation in cases involving breaches of international law , followed by a discussionof available means under u.s. law .

congress has the authority under the constitution to make rules regarding capture on landor water , ( 105 ) to defineand punish violations of international law , ( 106 ) and to make regulations to govern the armed forces .

 ( 107 ) however , it hasnotpreviously taken a very active rule in prescribing the treatment of prisoners of war and civilianinternees .

 ( 108 ) thefollowing sections summarize the congressional reaction to the abu ghraib scandal and legislativeproposals to prevent a recurrence .

the 108th congress took up issues related to the abu ghraib scandal and the treatment ofdetainees in numerous committee hearings , and reaffirmed that torture is unlawful .

section 9011 ofthe department of defense appropriations act of 2005 , p.l .

108-287 , states that congress , consistent with international and unitedstates law , reaffirms that torture of prisoners of war and detainees is illegal and does not reflect thepolicies of the united states government or the values of the people of the unitedstates .

also during the 108th congress , the house of representatives and the senate each passedresolutions condemning the abuses at abu ghraib and calling for investigations .

 ( 109 ) several houseresolutions of inquiry that would have called for the administration to turn over pictures , film anddocuments related to the abuse of iraqi prisoners were reported adversely out of committee and neverreached a vote by the full house .

 ( 110 ) hearings .

at least five committees - - the senatearmed services committee , senate select committee on intelligence , house select committee onintelligence , house armed services committee , and senate foreign relations committee - - heldhearings during the 108th congress where the abu ghraib scandal was discussed .

in a series ofhearings held in may , 2004 , the armed services committees of both houses took testimony fromnumerous department of defense officials , including secretary of defense donald rumsfeld,general richard b. myers , chairman , joint chiefs of staff ; acting secretary of the army lesbrownlee ; u.s. army chief of staff general peter j. schoomaker ; and centcom deputycommander lieutenant general lance l. smith .

the committees also interviewed general taguba,who investigated the mp unit at abu ghraib , and stephen cambone , undersecretary of defense forintelligence , as well as other intelligence officials .

the senate armed services committee tooktestimony from centcom commander general john abizaid , lieutenant general ricardosanchez , commander of the multinational force - iraq ; major general geoffrey miller , deputycommander for detainee operations in iraq , and colonel marc warren , army judge advocategeneral .

in july , 2004 , the senate armed services committee interviewed lieutenant general paulmikolashek , army inspector general , about the findings of his investigation into the matter .

onseptember 9 , the senate and house armed services committee held hearings to receive testimonyfrom general officers who conducted a formal investigation into the allegations of abuse , ( 111 ) and from jamesschlesinger and harold brown , appointed by the secretary of defense to head the independent panelto review dod detention operations .

 ( 112 ) .

the following laws enacted by the 108th congress address the treatment of prisoners in iraq .

national defense authorization act for fy2005 , p.l.108-375 .

in addition to the jurisdictional modifications described above , congressaddressed the detention issue in the defense authorization act , which was signed into law by thepresident october 28 , 2004 .

the senate had included a measure in its version that would haveapplied to cia interrogators , as well as intelligence personnel from other agencies , the same rulesthat apply to the military , ( 113 ) but the administration objected that the provision "would haveprovided legal protections to foreign prisoners to which they are not now entitled," ( 114 ) and the measure wasstripped out in conference .

 ( 115 ) the national defense authorization act does not specifically prohibit torture or cruel,inhuman or degrading treatment of detainees , as the senate bill would have provided .

 ( 116 ) instead , it sets forththe sense of the congress that "the constitution , laws , and treaties of the united states and theapplicable guidance and regulations of the united states government prohibit the torture or cruel,inhuman , or degrading treatment of foreign prisoners held in custody by the united states," and thatno detainee shall be subject to such treatment .

 ( 117 ) section 1091 states that the policy of the united states is toensure that no detainee in its custody is subjected to the treatment described above , to promptlyinvestigate and prosecute instances of abuse , to ensure that u.s. personnel understand the applicablestandards , to accord detainees whose status is in doubt the protection for prisoners of war under thegeneva conventions , and to "expeditiously process and , if appropriate , prosecute detainees in thecustody of the united states , including those in the custody of the united states armed forces atguantanamo bay , cuba. .

required regulations .

section 1092 requires themilitary to implement , within 150 days of the passage of the act , a policy to ensure detainees aretreated in accordance with the obligations set forth in section 1091 .

the required dod regulationsare to contain , at a minimum , the following elements: ( 1 ) commanding officers of detention and interrogationfacilities must educate their troops , including military personnel and civilian contractors , about thegeneva convention relative to the treatment of prisoners ofwar .

 ( 2 ) dod contracts in which civilian contract personnelwill be required to interact with detainees must include a requirement that such personnel havereceived training regarding the international obligations and applicable u.s. law .

 ( 3 ) detainees must be informed in their own languagesof their rights under the geneva convention .

 ( 4 ) the department of defense must provide forperiodic inspections , both announced and unannounced , of detention and interrogationfacilities .

 ( 5 ) guard - detainee contact must be same - sex exceptunder exigent circumstances .

the first two requirements of section 1092 codify the gpw , art .

127 requirements that statesparties provide for education in the requirements of the geneva conventions , except that it is limitedto military personnel and civilian contractors working at detention and interrogation facilitiesoperated under dod .

the third requirement also corresponds to an obligation under the gpw .

 ( 118 ) with respect to thefourth requirement , the gpw does not specifically require inspections by the military chain ofcommand .

however , subparagraph 3 would provide a means to satisfy the obligation to preventabuse .

the fifth requirement also echoes an obligation under the gpw , at least as the conventionapplies to women prisoners .

 ( 119 ) reporting requirements .

section 1093 of pl 108-375requires dod to submit copies of regulations , policies and orders prescribed under section 1092 tothe armed services committees of both houses within 30 days after their implementation , along witha report setting forth steps taken to implement section 1092 as of that time .

 ( 120 ) section 1093 alsorequires dod to submit an annual report giving notice of any investigation into any violation of lawsregarding the treatment of detainees , as long as ongoing criminal or administrative actions are notcompromised through such notice .

further , the report will contain aggregate data relating to thedetention operations of the department of defense , including how many persons are held and inwhat status , and how many have been transferred to the jurisdiction of other countries .

section 1206 requires dod to submit a report on contractors supporting deployed forces andreconstruction efforts in iraq , including a description of the overall chain of command and oversightmechanisms to ensure adequate command and supervision and an explanation of their legal statusafter the transfer of sovereignty in iraq .

the report is to be submitted within 180 days of theenactment of p.l .

108-375 , and will include a description of sanctions that may be imposed in caseof misconduct , a list of actions taken against contractor personnel as of the date of the initiation ofmilitary operations in iraq , may 1 , 2003 .

prohibition on funds to justify torture .

congressincluded in the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 , p.l .

108-447 , a prohibition on the useof funds by the justice department to "be used in any way to support or justify the use of torture byany official or contract employee of the united states government. .

 ( sec .

632 ) .

as investigations continue into u.s. detention operations outside the united states , calls forfurther congressional action and for more rigorous investigation will likely continue .

 ( 121 ) hearings .

the senate judiciary committee heldhearings june 15 , 2005 , on the subject of detainees .

the senate armed services committee,subcommittee on personnel , held hearings july 14 , 2005 on detention policies and military justice .

on that same day , the house permanent select committee on intelligence held a hearing entitled"critical need for interrogation in the global war on terror. .

the armed services committee ofthe house of representatives held hearings june 29 , 2005 , entitled "detainee operations atguantanamo bay. .

detainee operations were also discussed during nominations hearings , includingthe nomination of attorney general alberto gonzales and the nomination of general peter pace forthe position of chairman of the joint chiefs of staff .

legislation .

the emergency supplementalappropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) ,enacted into law may 11 , 2005 , contains a prohibition on the use of funds appropriated by that act"to subject any person in the custody or under the physical control of the united states to torture orcruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment that is prohibited by the constitution , laws,or treaties of the united states. .

 ( sec .

1031 ) .

the prohibited treatment is defined to coincide withthe statutory definition of torture and the senate declaration that accompanied the ratification ofcat , which defined "cruel , unusual , and inhumane treatment or punishment" as actions that areprohibited by the fifth , eighth or fourteenth amendments to the constitution .

however , withrespect to cruel , unusual and inhumane treatment , the administration has taken the position thatneither the constitution nor cat , as implemented by the united states , applies to aliens heldoverseas .

 ( 122 ) it isthus unclear whether section 1031 will be interpreted to impose any new restrictions on defensespending .

two bills would create an independent commission to investigate detainee abuse ( h.r .

3003 , s. 12 â§ 224 ) .

the house of representatives passed a provisionas part of its defense authorization bill for fy2006 , h.r .

2863 , that would "reaffirm[]that torture of prisoners of war and detainees is illegal and does not reflect the policies of the unitedstates government or the values of the people of the united states. .

 ( sec .

9009 ) .

h.r .

112 would require detainee interrogations , whether conducted by military or civilian personnel ( including contractors ) , to be videotaped .

the resulting videotapes could beclassified , but would be available to any party in any military or civilian criminal proceeding , ifrelevant , under seal if appropriate .

the bill would also require that immediate and unfettered accessto detainees be accorded to representatives of the international committee of the red cross , the unhigh commissioner for human rights , and the un special rapporteur on torture .

the senate defense authorization bill ( s. 1042 ) contains a section that wouldrequire the secretary of defense to establish a dod policy with respect to the role of military medicaland behavioral science personnel in the interrogation of detainees .

 ( sec .

1071 ) .

the senate is alsoconsidering amendments to that bill to require the defense department to adhere to the army'sinterrogation manual ( sa 1557 ) , to prohibit cruel , inhumane and degrading treatment of prisonersin u.s. custody no matter where they are held ( sa 1556 ) , to authorize the combatant status reviewtribunals to determine detainees' status ( sa 1505 ) , and to establish an independent commission toinvestigate detainee abuse ( sa 1494 ) .

 ( 123 ) after the white house reportedly threatened to veto the billif it includes measures that would impede the president's ability to conduct the war onterrorism , ( 124 ) the billwas returned to committee and further action on it was postponed .

the senate version of the defense department fy2006 appropriations bill ( h.r .

2863 ) contains a provision , introduced as an amendment by senator mccain , thatwould prohibit the "cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment" of detainees .

 ( 125 ) section 8154 of thebill , as amended , would limit interrogation techniques used by the department of defense to thosedefined in u.s. army field manual ( fm ) 34-52 , intelligence interrogation ( 126 ) ( "fm 34-52" ) .

thisrequirement would not apply with respect to persons detained under criminal or immigration laws .

the provision would not restrict dod's authority to revise the regulation , but would require that dodprescribe uniform interrogation procedures for all detainees in dod custody who are undergoinginterrogation for intelligence purposes .

section 8155 of h.r .

2863 , as passed by the senate , applies more broadly .

itwould prohibit the cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment of all persons in u.s.custody , regardless of the agency in whose custody the person is held and without geographicallimitation .

the prohibited treatment is defined as that which would violate the fifth , eighth , andfourteenth amendments to the u.s. constitution , as the senate has interpreted "cruel , inhuman , ordegrading" treatment banned by the u.n. convention against torture .

 ( 127 ) the administrationhas reportedly sought to have the central intelligence agency excepted from this provision on thegrounds that "the president needed maximum flexibility in dealing with the global war onterrorism. .

 ( 128 ) senator mccain has criticized the administration's proposal , arguing that an express cia exemptioncould be interpreted as tantamount to statutory authority for the cia to subject detainees to thetreatment his amendment seeks to ban .

 ( 129 ) the targeting terrorists more effectively act of 2005 , s. 12 , contains aprovision to define u.s. policy with respect to detainees in the war against terrorism .

section 223would express the sense of the congress that , at a minimum , common article 3 of the genevaconventions applies to the war .

the bill would expressly mandate that "no detainee shall be subjectto torture or cruel , inhumane , or degrading treatment or punishment that is prohibited by theconstitution , laws , or treaties of the united states. .

it would further state that the policy of theunited states is to treat all foreign persons in the custody of the united states "humanely and inaccordance with the legal obligations under united states law and international law , including theobligations in the convention against torture and in the minimum standards set forth in the genevaconventions. .

the bill would further proclaim as u.s. policy that "all officials of the united statesare bound both in wartime and in peacetime by the legal prohibitions against torture , cruel,inhumane , or degrading treatment set out in the constitution , laws , and treaties of the united states. .

it may be argued that it is unnecessary for congress to provide more express prohibitions toenforce executive compliance with what already is the law of the land .

 ( 130 ) however , a series ofdocuments released by the executive branch that discuss legal aspects of the treatment of detaineesin the war on terrorism may be read to suggest that relevant treaties are inoperative with respect tothe executive branch unless congress has enacted specific implementing legislation , or that thepresident has inherent authority to set aside treaty obligations .

 ( 131 ) as investigations intoalleged abuse of detainees at guantanamo bay naval station continue , the issue of detaineetreatment seems likely to continue to draw the attention of congress .

