the united states , the third - largest population globally , accounts for about 4.5% of the world's population .

the u.s. population—estimated in the 2010 census at 308.7 million persons —has more than doubled from its 1950 level of 152.3 million .

more than just being double in size , the u.s. population has become qualitatively different from what it was in 1950 .

as noted by the population reference bureau , "the u.s. is getting bigger , older , and more diverse. .

the objective of this report is to highlight some of the demographic changes that have already occurred since 1950 and to illustrate how these and future trends will reshape the nation in the decades to come .

while this report will not discuss policy options , it is important to recognize that the inexorable demographic momentum will produce an increasingly older population in the united states .

there is ample reason to believe that the united states will be able to cope with the current and projected changes if policymakers address and adapt to the changing demographic profile as it relates to a number of essential domains such as work , retirement , and pensions , private wealth and income security , transfer systems , and the health and well - being of the aging population .

these topics are discussed briefly in the final section of this report .

the u.s. population has experienced remarkable growth since 1950 .

from a base of about 152 million americans in 1950 , an additional 156 million persons were added to the population between 1950 and 2009 , with the number of additional women slightly outnumbering additional men ( see figure 1 ) .

this increase ( of about 103% ) in the size of the u.s. population was remarkable compared with other industrialized countries .

germany and italy , for instance , grew by only 21% and 30% respectively during the same period .

and , a number of countries , most notably in eastern europe , have recently experienced absolute reductions in the size of their populations .

despite the growth of the u.s. population over this period , the united states' share of the world's population has been declining as less developed , higher fertility countries have grown more rapidly .

pakistan , bangladesh and nigeria , for instance , now rank #6 , #7 and #8 in total population size , surpassing more developed countries—such as germany , france , the united kingdom , and italy—that are no longer among the world's 10 most populous countries .

the census bureau projects that the u.s. population will continue to grow , to almost 440 million persons by year 2050 , albeit at a slower pace than the growth recorded over the past half - century .

note , however , that population projections , which rely upon assumptions about the future courses of mortality , fertility , and immigration are uncertain .

more pessimistic growth projections are offered by the united nations and the social security administration , which estimate that the u.s. population will be 404 million or 411 million respectively in the same year .

average annual growth rates for each 10-year intercensal period between 1950 and 2000 were positive , but have generally been declining over time ( see figure 2 ) .

expressed as a percentage of the population at the beginning of the period , the average population growth rate in the 1950s , for example , was 1.7% per annum while it was only 0.9% per year during the 1980s .

the census bureau assumes that the growth rate will remain positive through year 2050 , but will fluctuate over the time period .

the current level of 0.8% per annum will increase through 2030 to closer to 0.9% per annum .

after 2030 the growth rate is expected to return to 0.8% per annum .

trends in the size and growth of the u.s. population reflect the interactions of three underlying determinants: the role of human reproduction and the fertility behavior of american couples ; trends in disease risk and subsequent mortality , and , the net effect of international immigration to and from the united states .

figure 2 and the appendix ( at end of this report ) , in addition to highlighting the estimated and projected trends in population growth for the period 1950-2050 , also highlight trends and projections for these three underlying components of population change .

characteristics of u.s. fertility , mortality , and immigration are discussed in the following sections .

aside from its total size , one of the most important demographic characteristics of a population for public policy is its age and sex structure .

in general , a "young" population structure is seen in countries experiencing high fertility and rapid population growth , and the relevant policy considerations are whether there are sufficient schools and , later , enough jobs and housing to accommodate them .

on the other hand , critical policy challenges in countries with "old" population structures are to develop retirement and health systems to serve the older population , often with simultaneous reductions in the number of working - age persons to support them .

the population of the united states had been relatively "young" in the first half of the 20 th century , a consequence of a history of three demographic trends acting in concert—relatively high fertility , declining infant and childhood mortality , and high rates of net immigration to the united states by young workers and families .

since 1950 , the united states has been in the midst of a profound demographic change: rapid population aging , a phenomenon that is replacing the earlier "young" age - sex structure with that of an older population .

as seen in table 3 , the population aged 65 and older has been increasing as a percentage of the total u.s. population .

the older population represented 8.1% of the total population in year 1950 .

that percentage increased to 12.8% in 2009 ( not in table ) , and is projected to reach 20.2% in 2050 .

stated another way , one in five persons in 2050 will be aged 65 or older .

figure 4 graphically displays three population pyramids of the united states population at three points in time—in census years 1950 and , 2000 , and projected to year 2050 .

the figure shows the proportion of persons in each five - year age and sex group in these three selected years .

note the increasing numbers on the x - axis , which highlights the increasing size of the u.s. population over time .

in 1950 , the u.s. population , which numbered 152 million persons , was relatively young and its population pyramid generally resembled a christmas tree .

the widest portion , representing the most populous age group , was at the base—where 16.4 million new births and children under age 5 accounted for 10.8% of the total population .

bars representing persons at older ages gradually narrow as deaths occur .

the median age was 30.2 years and births outnumbered deaths by a margin of 2.5 to 1.0 .

three characteristics of the 1950 pyramid are especially worth noting: the only significant departure from a pyramidal shape is notches representing persons aged 10-24 years .

unusual bulges or bites in population pyramids are usually caused by short - term fluctuations in birth and death rates that can be traced to such historical events as wars , epidemics , economic booms , or depressions .

in this case of persons aged 10-24 years in this population pyramid , these persons were born primarily during the economic depression of the 1930's when birth rates were comparatively low .

early "baby boom" births are evident in the youngest age group .

the number of persons aged 65 and older in the population was still relatively low—12.4 million persons , representing 8.1% of the u.s. population .

the population pyramid in year 2000 , the most recent year in which the u.s. population was enumerated by the decennial census , is typical of a population experiencing slow growth .

reflecting lower fertility , fewer people entered the lowest bars of the pyramid , and as life expectancy has increased , a greater percentage of persons have survived until old age .

as a result , the population has been aging .

by 2000 , the median age of the population had risen to 35.3 years while infants and children under the age of five numbered 19.2 million , accounting for only 6.8% of the population .

important characteristics of the u.s. population in year 2000 included: the u.s. population grew by roughly 85% between 1950 and 2000—from 152 million to 282 million persons .

the pyramid , which is significantly larger in all age groups , reflects this fact ( see x - axis scaling in figure 4 ) .

the bulge of the baby - boom generation , those born between 1946-1964 , can be seen in the pyramid for ages 35-54 years in 2000 .

after 1964 , birth rates moved downward until the late 1970s .

as the last members of the baby boom approached their childbearing years during the 1980s , the number of births rose again , peaking in 1990 .

these children , the youngest generation , are represented by the slightly widening base of the pyramid .

even though the number of births per woman had been near an all time low , the population continued to grow in part because of the children and grandchildren of the huge baby - boom generation .

the number of persons aged 65 and older had been steadily increasing and reached 35.1 million persons , representing 12.4% of the u.s. population .

the fact that female survival chances exceed those of men , especially at the older ages , becomes noticeably more evident in the 2000 pyramid .

about 4.3% of the total female population was aged 80 and above in 2000 compared to only 2.2% of men .

by year 2050 , projections of the u.s. population suggest that the population "pyramid" will no longer resemble a christmas tree ; rather , it will be increasingly rectangular .

in this population of 439.0 million persons , the most striking feature is the projected number of people who will be aged 65 and older—88.5 million , just over one in every five persons in the total u.s. population .

to put these figures into perspective , the "oldest" state in 2009 was florida with 17.2% of the state's population in the age category 65 years and older .

by year 2050 , the percent elderly in the national population will surpass the figures observed in the "oldest" states today .

the oldest - old , those aged 80 and above and including the youngest of the baby boomers , will be the most populous age group—32.5 million persons or 7.4% of the entire u.s. population .

the oldest - old women of the same age will account for 8.5% of all women .

the "baby boom" generation will have accelerated population aging , but aging will continue to be one of the most important defining characteristics of the population , even after the youngest of the "baby boom" population has passed away .

this reflects projections of continuing low fertility coupled with improving survival in the united states .

the u.s. population is becoming more racially and ethnically diverse .

this reflects two forces .

first , immigration has been a major influence on both the size and the age structure of the u.s. population .

although most immigrants tend to be in their young adult ages , when people are most likely and willing to assume the risks of moving to a new country , u.s. immigration policy has also favored the entry of parents and other family members of these young immigrants .

second , major racial and ethnic groups are aging at different rates , depending upon fertility , mortality , and immigration within these groups .

federal standards for collecting and presenting data on race and hispanic origin were established by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in 1997 .

race and hispanic origin are considered to be two separate and distinct concepts and are considered separately in this report .

the changing demographic profile will impact upon a wide range of social and economic issues in the united states .

the following section presents a short discussion of some major policy considerations that are related to these changes .

neither the list nor the discussions are comprehensive .

the increasing financial pressure faced by public pension systems , such as social security , is often attributed to demographic trends that have led to aging populations .

however , beyond the simple mathematics of the worsening age dependency ratio , decreasing labor force participation rates have contributed to financial imbalances within pension programs , further increasing the number of retired persons relative to those in the workforce .

the declining labor force participation of older men is one of the most dramatic economic trends of the past four decades in the united states .

between 1963 and 2008 , labor force participation rates declined from 90% to 76% among men aged 55-61 .

over this period , labor force participation rates dropped from 76% to 53% for men aged 62-64 and from 21% to 15% for men aged 70 and over .

for all of these groups , most of the declines occurred prior to the early 1980s .

an individual's decision of whether to stay in the workforce or to retire is based on the complex interaction of a number of factors including , but not limited to the following: eligibility for social security benefits .

availability of and benefits under an employer - financed pension plan .

work incentives to stay in the labor force ( such as continued benefit accrual after attaining the early retirement age , options for phased retirement or to work reduced hours , etc. ) .

the physical and cognitive health of the worker and potentially other family members ( spouse , an aging parent , an adult child with a disability ) .

availability ( and eligibility for ) disability and unemployment insurance programs .

the worker's relative preference for "leisure" compared to employment .

policy levers are , however , available to influence labor force participation and retirement decision - making .

for instance , the federal government influences employers' decisions about whether to offer benefits like pensions and health insurance through direct legislation , such as erisa and the age discrimination act ; through social insurance programs , such as social security and medicare ; and through the financial incentives created for both employers and employees by the internal revenue code .

income security during retirement , coupled with an increase in the number of post - retirement years during which individuals can enjoy family and leisure , is one of the primary social achievements of the 20 th century .

at the same time , this accomplishment has introduced some fundamental public policy challenges associated with population aging .

from an individual's perspective , the two most basic challenges are to ensure that they have sufficient income security during their retirement years and that they have protection against the increasing risk of experiencing periods of poor health and / or disability .

for policy - makers , there are fundamental questions with respect to what the federal role should be in helping individuals meet these objectives .

a major domestic political challenge of the 21 st century will be how to adapt our old - age income security and health insurance systems to ensure financial solvency while ensuring that there is an adequate safety net to protect the most vulnerable in the population .

one option that is likely to be considered involves relying on individual private savings and wealth accumulation to offset any reductions that may take place in the level of public - tier support .

the underlying question is how realistic it is to assume that individuals will save sufficiently over their lifetimes to contribute significantly to their own income needs during retirement .

another central question regarding income security for older persons is whether individuals and families will assume greater responsibility for their own retirements if current government programs are scaled back because of budgetary pressures .

several decades of population aging have occurred in the united states wherein the proportion of young persons has declined while the number of older persons has expanded dramatically .

the changing age structure has raised philosophical questions around the theme of inter - generational equity .

many analysts might expect such demographic changes to have favorable consequences for children and troubling ones for older persons .

fewer children should mean less competition for resources in the home as well as greater availability of social services earmarked for children , especially public schooling .

the sharp rise in the number of elderly should put enormous pressure on resources directed towards the older ages , such as medical care facilities , nursing homes , and social security funds .

however , preston , in his 1984 presidential address to the membership of the population association of america documented that exactly the opposite had occurred: conditions for children had , in fact , deteriorated while they had improved dramatically for older americans .

now , over two decades later , the issue continues to be one of considerable debate .

analysts have argued that , without an overhaul of entitlement programs ( which largely favor older persons ) or tax - revenue reform , the ever - expanding social security , medicare , and medicaid budgets will tighten the squeeze on other domestic spending ( including programs for children , welfare , education , the environment , community development , housing , energy , and justice—programs that reach the majority of all americans. ) .

but , others argue that there are potentially catastrophic outcomes associated with the redistribution of federal resources among age categories .

for instance , the safety nets for the most vulnerable may be interrupted .

costs might be transferred to the states , with limited capacity to absorb the additional expenditures .

individuals may be unable to assume the additional responsibilities asked of them .

there is no generally accepted rule in welfare economics for how an age group's interests ought to be represented in public decision - making .

as noted by preston , however , we are continually faced with two questions .

first , do we care about our collective future—the commonwealth—or only about our individual futures ? .

and , if we have collective concerns , we face an even more difficult decision about what mix of private and public responsibilities will best serve the needs of the generations .

health policy is interrelated with population change .

changes in the population size , racial and ethnic composition , and age structure affect the healthcare resources needed , spending levels , and health conditions observed .

for example , recent fertility changes with more births occurring to women at the beginning and end of childbearing years—to teenagers and women over 40 respectively—could have profound consequences on the health of the children born to these mothers .

specifically , there have been large increases in the birth rate of women over the age of 40 .

children born to mothers at later ages are at greater risk for a number of health conditions including downs syndrome .

infants born to women at later ages are also more likely to be low birth weight which is associated with higher infant mortality rates , premature birth , and a number of other health problems .

increasing numbers of women delaying childbearing past age 40 may increase the number of children born with health conditions which may , among other things , increase health spending and increase the need for specific health resources such as neonatal intensive care .

at the other end of the age spectrum , babies born to teenage mother are also at increased risk for a number of health conditions .

babies born to teenage mothers are more likely to be premature and low birth weight .

additionally , teenage mother receive less prenatal care than women giving birth at later ages which may exacerbate or cause adverse outcomes .

changes in the racial and ethnic composition of the population will also have profound effects on the health and healthcare needs of the population .

there are observed differences in how different groups use health services with non - hispanic whites more likely to visit physicians in an office - setting while non - hispanic blacks more frequently seek care in emergency rooms .

there are also differences in the types of care sought and utilized by race and ethnicity , differences in health conditions experienced , and differences in both mortality rates and mortality rates for specific conditions .

these differences , which are in part related to socioeconomic differences across racial and ethnic groups could mean that there will be a growing proportion of the population in poorer health , with higher incidence of certain health conditions , less access to health insurance and health services , and higher mortality rates at certain ages .

current racial and ethnic differentials coupled with future population growth create challenges for healthcare planning in terms of the services needed and the workforce required to best serve an increasingly diverse population .

beyond the increasing diversity of the population , the aging of the population can have profound impacts on the health and health services needed .

although population aging may or may not result in increasing proportions of older persons in poor health , the numbers experiencing that condition are almost certain to rise .

thus , as the u.s. population ages , the social and economic demands on individuals , families , communities , and the government will grow , with a substantial impact on the formal and informal health and social care systems and on the financing of medical services in general .

a report issued by the institute of medicine in 2008 found that the u.s. healthcare workforce will be too small and not appropriately organized or trained to meet the health needs of a growing aging population .

they cited both a lack of physicians and other providers who specialize in providing care for older adults and a lack of competence in providing care for older adults throughout the health workforce .

in conjunction with , and driven by , the growing numbers of older persons , the united states faces secular change in health status , as reflected in rates and outcomes of various conditions and disabilities .

trends in cognitive impairment and dementia have enormous policy implications , but whether changes in disease and disability rates will alter the rates of long - term care in institutions or in other settings is unclear .

the use of long - term care , because of cognitive impairment or other health conditions , is expected to increase as americans live longer .

the future need for long - term care has financial implications for states , and for the federal government as the majority—nearly three quarters—of long - term care expenses are funded by public programs most commonly medicaid .

while recognizing the necessity to address the changing health needs of the older population , critical questions remain regarding the best mechanisms for health system organization , delivery of and access to services , administration , and financing .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 ) , recently enacted health reform legislation , may address some of these concerns , but critics contend that the law may exacerbate provider shortages and do little to control growing healthcare costs or reduce inefficiency .

immigration has historically been a major contributor to population growth in the united states .

the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states is higher than at any point in u.s. history and at 12.5% ( in 2008 ) has reached a proportion of the u.s. population not seen since the early 20 th century .

of the 38 million foreign - born residents , approximately one - third are naturalized citizens , one - third are legal permanent residents , and one - third are estimated to be unauthorized ( illegal ) residents. .

the growing number of illegal immigrants has given rise to a consensus that the immigration system is seriously flawed .

despite this consensus , there are major disagreements over proposed solutions .

u.s. policy on permanent immigration has been based on four principles: the reunification of families , the admission of immigrants with special skills , the protection of refugees , and the diversity of admissions by country of origin , the balance of these four principles and whether the balance changes has implications for the size and composition of the u.s. population .

for example , those who immigrate under family reunification policies tend to be older ; while those entering for employment reasons are generally younger .

the number of immigrants seeking to enter the u.s. and the needs of businesses seeking workers are linked to economic conditions and trends .

the current recession has lowered immigration levels , but companies still want an immigration policy that allows the entry of both highly skilled workers and low - skilled temporary workers .

other argue that immigration policies could adversely affect the economic well - being of the u.s population by creating competition for jobs in a context of high unemployment .

immigration issues and potential reform have broad implications for a number of policy areas .

immigration may stimulate the economy by providing both low and high skilled workers .

pursuing an immigration strategy that favors workers entering for employment reasons may also slow u.s. population aging thus averting or delaying a number of the policy challenges that could arise from population aging .

immigration may also create a number of policy challenges .

for example , immigrants are often concentrated in certain geographic areas which may strain local governments and infrastructure .

the number and type of immigrants seeking to enter the u.s. may also impact areas such as homeland security , the workforce , and crime and law enforcement policy .

the country of origin of immigrants will also affect the racial and ethnic composition of the u.s. population and contributes to the increasing diversity in the u.s. which , as discussed below , has a number of policy implications .

the u.s. population is becoming more racially and ethnically diverse .

once a mainly biracial society with a large white majority and relatively small black minority—and an impenetrable color line dividing these groups—the united states is now a society composed of multiple racial and ethnic groups .

along with increased immigration are rises in the rates of racial / ethnic intermarriage , which in turn have led to a sizeable and growing multiracial population .

these trends are projected to continue for the next decades .

this diversity presents policy challenges in a number of areas .

for instance: assimilation .

many asian americans speak their native languages at home and maintain their distinct ethnic cultures and values , signaling that they either face difficulties fully assimilating into the american mainstream or purposefully resist full assimilation .

the continued flows of latino immigrants ensure that the spanish language and diverse latino cultures will endure in the united states .

the degree to which there are language barriers or lack of assimilation of immigrants has important implications for both entry into and achievement in the educational system and the labor force .

income disparities .

there are persistent differences in household incomes among racial / ethnic groups in the united states .

for instance , in 2009 , the real median income level for a black household—at about $33,000—was about $19,000 lower than that of a non - hispanic white household ( about $52,000 ) .

one consequence of this disparity had been that low - income / low - wealth persons had faced hurdles when attempting to become homeowners .

key findings from a study from the department of housing and urban development showed that subprime loans are three times more likely in low income neighborhoods than in high - income ones , and that predatory lending practices made homeownership far more costly for poor families .

poverty .

the official poverty rate in 2009 was 14.3 percent , up from 13.2 percent in 2008 ; the most recent figure is the highest poverty rate since 1994 .

nonetheless , it was still 8.1 percentage points lower than in 1959 , the first year for which poverty estimates are available .

in 2009 , 43.6 million people were counted as poor—the third consecutive increase in the number of people in poverty .

according to gabe , the most recent increase in poverty reflects the worsening economic conditions since the onset of the economic recession in december 2007 and is expected to remain comparatively high even after the economy begins to recover .

america's racial minorities continue to have disproportionately high poverty rates .

in 2009 , african americans and hispanics had poverty rates that exceed those of whites by several times .

in 2009 , 25.8% of blacks ( 9.9 million ) and 25.3% of hispanics ( 12.3 million ) had incomes below poverty , compared to 9.4% of non - hispanic whites ( 18.5 million ) and 12.5% of asians ( 1.8 million ) .

poverty and welfare receipt are inextricably linked .

government programs may help low - income persons meet their basic daily needs ( through cash assistance programs such as tanf , medicaid , or food stamps ( now called the supplemental nutrition assistance program or snap ) , though some observers fear that welfare creates economic dependency and perpetuates the cycle of poverty .

