the various systems that collect , process , and disseminate intelligence are encompassed inthe budget category known as intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ( 1 ) ) .

isr covers a multitude ofprograms ranging from billion - dollar satellites to hand - held cameras .

the bulk of funding is forresearch and development ( r&d ) and procurement ; personnel costs are comparatively low .

somesystems are used only by military units ; others are national systems operated by washington - leveldefense agencies .

most are surrounded in secrecy , but total spending on isr , while difficult toestimate with unclassified information , undoubtedly runs into the tens of billions of dollars .

the isrprograms considered in this report are managed by the central intelligence agency ( cia ) and by thelarge intelligence agencies and components of the department of defense ( dod ) .

 ( 2 ) isr acquisition has in recent years come under strong criticism .

reportedly , there aretechnical problems with the new generation of reconnaissance satellites , along with billion dollarcost - overruns ; only a small number of the planned high - altitude uavs are actually deployed ; andthere have been difficulties in ensuring that the troops who need intelligence acquire it in a timelymanner .

there is a widespread awareness that isr spending , much greater than in past years , couldeasily absorb even larger portions of defense and intelligence budgets , making the need for tradeoffseven more important .

some observers point to the possibility that satellites and uavs potentiallyundertake the same or similar missions , but that the current system gives little opportunity for costcomparisons or trade - offs to be made in the acquisition process .

appendix a provides a case studyof the trade - offs between satellites and unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) .

understanding the procedures for acquiring isr systems is , however , complicated by the factthat different isr systems are acquired in entirely different ways , by different intelligence agenciesor military services , and are designed for different users .

in addition , the acquisition processes areoverseen by different congressional committees .

it is difficult to ensure efficient acquisition in theseparate programs which are often based on innovative technologies .

it is even more challengingto envision a seamless and comprehensive system of systems and to ensure the acquisition of anoptimal mix of specific systems .

although procedures for coordinating the budgeting of isr programs have long been inplace , some members of congress have concluded that the procedures have not been whollyeffective .

there has been , it is argued , inadequate data to compare systems capabilities and costsacross the spectrum of intelligence programs , an imbalance between collection and analysisprograms , and an intelligence effort that does not reflect an optimal allocation of extensive resources .

expressions of congressional concern go back a number of years .

in 1995 , the senate selectcommittee on intelligence ( ssci ) expressed its misgivings about existing cooperation amongagencies and recommended a joint review by the director of central intelligence ( dci ) and thedeputy secretary of defense to ensure that "both intelligence community and defense departmentequities are served in the planning , programming , and management of all intelligence activities andprograms. .

 ( 3 ) some believed that giving the dci greater management responsibilities would improve themanagement of isr programs , including those in the department of defense ( dod ) .

reflecting thatview , the fy1997 intelligence authorization act ( p.l .

104-293 ) included provisions thatstrengthened the ability of the dci "to manage the intelligence community by codifying hisauthority to participate in the development of the budgets for defense - wide and tacticalintelligence...." ( 4 ) theconference committee stated: "giving the dci a database of all intelligence activities and requiringall national foreign intelligence program ( nfip ) elements ( 5 ) to submit periodic budget execution reports should enable the dcito make better use of his existing authorities - - given to him by congress in 1992 - - to approve thebudgets of nfip elements and to transfer funds and personnel with the concurrence of affectedagency heads .

the conferees in considering the fy1997 legislation urged the dci to be moreassertive in using these authorities. .

 ( 6 ) in may 2000 , the senate intelligence committee reported that , "the budget practices of the[central intelligence agency ( cia ) ] and the intelligence community as a whole are simplyinadequate to address current requirements .

upper level program managers lack sufficient insightinto the process to make informed and timely decisions regarding the allocation of funds , and toassure congress , and themselves , that funds are being spent as appropriated and authorized. .

 ( 7 ) the next year the committee again argued that the intelligence community "is handicappedby the lack of comprehensive strategic and performance plans that can be used to articulate programgoals , measure program performance , improve program efficiency and aid in resource planning. .

accordingly , the committee directed the dci to produce a "comprehensive intelligence communitystrategic plan and performance plan , as well as complementary strategic and performance plans forthe intelligence agencies within the national foreign intelligence program aggregation. .

thecommittee asked that such plans be undertaken annually and made available to congressionalcommittees by march 1 of each year .

 ( 8 ) in 2002 , the senate intelligence committee acknowledged receipt of the "first - ever planscoordinated across the intelligence community aimed at establishing performance measures alignedwith the stated goals and priorities of the director of central intelligence. .

the committee went on,however , to indicate that further work is needed and suggested that developing new systems merelyto acquire a new capability was insufficient ; the capability had to meet validated intelligence needs .

"a key issue is the development of performance plans and measures that are not focused solely onthe attainment of intelligence capabilities but also on the value received from such capabilities inpursuit of intelligence community missions. .

 ( 9 ) despite this admonition , the next year the committee called attention to the absence of a2003 performance plan submission , even though the deadline had passed with no request for anextension .

 ( 10 ) moresignificantly , the committee noted that it is aware of no capability within dod or the intelligencecommunity for objectively , independently , and comprehensively evaluating alternative sensor andplatform architecture and capabilities .

there are some capabilities within different agencies anddepartments , but none that are available , independent of the program offices , to model and assesscross - program trades without regard to the location of the sensor or platform ( air , space , land , or sea ) or the level of compartmentation .

consequently , although dod and intelligence communityofficials expend substantial effort and time evaluating program trades , they do so without the benefitof the rigorous quantitative modeling necessary to optimize collection capabilities and architectures .

given the vast sums involved in these programs , even modest increases in the efficiency of resourcesallocation could lead to substantial benefits .

further , the committee notes that the national militarystrategy , as well as the defense planning guidance , have been developed in recent years without theparticipation of the director of central intelligence or his staff , notwithstanding the growingimportance of intelligence to military operations and the need to build forces commensurate tovalidated threats .

 ( 11 ) section 355 of the fy2004 intelligence authorization act ( p.l .

108-177 ) required a report from thedci and the secretary of defense assessing progress in the development of "a comprehensive anduniform analytical capability to assess the utility and advisability of various sensor and platformarchitectures and capabilities for the collection of intelligence ... [and] the improvement ofcoordination between the department [of defense] and the intelligence community on strategic andbudgetary planning .

in separate legislation , congress also urged that dod take a greater role in managing isr ; in section 923 of the fy2004 defense authorization act ( p.l .

108-136 ) congress found that: ... there is not currently a well - defined forum throughwhich the integrators of intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance capabilities for each of thearmed forces can routinely interact with each other and with senior representatives of departmentof defense intelligence agencies , as well as with other members of the intelligence community , toensure unity of effort and to preclude unnecessary duplication of effort .

 ( 12 ) p.l .

108-136 further stated that the existing structure of intelligence programming may not be the best approach for supporting thedevelopment of an intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance structure that is integrated to meetthe national security requirements of the united states in the 21stcentury .

accordingly , the fy2004 defense authorization act directed the under secretary of defense forintelligence to establish an "isr integration council" to provide a permanent forum for assessingisr capabilities .

the council is to consist of senior intelligence officers of the services , the specialoperations command , the joint staff , and the directors of dod intelligence agencies .

the dciwould be "invited" to participate .

the council would be charged with developing a comprehensiveroadmap "to guide the development and integration" of dod isr capabilities for 15 years .

 ( 13 ) in addition to its general concerns about isr programs , some members of congress havespecifically focused on two issues related to budget processes that they argued undermine theirabilities to conduct oversight of isr efforts .

they argue that congressional budget justificationbooks have been inadequate , and that there has been an over - reliance on supplemental appropriationsto fund continuing isr programs .

one argument that has been used by those who have proposed a major reorganization ofintelligence programming and budgeting is that the different categories of intelligence programs areobsolete in today's complex technological and threat environment .

isr programs are currentlygrouped into three major categories - - the national intelligence program ( nip ) , the joint militaryintelligence program ( jmip ) , and tactical intelligence and related activities ( tiara ) .

 ( 32 ) the three categories ofintelligence activities used in programming and budgeting are based on the different consumer beingserved , different management arrangements , and different oversight in congress .

 ( 33 ) .

programming and budgeting of isr systems have been managed by the department ofdefense ( dod ) and its many components , and by the intelligence community ( through the officeresponsible to the dci for inter - agency coordination , the community management staff ( cms ) ) .the office of management and budget ( omb ) also plays a critical role in allocating budgetary goalsthat can constrain intelligence spending proposals .

congressional responsibilities are spread amongarmed services , intelligence , appropriations , and other committees .

although it would be easy toquestion the number of entities involved , the reality is that the overlap results from the evolution ofa multiplicity of systems and the variety of consumers .

whereas nasa can singlehandedly managea moon probe , no intelligence agency will ordinarily by itself collect , analyze , and disseminatefinished intelligence .

different procedures used for different isr systems by different agencies canalso complicate efforts to achieve compatibility and maximize effectiveness .

despite the existence of the coordinative mechanisms described above , congress formallyexpressed its concerns that isr has been ill - coordinated .

in part , coordination difficulties havederived from the challenges faced by large governmental organizations in managing fast - movingtechnological developments .

in addition , u.s. post - cold war defense planning continues to evolveinto new , and uncertain , approaches to a wide variety of possible conflict situations .

this evolutionmay make it even more difficult to reach consensus on isr requirements in future years .

how theprovisions of the intelligence reform act will be implemented remains unknown .

many complexissues will have to be addressed , including the roles of congressional authorizing and appropriationscommittees .

in regard to isr systems , the act provides the dni with an opportunity and a staff ( thecommunity management staff is to be transferred to the office of the dni ) to assess whethergovernment - wide isr requirements are being effectively addressed .

some observers believe that past failures to satisfy congressional concerns about coordinationresulted in significant measure from the lower relative influence of the dci and the communitymanagement staff compared with that of the secretary of defense and dod .

the dci was arguablyat a disadvantage in any dispute with dod because of the latter's size , influence , and prestige .

similarly , questions have existed regarding the relative influence of intelligence and armed servicescommittees ( and some members have suggested that certain intelligence matters should receiveoversight from other committees ) .

the intelligence reform act did not specify procedures forcongressional oversight , but congress may choose to develop new approaches to reviewing isrprograms .

some observers go so far as to argue that longstanding distinctions among national , jointmilitary , and tactical systems have outlived their usefulness and that a more comprehensive approachshould be attempted .

since these distinctions are provided for in statutes and have been recently beenincluded in the intelligence reform act , any major changes would require further congressionalaction .

there is a widespread sense that the optimal mix of isr systems has not yet been determined .

admittedly , it would be almost impossible to design analytical processes that would identifydefinitive options for isr systems readily acceptable to all interested parties .

the diverse nature ofthe systems , the multiple customers for data , the number of intelligence agencies , and the dynamicsof ever - changing isr technologies make a multi - year "roadmap" extremely difficult .

yet , a moredisciplined assessment of the potential advantages and disadvantages of different isr options couldbe required for review in the executive branch and in congressional committees .

given the potential for the need for future budgetary restraints on isr programs , with orwithout a new procedural framework , the acquisition of expensive new systems will undoubtedlyremain an especially complex challenge to government decisionmakers .

efforts to procure a new generation of reconnaissance satellites and high altitude unmannedaerial vehicles ( uavs ) serve as a case study that illustrates the dilemmas involved in the acquisitionsof intelligence platforms and systems .

both of the these expensive and technologically sophisticatedplatforms can support national policymakers as well as military commanders .

each has strengths andlimitations .

 ( 62 ) whileno serious observer would argue that u.s. isr requirements could be met by only one approach,many believe that there have been insufficient efforts to achieve an appropriate mix that providesoptimal collection capabilities while avoiding unnecessary duplication or wasted resources .

satellite imagery has long been one of the most valuable tools of the intelligence profession .

the need for to obtain accurate estimates of soviet military forces in the mid - 1950s led the unitedstates , in order to avoid highly dangerous overflights by conventional aircraft , to develop specialplanes that could fly at very high altitudes and ultimately to build reconnaissance satellites that couldidentify small objects from space .

satellite imagery became the cornerstone of arms control effortsin the cold war and , coupled with the availability of precision guided munitions , became the keyto those post - cold war defense tactics that rely on highly selective targeting to destroy selectedtargets with minimal collateral damage .

satellite programs are among the most expensive intelligence efforts , with individualsatellites costing a billion dollars each .

the need to replace aging satellite programs led theintelligence community in the mid - 1990s to initiate the future imagery architecture ( fia ) programthat is intended to provide a greater number of smaller satellites that can provide coverage of moreregions for longer periods .

fia has , however , received considerable criticism .

in 1998 , the houseintelligence committee has concluded: for several years , the committee has been concernedwith the increasing costs of several major national reconnaissance office ( nro ) programs and thenrp's [national reconnaissance program through which the nro is funded] growing share of thenfip budget .

not seeing any relief from the tight fiscal environment , the committee has sought tofind technological innovations and managerial reforms in the nrp that could reduce costs .

this goallay behind the committee's push to shift to larger numbers of smaller satellites , which the committeethought also would provide better performance against hard targets , reduce satellite vulnerability,and help to counter foreign denial and deception practices .

the committee , in summary , is not satisfied that allappropriate measures have been taken to reduce or control costs in the nrp or to adequately measurethe cost - effectiveness of all overhead collection activities .

the committee believes that the dcineeds to exercise much more knowledgeable and diligent oversight of nro programs , with an eyeto freeing up funds for investment elsewhere , wherever possible .

this oversight must extend fromrequirements tradeoffs , to cost estimating , to acquisition oversight .

the dci also needs to acquirethe expertise necessary to make tradeoffs across the major nfip programs .

the dci can no longerafford to rely on the major program managers to police their organizations and budgets .

thecommittee has recommended additional funds for the dci to accelerate the development of thesecapabilities .

 ( 63 ) one media account in december 2002 reported that "the national reconnaissance office'snext - generation spy satellites , known as future imagery architecture , are more than a year delayedand almost $3 billion over cost , spurring an internal pentagon debate about whether to proceed withthe program at all , say people familiar with the discussions. .

 ( 64 ) further criticism wasvoiced in may 2003 by a task force established by the defense science board which submitted areport finding that "the fia program under contract at the time of our review to be significantlyunderfunded and technically flawed .

the task force believes that the fia program - - thus structured - - is not executable. .

 ( 65 ) the process of satellite procurement and the role of the dci vis - a - vis dod has come undersome criticism .

one former cia official who worked with the nro has described "an incrediblyinefficient requirements process," and suggested that the dci's role has been reduced to thedetriment of the overall satellite reconnaissance effort: the process for deriving the requirements for the newimagery architecture ( fia ) took two years and makes the point about the dci's diminished powerclear .

dod and the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) played key roles in the fiarequirements process ; now dod essentially controls all major nro requirements .

the dci and thecia have let dod significantly erode what should be the dci's major responsibility: the arbitration,consolidation , and establishment of national intelligence requirements .

 ( 66 ) fia , whose satellites are expected to be launched beginning around 2008 , absorbs a majorportion of the intelligence budget and reportedly continues to be plagued with serious delays andmanagement problems .

 ( 67 ) according to one media account , the program is more than ayear behind schedule and is forcing a shift of some $4 billion from other isr programs .

 ( 68 ) some observers have,accordingly , suggested that many of the capabilities of reconnaissance satellites could be realizedby relying on less expensive , high - altitude unmanned aerial vehicles such as global hawk , whichhas recently become available for operational missions and has been used during operation iraqfreedom .

proponents of global hawks , which have been estimated to cost some $57 million perunit , maintain that these vehicles could provide a considerable portion of the imagery that couldotherwise be obtainable by satellites that cost many times that figure .

 ( 69 ) there are advantages and disadvantages to both satellites and uavs ( as well as mannedaircraft which can also be used advantageously in some circumstances ) .

satellites have beenconsidered invulnerable to attacks from all but the most sophisticated adversary and can be launchedfrom u.s. territory .

 ( 70 ) they are in orbit for years and can be shifted from target to target as needs change .

on the otherhand , they are expensive and there are inevitably limited numbers in the u.s. inventory .

globalhawks , on the other hand , can be launched when needed , and can be targeted by local commanders .

they do not , however , have the capability to remain overhead for lengthy periods ( sometimes termeda "long - dwell capability" ) , and they may be vulnerable to attack .

while inexpensive in comparisonwith satellites , they are far too costly to be considered expendable , as is the case with some tacticaluavs .

uav acquisition has been as heavily criticized as fia .

hpsci , in particular , has pointedout problems with global hawk procurement: the committee is very concerned about themanagement and cost growth of the global hawk endurance uav program.... [because of airforce - initiated upgrades] a $10 million per copy global hawk platform has become at least a $30-40million aircraft , and the cost will increase substantially further as additional and improved sensors,and corresponding power / payload upgrades , are added .

in fact , the air force projects that theaverage total unit cost ( including all program costs ) will exceed $75 million percopy .

... there is now an effort to flood the global hawkprogram with money , there are ad hoc plans for rapid , major upgrades before requirements have beenestablished , and no sign of serious examination of where and how global hawk fits into an overallcollection architecture.... dod has taken no serious steps to be able to relay and process the hugeamounts of data from global hawk , or to process , exploit , and disseminate all the data that a fleetof 51 global hawks with highly capable sensors will generate .

 ( 71 ) satellites are budgeted under nip and operated by the nro ; global hawk uavs , on theother hand , have been budgeted under jmip and operated by air force components of regionalcommands .

these separate paths have made the possibility of potential trade - offs between space anduav collection vastly more difficult .

observers sense that current procedures to integrateintelligence acquisition efforts have not led to a comprehensive assessment of major issues relatingto satellite and uav programs .

if uavs can do at least part of the work of satellites then , arguably,considerable budgetary savings might be realized .

on the other hand , a failure to take advantage ofu.s .

satellite technological superiority could limit intelligence - gathering capabilities for decades tocome and prompt the decline of an important u.s. industry .

