this report provides a chronology of selected events leading up to and following thediscoveries of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or "mad cow disease" ) in north america .

as of this writing , 10 native cases have been confirmed on this continent , seven in canada and threein the united states .

 ( 1 ) bse is a degenerative disease that is fatal to cattle , affecting their nervous system , and it has beenlinked to a rare but fatal human form of the disease which has occurred primarily in the unitedkingdom , where most bse cases also have been reported .

the following chronology is not intended to be comprehensive .

it is intended to be a timelinefor selected regulatory , legal , and congressional developments that are frequently referenced in theongoing policy debate .

it does not contain entries for the introduction of the many bse - related billsintroduced into this or previous congresses , except for those in recent years where committee orfloor action has occurred or where markedly widespread attention has been focused .

nor does itcover a number of policy developments that are not directly bse - related , but that nonetheless havearisen within the context of bse debate , such as a universal animal identification ( id ) program andcountry of original labeling ( cool ) for meats and other commodities .

other crs reports may provide more background and context for this policy debate .

theseinclude: crs report rs22345 , bse ( "mad cow disease" ) : a brief overview , by[author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl32414 , the private testing of mad cow disease: legal issues ,by stephen r. viã±a ; crs report rs21709 , mad cow disease and u.s .

beef trade , by charles e.hanrahan and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl32199 , bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or "mad cowdisease" ) : current and proposed safeguards , by [author name scrubbed] and sarah a.lister .

unless noted , the sources for the entries in this chronology are the above reports , as well asvarious u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and food and drug administration ( fda ) pressreleases , fact sheets , and other publicly available materials , reports of hearings before the house andsenate agriculture committees , and for some entries , articles that appeared in leading food andagriculture trade periodicals including food chemical news , feedstuffs , and cattle buyers weekly .

when bse was first identified in 1986 in a british laboratory , relatively little was knownabout its character , its cause , or how to contain it .

the united kingdom ( uk ) has so far been thehardest - hit region , where reported cases affecting cattle continued to climb through the late 1980sand early 1990s to a peak of more than 37,000 in 1992 .

cases have been declining each year sincethen .

several other countries , primarily in other parts of europe , also reported hundreds of additionalcases , according to the world animal health organization ( oie , its french acronym ) .

as the uk and other countries were coping with bse , the u.s. and canadian governmentswere establishing panels to study the disease and instituting a series of safeguards aimed at keepingit out of north america or stopping any spread if it should occur here .

prior to 2003 , the only knowncase of bse in north america was in canada , where a non - native case was discovered in late 1993 .

this animal is believed to have been born in and imported from great britain in 1987 .

the first native - born case of bse in north america was confirmed in a cow in alberta,canada , in may 2003 .

the united states almost immediately halted the importation of virtually allruminants and ruminant products , including live cattle and beef , from canada .

 ( an interim final rulewas published in the may 29 federal register , retroactive to may 20. ) .

in august , the u.s. secretaryof agriculture announced that the u.s. border would reopen to boneless beef from cattle under 30months old and other items considered to be of low risk for bse .

rather than issuing a proposedor interim rule , usda claimed authority to proceed under a standing veterinary import permittingprocess .

in november , usda proposed for comment a more extensive rule change that essentiallywould formalize and expand imports from canada , to include among other things live cattle under30 months old .

shortly thereafter , testing of a cow in mabton , washington , indicated the presenceof the bse agent .

confirmatory testing affirmed bse , and the u.s. secretary of agriculture reportedthe findings on december 23 .

this became the first reported u.s. case , although investigatorsquickly determined that the animal was not native but rather was born in and imported from canada .

usda , cattlemen , and meat industry officials scrambled to reassure u.s. and foreignconsumers that u.s. beef was safe and , as the year closed , the secretary of agriculture announcedthat she would take a number of major steps to strengthen existing u.s. bse safeguards .

althoughdomestic demand remained firm , most foreign countries closed their borders to u.s. beef and liveruminants including cattle .

usda moved to implement the new measures it had announced at the close of 2003 , whileat the same time it worked to restore full cross - border trade with canada and mexico .

in the springof 2004 , however , a cattlemen's group successfully sued usda to halt any further expansion ofcanadian beef imports in a federal court .

usda then agreed to limit such beef imports to the typesit began permitting in august 2003 , until it promulgated a rule finalizing its november 4 , 2003,proposal .

the enhanced bse surveillance program began in earnest in june 2004 ; initial screening testsreported three possibly positive cases during the year ( which usda termed "inconclusives" ) thatlater were deemed to be negative for bse .

nonetheless , cattle and beef markets reacted nervouslyto the reports ; usda was challenged sharply on the adequacy of their design and conduct of thetesting program and how results were being reported prior to final confirmation .

at fda , whereofficials had promised early in 2004 to revise their animal feed rules to tighten controls over possiblebse contamination , deliberations over the rules continued through the end of the year .

some countries , notably canada and mexico , were again accepting some u.s. beef in 2004,as were several smaller country markets .

but japan and south korea , the other top two destinationsfor u.s. beef , remained closed , despite what appeared to be a hopeful joint announcement in octoberby the united states and japan of a "framework" agreement for restarting u.s. exports there .

in early 2005 , as usda was unveiling its new rule for permitting canadian imports , canadawas announcing two additional discoveries of bse .

this brought to four canada's reportednative - born cases ( including the one found in the united states ) .

u.s. officials expressed confidencein canadian bse safeguards but sent a team to confirm that feed controls there were effective .

r - calf usa again sued usda to halt canadian beef and live cattle imports , winning atemporary injunction in early march against implementation of usda's january 4 , 2005 , final rule .

however , an appeals court ruled in july to stay ( reverse ) the lower court's ban .

younger canadiancattle soon began crossing the border for the first time in more than two years .

as japan was engaged in what many u.s. critics regarded as a needlessly slow regulatoryprocess toward lifting its ban on u.s. beef imports , usda reported , in june 2005 , the second u.s.case of bse , but the first to be confirmed in a native - born cow .

the texas animal initially had beensampled for bse in november 2004 .

screening tests at that time came back inconclusive ( i.e.,possibly positive ) for the disease , but follow - up testing failed to confirm it , usda said inannouncing a negative result .

however , at oig's urging , department scientists re - tested samples injune 2005 , and the results were positive for bse .

in japan , the regulatory process along withcontinued consumer resistance there delayed the border opening until december , when some u.s.beef imports began to be accepted again .

in congress , mounting frustration led to the introduction of several measures aimed atcoercing japan into moving more quickly to reopen its border .

one such measure passed the senatein september as an amendment to the pending usda appropriation , but it was removed inconference .

 ( the senate had voted in early march to block the usda rule permitting canadiancattle to enter , but necessary house action did not occur. ) .

efforts to fully restore beef and cattle trade encountered several setbacks in 2006 .

first,japan in january again halted all u.s. beef imports after finding some vertebral bones in a shipmentof veal .

u.s. and industry officials were forced to redouble their efforts , and agree to additionalconcessions , to regain market access , which japan finally granted in late july .

u.s. beef exportswere expected to arrive there starting in august .

however , an agreement on the terms for shippingbeef and cattle to korea continued to elude negotiators during the first half of 2006 .

these effortswere exacerbated somewhat by the confirmation in march 2006 of a second u.s. - born cow withbse .

u.s. beef trade with canada continued , despite that country's finding of four additionalbse - positive cattle .

u.s. and canadian officials stated that the new findings were not unexpectedand still within the limits permitted under the oie guidelines for trading with a country with somebse .

however , several of the animals had been born after canada's 1997 ban on feedingmammalian protein to ruminants , raising concerns about the effectiveness and enforcement of theban .

critics urged usda to reconsider its proposed rules ( now being reviewed prior to formalpublication in the federal register ) to permit the importation of older canadian cattle and / or otherruminant products .

meanwhile , usda officials announced in july that the department would soon scale backits massive bse testing program , reverting to a lower level of ongoing surveillance , afterdetermining that the potential level of the disease in the u.s. cattle herd is very low .

at the time of this report , the administration and many members of congress werecontinuing to focus on efforts to reopen more major foreign markets to u.s. beef , most notablykorea .

they also were awaiting the restart of beef exports to japan , which officials in that countryhad promised would begin shortly after a successful round of u.s. plant inspections in july 2006 .

at hearings and other venues , u.s. policymakers and industry officials had been expressingfrustration with the pace of these market - opening efforts .

bills ( such as s. 3364 , s. 3538 , and h.r .

5675 ) demanding trade sanctions against japan havebeen introduced but likely will not be acted upon if the market does reopen as anticipated .

 ( asnoted , the pending senate version of the fy2007 usda appropriation , h.r .

5384 ,includes a committee - approved , nonbinding amendment recommending such sanctions. ) .

after more than two years of intensive surveillance , with more than 764,000 tests ofhigher - risk cattle , only two u.s. - born bse cases have been confirmed , according to usda .

yetsome remain concerned about the disease and its potential threat to public health as well as trade,particularly in the wake of several additional findings of bse in cattle .

the age of several of thecanadian cattle - - that is , they were born after the implementation in 1997 of stronger cattle feedrules to protect against bse - - has been cited as a worrisome development by some critics of northamerican bse safeguards .

however , canadian , usda , and industry officials continue to argue that the overall northamerican risk profile is unchanged .

they have long warned that several additional bse - positivecattle might be found , but should be no cause for alarm .

these officials have repeatedly attemptedto reassure consumers and foreign buyers that u.s. cattle and beef are safe and pose no risk to animalhealth or to human food safety ( although research into the numerous unknown aspects of the diseaseand of the tse family of diseases , and consideration of additional regulatory safeguards , continues ) .

few observers had expected the trade and economic issues to be resolved quickly .

nonetheless , frustrations continue to mount over the length of time it has taken to regain entry intothe japanese and korean markets .

even after u.s. beef becomes eligible for japanese importation,the industry faces the difficult task of both meeting restrictive japanese requirements , and thenregaining the market share there that other countries , notably australia , have since captured .

efforts to restore beef and cattle trade between the united states and canada have been morefruitful , although some u.s. cattlemen continue to express concerns about the potential impacts onu.s .

cattle health .

meanwhile , congress can be expected to play a continued role , holding oversighthearings , providing funding for bse - related activities , and possibly considering legislative optionsto address one or more of the problems at hand .

