as health insurance coverage has evolved from an uncommon benefit to a routine one , government's role in subsidizing and regulating that coverage also has changed .

while most insured americans obtain health coverage through the private sector , public entities play an increasingly significant role .

the federal government's involvement in health coverage expanded dramatically over the past several decades: a long - standing rule issued by the internal revenue service ( irs ) in 1954 stated that an employer's contributions to employer - sponsored health insurance are not to be included in an employee's gross income for tax purposes ( internal revenue code , section 106 ) .

this ruling helped spur the growth of employer - sponsored health benefits .

the irs also stated separately that employers could deduct such contributions as part of business expenses .

advances in medicine led to increased costs of treatment , which was especially problematic for certain groups of consumers who lacked health coverage .

this led to government efforts to assist health care consumers in paying for medical services through the 1965 medicare and medicaid social insurance programs .

more and more employees began to work for more than one employer over their lifetimes .

the federal government enacted the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) to provide certain protections to workers that switched or lost jobs .

in response to a persistent rate of uninsurance , the federal government in 2010 passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , which instituted a large set of reforms to the private insurance market and expanded publicly funded coverage .

given the frequent introduction of legislation aimed at modifying or building on the current health insurance system , understanding the potential impact of such proposals requires a working knowledge of how health insurance is provided , purchased , and regulated .

this report provides background information about these topics .

americans obtain health insurance through a variety of methods and from different sources ( see figure 1 ) .

people may get it through the private sector or from a government source .

consumers may purchase health coverage on their own , as part of an employee group , or through a trade or professional association .

individuals can also have multiple sources of coverage in a year .

that is , they may have multiple types of coverage at one time or even switch coverage types within a year .

this report discusses health insurance coverage in three categories: ( 1 ) insured through private sources , ( 2 ) coverage under public programs , or ( 3 ) uninsured .

health insurance in the united states is a patchwork comprised of a combination of private and government sources .

in 2013 , a majority ( 64.2% ) of americans obtained health insurance through the private sector , which includes both employer - sponsored and nongroup coverage .

public programs ( medicare , medicaid / chip , or health care services for military servicemembers and veterans ) provided coverage to 34.3% of americans .

approximately 13.4% of americans were uninsured for the entire year of 2013. , within each of the sources , health insurance differs by the market structure itself — group versus nongroup , fully insured versus self - insured ; self - only versus family coverage , etc .

overlaying this patchwork are also regulations from both the federal and state level .

in addition , the aca instituted a large set of reforms to the private insurance market and expanded publicly funded coverage .

health care is also delivered and financed through different arrangements ( eg , indemnity insurance , managed care , and consumer - driven health care ) , which are further discussed in the appendix .

the popularity of some of these mechanisms has also changed over time .

given the complexity of the health care system overall , it is no surprise that health coverage is delivered and financed through different arrangements .

those arrangements vary due to numerous factors such as how health care is financed , how much access to providers and services is controlled , and how much flexibility the enrollees have to use the services covered under her / his health plan .

while delivery systems may share certain characteristics , general distinctions can be made based on payment , access , and other critical variables .

indemnity insurance under indemnity insurance , the insured person decides when and from whom to seek health services .

if the services the enrollee receives are covered under his / her insurance , the enrollee or the enrollee's provider files a claim with the insurer .

thus , insurers make payments retrospectively ( i.e. , after the health services have been rendered ) , up to the maximum amounts specified for each covered service .

in this model of health care delivery , the financing of health services and the obtaining of those services are kept separate .

this bifurcated arrangement was unquestioned for a time .

but as medical costs began to rise , sometimes faster than other sectors of the national economy , many observers criticized this delivery model as contributing to increasing expenditures .

because providers were compensated on a fee - for - service basis , some argued that providers were not given incentives to provide efficient health care .

in fact , some critics accused health care practitioners and institutions of providing an over - abundance of health care in order to generate greater revenue .

by the early 1970s , legislators , analysts , and others expressed considerable interest in alternative models , such as managed care models , with cost control as a key feature .

managed care while managed care means different things to different people , several key characteristics set it apart from traditional ( indemnity ) insurance .

one of the main differences is that the service delivery and financing functions are integrated under managed care .

managed care organizations ( mcos ) employ various techniques to control costs and manage health service use prospectively .

among those techniques are restricting enrollee access to certain providers ( in - network providers ) ; requiring primary - care - physician approval for access to specialty care ( gatekeeping ) ; coordinating care for persons with certain conditions ( disease management or case management ) ; and requiring prior authorization for routine hospital inpatient care ( pre - certification ) .

mcos may offer different types of health plans that vary in the degree to which cost and medical decision - making is controlled .

as a consequence , enrollee costs also vary .

generally , the more tightly managed a plan is , the lower the premium .

other distinguishing features of the managed care approach include an emphasis on preventive health care and implementation of quality assurance processes .

managed care was touted as the antidote to rapidly rising health care costs .

starting with the passage of federal legislation in the 1970s which supported the growth of managed care ( specifically in the form of health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) ) , the number of mcos grew quickly .

increased market competition among these organizations led to decreases in premiums , in order to gain market share .

with high medical inflation in the 1980s and early 1990s , enrollees flocked to these less - costly managed care plans .

by the mid - 1990s , more insured workers were enrolled in hmos than any other health plan type — contributing to the substantial displacement of traditional indemnity insurance — and health insurance premiums had stabilized .

but in the latter half of the 1990s , a backlash against managed care started to grow .

some enrollees had grown weary of provider and service restrictions .

many mcos that had increased market share through artificially low premiums began to raise them in order to increase revenue .

consumers and others accused the managed care industry of caring more about controlling costs than providing health care .

some providers resented the role managed care played in medical decision - making .

many enrollees began to leave hmos .

the industry responded by developing insurance products that were less - tightly managed , but more costly .

some traditional hmos widened their provider networks and eliminated the gatekeeping function , while employers began to offer plan types that were less tightly managed , such as preferred provider organizations ( ppos ) .

in fact , by the end of the 1990s , more people with work - based health coverage were enrolled in ppos than in hmos .

as the influence of managed care waned and health care costs began to rise at an increasing pace during the late 1990s , consumers began to feel the impact .

for example , in the employment setting , employers absorbed the extra costs at first in order to recruit and retain workers during the booming economy of the mid to late 1990s .

but as the economy soured , employers began to pass these expenses along to enrollees by increasing employees' contributions to their own coverage .

consumer - driven health care by the end of the 1990s , large increases in health costs again became commonplace .

with the belief by some observers that the age of managed care was over , they began to search for alternatives .

consumer - driven ( or consumer - directed ) health care has been offered as one such option .

consumer - driven health care refers to a broad spectrum of coverage arrangements that give incentives to consumers to control their use of health services and / or ration their own health benefits .

while consumer - driven health care can take on many forms , the premise common to all of these approaches is that by making enrollees more responsible for the cost of their own health care , it creates incentives for people to use services prudently .

the expectation is that greater cost - consciousness on the part of consumers will result in lower overall health costs .

in essence , the service and cost control functions administered by mcos and providers under managed care shifts in part to enrollees under the consumer - driven health care model .

one example that is at the heart of discussions about consumer - driven care is the health savings account ( hsa ) .

an hsa , in and of itself , is not a health insurance plan .

instead , it is an investment account in which contributions earn interest tax free .

consumers , their employers , or both may make contributions to hsas .

consumers withdraw funds on a tax - free basis to cover medical expenses not covered by health insurance .

unused contributions roll over to the next year .

hsas are paired with high - deductible health plans .

if the hsa funds are exhausted and the deductible level has not been reached , the consumer is responsible for covering that gap .

once the consumer's spending reaches the deductible level , then coverage from the health plan takes effect .

hsas were authorized in november 2003 under the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) .

proponents of consumer - directed health care assert the merit in having people take increased responsibility for their own health care use and expenses .

they predict that this approach will lead to better - informed consumers , more appropriate use of health services , and lower overall spending on health care .

opponents express concern that this approach does not recognize the possible range of health conditions in an enrolled population ; and imposes a greater burden on individuals with moderate to severe health conditions .

also , opponents point out that the tax advantages of such insurance arrangements benefit the wealthy to a greater extent than those less well off .

recent enrollment trends from the mid - 1990s to 2014 , hmos continued to become proportionally less popular among covered workers , declining to a 13% share of the employer - sponsored insurance market in 2014 after reaching a 31% share in 1996 .

for more than a decade , ppos have made up the majority ( 58% share in 2014 ) of employer - sponsored plans — contributing to the displacement of conventional indemnity coverage , which has by now all but disappeared from the private market .

ppo plans , which combine moderate provider network restrictions with increased patient freedom relative to hmos , remain the dominant form of worker coverage today .

high - deductible coverage paired with hsas and other savings account arrangements have also made inroads in the market , making up about a fifth of employer - sponsored enrollment by 2014 .

the individual insurance market has seen a similar distribution of plan types .

surveys taken of health insurers show that for the individual market , just as for the group market , ppos are the most popular option ; in fact , they are overwhelmingly popular , accounting for more than 80% of self - only plans and more than 70% of family plans in 2009 .

in contrast , hmos are relatively unpopular , with hmo plans declining from about 6% of self - only plans in 2004 to about 2% in 2009 .

