congressional interest in facilitating u.s. technological innovation led to the passage of p.l .

96 - 517 , amendments to the patent and trademark act , commonly referred to as the "bayh - dole act" after its two main sponsors former senators robert dole and birch bayh .

under this 1980 law , as amended , title to inventions made with government support may be provided to the contractor if that contractor is a small business , a university , or other non - profit institution .

the legislation is intended to use patent ownership as an incentive for private sector development and commercialization of federally funded research and development ( r&d ) .

as a response to congressional efforts to create a unified government patent policy pertaining to inventions made with federal support , the bayh - dole act promotes cooperative activities among academia , small business , and industry leading to new products and processes for the marketplace .

this report discusses the rationale behind the passage of p.l .

96 - 517 , its provisions , and implementation of the law .

observers generally agree that the bayh - dole act has successfully met its objectives .

however , some experts argue that the issues associated with the law's patent policies should be revisited given the current r&d environment .

much of the renewed interest is a result of the legislation's effect on the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries where critics assert that the private sector is receiving benefits to the detriment of the public interest .

other analysts , particularly in the defense arena , maintain that the existing rights maintained by the government are too restrictive and prevent industry from meeting national needs .

many of these issues and concerns are similar , if not identical to those addressed during the 15 to 20 years of deliberation prior to enactment of the law .

these too will be explored to provide a context for current discussions .

while the bayh - dole act provides a general framework to promote expanded utilization of the results of federally funded research and development , questions have been raised as to the adequacy of current arrangements .

most experts agree that closer cooperation among government , industry , and academia can augment funding sources ( both in the private and public sectors ) , increase technology transfer , stimulate more innovation ( beyond invention ) , lead to new products and processes , and expand markets .

however , others point out that cooperation may provide an increased opportunity for conflict of interest , redirection of research , less openness in sharing of scientific discovery , and a greater emphasis on applied rather than basic research .

the successes of the bayh - dole act and the visibility of the results of its implementation have generated certain concerns , many of which are associated with the role of the university in research , as well as biomedical and biotechnology r&d , particularly as related to the availability and cost of pharmaceuticals .

several of these issues are discussed below .

however , it is important to place the bayh - dole act in context .

the law is one significant factor in expanded industry , university , small business collaboration , but not the only one .

therefore , it may be difficult to assess what concerns are the direct result of the bayh - dole act and which arise from the overall research environment .

the rising costs associated with the performance of research and development , the availability of venture capital , increased r&d outsourcing by large firms , and expanded federal funding for biomedical research all contribute to increased interaction among the parties .

additional legislative initiatives including the research and experimentation tax credit , the national cooperative research act , the small business technology transfer program , the advanced technology program , and cooperative r&d agreements established by the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act all facilitate joint r&d activities leading to the commercialization of new technologies for the marketplace .

the discussion surrounding changes to the patent laws in the 1980s , and the debate over technology transfer since the late 1970s , acknowledged many of the issues currently being explored .

as a result of expressed concerns , certain safeguards were built into the activities authorized by the bayh - dole act .

as discussed previously , march - in rights , the government's retention of an irrevocable license to patents generated under federally funded r&d , publication requirements , and commercialization schedules , among other things , all are incorporated into the process to protect the public interest .

while there is a potential for creating an "unfair" advantage for one company over another , this is balanced against the need for new technologies and techniques and their contribution to the well - being of the nation .

despite arguments that title should remain in the public sector where it is accessible to all interested parties , the earlier lack of exclusivity appeared to interfere with the further development and commercialization of federally funded r&d .

during the 1980s , congress determined that the dispensation of patent rights to universities , small businesses , and nonprofit institutions and cooperative efforts took precedence , projecting the greater good generated by new products and processes that improve the country's health and welfare .

lawmakers anticipated the economic benefits through increased revenues from profits , wages , and salaries .

the government receives a significant payback through taxes on profits and society benefits from new jobs created and expanded productivity .

the importance of patent ownership has been reinforced by the positive effects studies have demonstrated p.l .

96 - 517 is reported to have had on the emergence of new technologies and new techniques generated by american companies .

there remain areas of concern , as discussed above , that congress may decide to pursue .

some argue , particularly with respect to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology , that under the bayh - dole act companies are receiving too many benefits at the expense of the public .

others , particularly in the defense arena , assert that the existing rights retained by the government under the act are too restrictive and are an impediment to meeting federal needs .

but the impact of the legislation is still seen as significant .

as summed up by howard bremer , who was patent counsel to the wisconsin alumni research foundation from 1960 through 1988: one important factor , which is often overlooked , is that the success was achieved without cost to the taxpayer .

in other words , no separate appropriation of government funds was needed to establish or manage the effort .

in fact , it has been estimated that the economic benefits flowing from the universities' licensing activities adds about $41 billion to the united states economy .

significant as that dollar amount is , it should not be overlooked that university inventions , arising , as most of them do , from basic research , have led to many products which have or exhibit the capability of saving lives or of improving the lives , safety and health of the citizens of the united states and around the world .

in that context their contribution to society is immeasurable .

