the question of enhancing the ability of the senate to limit consideration of matters has dominated the procedural history of the body for well over a century .

part of the reason for this persistence is that senate procedures have always lacked effective limits on consideration .

this lack of consideration limits may often enable opponents of a proposal to block its approval , even if it is supported by a majority , by extending its consideration indefinitely , thereby preventing the senate from ever being able to reach a vote on it .

it is delaying actions of this kind that are colloquially , but universally , known as filibustering .

this lack of effective consideration limits also applies to the procedures normally used for consideration of proposals for procedural change .

in particular , it extends to the consideration of any proposal to institute additional consideration limits .

proposals to constrain filibustering can be filibustered .

in this way , the existing lack of consideration limits operates as a continuing obstacle to the establishment of new consideration limits .

the persistence in the senate of the question of limiting consideration , however , also arises from a second cause .

certain elements of the senate's procedural system have the effect of requiring that its established procedures remain continuously in effect .

as a result , a proposal to institute more effective means of limiting consideration would have to be considered in accordance with the already existing procedures .

the principle that existing senate procedures remain always in effect then combines with the lack of consideration limits under existing procedures to make it hard for the senate to adopt more effective consideration limits .

it is in this sense that senate rules have been described as "entrenched" against their own change .

this section considers more specifically these two features of senate procedure , which together bring about its entrenchment .

it examines first the procedural provisions that result in the general lack of consideration limits , then the principles that result in the continuous force of the existing system of procedure .

on the basis of this discussion it will be possible to consider what characteristics a "nuclear option" would have to possess in order to succeed in overcoming the entrenchment of senate procedure so as to permit the adoption of additional limits on consideration .

the considerations advanced in the preceding section may be summarized by examining how they might be brought to bear in a contemporary attempt to institute more effective consideration limits through a "nuclear option. .

recent public accounts most often contemplate a course of events in which supporters of change would raise a point of order with the intent of securing a ruling that would have the effect of establishing consideration limits for a pending matter .

specifically , this point of order might claim that further debate on a pending judicial nomination would be dilatory and therefore that an immediate vote was required .

sarah binder and steven smith .

"this battle isn't new: the filibustering of judicial nominations. .

st. louis post - dispatch , march 8 , 2005 , p. 6 .

robert c. byrd .

"in defense of senate tradition. .

remarks in the senate .

congressional record , daily edition , vol .

151 , march 20 , 2005 , pp .

s3100-s3103 .

john cornyn .

"our broken judicial confirmation process and the need for filibuster reform. .

harvard journal of law and public policy , vol .

27 , fall 2003 , pp .

181-230 .

martin b .

gold and dimple gupta .

"the constitutional option to change senate rules and procedures: a majoritarian means to overcome the filibuster. .

harvard journal of law and public policy , vol .

28 , fall 2004 , pp .

205-272 .

jim mcclure and malcolm wallop .

"don't go nuclear. .

the wall street journal , march 15 2005 , p. a20 .

