the future combat system ( fcs ) was a multiyear , multibillion - dollar program at the heart of the army's transformation efforts .

it was to be the army's major research , development , and acquisition program and was to consist of 14 manned and unmanned systems tied together by an extensive communications and information network .

fcs was intended to replace current systems such as the m - 1 abrams tank and the m - 2 bradley infantry fighting vehicle .

the army's success criteria for fcs was that it should be "as good as or better than" the army's current force in terms of "lethality , survivability , responsiveness , and sustainability. .

in the aftermath of secretary gates's april 2009 recommendation to cancel the manned ground vehicle ( mgv ) portion of the fcs , reflected in the may 2009 dod budget submission , the army announced a new acquisition strategy in october 2009 .

its basis was an "incremental bct modernization plan" intended to provide "capabilities packages" to bcts in the army's force generation ( equipping and deploying ) cycle every two years and to develop a new ground combat vehicle that would be fielded starting in 2017 .

the primary issues for congressional concern are how the army plans to transition from the fcs program to a bct modernization program , incorporating selected remaining fcs technologies in a series of spin - outs — capabilities from the fcs program aimed at the current force .

key oversight questions for consideration include the following: what is the army's bct modernization strategy and spin - out plan ? .

what is the impact of an incremental modernization strategy on the army's budgets for fy2011 and beyond ? .

is the army rushing the gcv program ? .

will the army replace the non - line - of - sight cannon ( nlos - c ) ? .

what is the impact on the army's operational concept , force structure , and doctrine ? .

congress's decisions on these and other related issues could have significant implications for army capabilities and funding requirements , as well as the ground combat portion of the defense industrial base .

crs report rl32476 , u.s. army's modular redesign: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22707 , mine - resistant , ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicles: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33161 , the joint tactical radio system ( jtrs ) and the army ' s future combat system ( fcs ) : issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34333 , does the army need a full - spectrum force or specialized units ? .

background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21195 , evolutionary acquisition and spiral development in dod programs: policy issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

manned ground vehicles fcs manned ground vehicles ( mgvs ) were a family of eight different combat vehicles — with some having more than one variation — based on a common platform and being designed to be air transportable by the u.s. air force .

they were to be equipped with a variety of passive and active protection systems and sensors that the army hoped would offer them the same survivability as the current heavy armor force .

in addition , the army intended for its mgvs to be highly reliable , require low maintenance , and have fuel - efficient engines .

the following are brief descriptions of mgv types and variants that were cancelled in may 2009 .

mounted combat system ( mcs ) ( xm1202 ) as envisioned , the mcs was to provide direct and beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) fires , was to be capable of providing direct fire support to dismounted infantry , and to attack targets with blos fires out to a range of 8 kilometers .

the mcs was intended to replace to current m - 1 abrams tank .

the mcs was to have had a crew of two and to be armed with a 120 mm main gun , a .50 caliber machine gun , and a 40 mm automatic grenade launcher .

infantry carrier vehicle ( icv ) ( xm1206 ) as planned , the icv was to have consisted of four versions: the company commander version , the platoon leader version , the rifle squad version , and the weapons squad version .

all four versions were to have appeared to be identical from the exterior to prevent the targeting of a specific carrier version .

the rifle squad version was to have had a two - man crew and able to transport a nine - man infantry squad and dismount them so that they could conduct combat operations on foot .

the icv was to have mounted a 30 or 40 mm cannon .

non - line - of - sight cannon ( nlos - c ) ( xm1203 ) the nlos - c was to have provided networked , extended - range targeting and precision attack of both point and area targets with a wide variety of munitions .

its primary purpose was to have been to provide responsive fires to fcs combined arms battalions and their subordinate units .

the nlos was to have had a two - man crew and a fully automated handling , loading , and firing capability .

non - line - of - sight mortar ( nlos - m ) ( xm1204 ) the nlos - m was intended to provide indirect fires in support of fcs companies and platoons .

the nlos - m was to have had a four - man crew , mount a 120mm mortar , and also carry an 81 mm mortar for dismounted operations away from the carrier .

reconnaissance and surveillance vehicle ( rsv ) ( xm1201 ) as planned , the rsv was to feature advanced sensors to detect , locate , track , and identify targets from long ranges under all climatic conditions , both day and night .

the rsv was to have had a mast - mounted long - range , electro - optical infra - red sensor , sensors for radio frequency ( rf ) intercept and direction finding as well as a remote chemical warfare agent detector .

rsvs were also to have carried four dismounted scouts , unattended ground sensors ( ugs ) , a small unmanned ground vehicle ( sugv ) with various payloads , and two unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) .

in addition to the four scouts , the rsv was to have had a two - man crew and a defensive weapons system .

command and control vehicle ( c2v ) ( xm1209 ) the c2v was intended to serve as the "hub" for battlefield command and control .

it was to have provided information management for the integrated network of communications and sensors for the fcs brigade combat teams .

the c2v was to have had a crew of two and carry four staff officers and also be capable of employing uavs .

medical vehicle - evacuation ( mv - e ) ( xm1207 ) and medical vehicle - treatment ( mv - t ) ( xm1208 ) there were to be two versions of the mv: the mv - e and mv - t .

the mv - e would permit combat trauma specialists to be closer to the casualty's point of injury as it is to move with combat forces and evacuate casualties to other treatment facilities .

the mv - t was to enhance the ability to provide advanced trauma management / advanced trauma life support forward in the battle area and both mv - e and mv - t would have been capable of conducting medical procedures and treatments using telemedicine systems .

both would have four - man crews and the capability to carry four patients .

field recovery and maintenance vehicle ( frmv ) ( xm1205 ) the frmv would have been the fcs bct's recovery and maintenance system .

the frmv was to have a crew of three , plus additional space for up to three recovered crew members .

unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) each bct is to have a number of uavs .

while these uavs are to provide a variety of capabilities to forces on the ground , some experts note that they could also present an air space management challenge to not only manned army aviation assets , but also to navy , marine corps , air force , and other nation's aircraft that might be providing support to army ground operations .

the following are brief descriptions of the army's two classes of uavs: class i uavs ( xm156 ) class i uavs are intended to provide reconnaissance , surveillance , and target acquisition ( rsta ) at the platoon level .

weighing less than 15 pounds each , these class i uavs are intended to operate in urban and jungle terrain and have a vertical takeoff and landing capability .

they are to be used to observe routes and targets and can provide limited communications transmissions relay .

the class i uav are to be controlled by dismounted soldiers and can also be controlled by selected ground vehicles , and have an endurance of 50 minutes over an 8 kilometer area , and a 10,500 foot maximum ceiling .

class iv uavs ( xm157 ) class iv uavs are intended to provide bct commanders with a long endurance capability .

it is intended to stay aloft for 72 continuous hours and operate over a 75 kilometer radius with a maximum ceiling of 16,500 feet .

it is also planned to interface with other manned and unmanned aerial vehicles and be able to take off and land without a dedicated airfield .

unmanned ground vehicles ( ugvs ) armed robotic vehicle - assault light ( arv - al ) ( xm1219 ) the arv was originally intended to come in two variants — the assault variant and the reconnaissance , surveillance , and target acquisition ( rsta ) variant .

the rsta variant has been deferred as part of the army's 2007 fcs program restructuring .

the two variants were to share a common chassis .

the assault light variant was to provide remote reconnaissance capability , deploy sensors , and employ its direct fire weapons and special munitions at targets such as buildings , bunkers , and tunnels .

it was also intended to be able to conduct battle damage assessments , act as a communications relay , and support both mounted and dismounted forces with direct and anti - tank fire as well as occupy key terrain .

small unmanned ground vehicle ( sugv ) ( xm1216 ) the sugv is a small , lightweight , manportable ugv capable of operating in urban terrain , tunnels , and caves .

the sugv is to weigh 30 pounds , operate for six hours without a battery recharge , and have a 1 kilometer ground range and a 200 meter tunnel range .

its modular design is intended to carry a variety of payloads which are to enable it to perform high - risk intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) missions , and chemical weapons or toxic industrial chemical reconnaissance .

multifunctional utility / logistics and equipment vehicle ( mule ) the mule is a ugv that is to support dismounted infantry .

it is to come in two variants sharing a common chassis — a transport variant ( xm1217 ) and a countermine variant ( xm1218 ) .

the transport variant is to be able to carry 1,900 to 2,400 pounds of equipment and rucksacks for dismounted infantry and follow them in complex and rough terrain .

the countermine variant is to have the capability to detect , mark , and neutralize anti - tank mines .

unattended ground sensors ( ugs ) ugs are divided into two groups — tactical ugs and urban ugs — and are described as follows: tactical ugs ( an / gsr - 10 ) tactical ugs include intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) sensors and chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) sensors .

these sensors are to employ a variety of sensing technologies and integrated into the overall network .

they are intended to be deployed by hand , by vehicle , or by robot and have a 48-hour endurance .

they are intended to be expendable , low - cost sensors used for such tasks as perimeter defense , surveillance , target acquisition , and cbrn early warning .

urban ugs ( an / gsr - 9 ) the urban ugs can be employed by soldiers , vehicles , or robots and are intended to provide situation awareness inside and outside of buildings for force protection and also for previously cleared buildings and areas .

non - line - of - sight launch system ( nlos - ls ) ( xm501 ) nlos - ls is to consist of missiles in a deployable , platform - independent , container launch unit ( clu ) , which can be fired in an unmanned and remote mode .

each clu is to have a fire control system and 15 missiles consisting of precision attack missiles ( pam ) .

the pam is to have two employment modes — a direct - fire and a fast attack mode or a boost - glide mode .

the missile is intended to receive target information prior to launch and receive and respond to target location updates while in flight .

the pam can be fired in the laser - designated mode and transmit near real - time target imagery prior to impact .

the network the fcs network program is to continue but would likely be significantly modified because of the cancellation of the mgvs .

the original fcs network was to have consisted of four interactive components — the system - of - systems common operating environment ( soscoe ) ; battle command ( bc ) software ; communications and computers ( cc ) ; and intelligence , reconnaissance and surveillance ( isr ) systems .

system - of - systems common operating environment ( soscoe ) the soscoe is to enable the integration of a variety of software packages into the network .

it is intended to use commercial , off - the - shelf hardware and allow for the integration of critical interoperability packages that translate army , navy , air force , marine corps , and allied message formats into internal message formats .

battle command ( bc ) software battle command mission applications are to include mission planning and preparation , situational understanding , battle command and mission execution , and warfighter - machine interface .

mission planning and preparation this consists of 16 different functions that provide units with the following automated capabilities: the development of deliberate , anticipatory , and rapid - response plans .

the ability to perform plan assessments and evaluations .

the ability to perform terrain analysis .

the conduct of mission rehearsals .

the conduct of after action reviews .

situational understanding this consists of 10 different packages that allow the user to better comprehend his surroundings .

these packages employ map information and a variety of databases that help to determine enemy locations and capabilities , infer enemy intentions , and assess the threat to u.s. forces .

battle command and execution this package contains a variety of planning and decision aids to help commanders make rapid , informed , and accurate decisions during battle .

these packages can also be used in the training and rehearsal modes .

warfighter - machine interface package this package receives soldier - generated information and displays information across all fcs platforms for soldier use .

communications and computer ( cc ) systems the communications and computer network is intended to provide secure , reliable access to information over extended distances and complex terrain .

this network is not intended to rely on a large and separate infrastructure because it is to be embedded in combat vehicles and move with the combat units .

the communications network is to consist of a variety of systems , such as the joint tactical radio system ( jtrs ) , wideband network waveform and soldier radio waveform systems , network data link , and the warfighter information network tactical ( win - t ) .

intelligence , reconnaissance and surveillance ( isr ) systems the intelligence , reconnaissance and surveillance system is to be a distributed and networked array of multispectral isr sensors intended to provide timely and accurate situational awareness to the force .

in addition , the isr system is intended to help formations avoid enemy fires while providing precision , networked fires to the unit .

