significant amounts of technically recoverable oil and gas resources are projected to be onfederal public lands ( see table 7 ) .

however , energy development on some of these lands has beenrestricted because they are considered environmentally sensitive or unique .

these restricted areasmay contain sizable amounts of oil and natural gas , according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) and the energy information administration ( eia ) .

the conflict between environmental concerns and the need for increased domestic energyproduction from public lands is a major policy issue .

for example , the conference report on theomnibus energy bill ( h.r .

6 ) and the senate substitute , s. 2095 hasprovisions that would examine restrictions and impediments to oil and gas development on publiclands , including an evaluation of the current permitting process .

reportedly , reflecting its energytask force recommendations , the bush administration has its own initiative to expedite the oil andgas permitting process on federal lands .

oil and gas development practices have generated considerable debate in congress since theearly years of the industry .

originally , oil and gas resources on public lands could be transferred toprivate ownership ( patented ) under the mining law of 1872 - - essentially , lands containing oil weresold at a fixed price per acre to the first claimant .

 ( 1 ) conservationists contended that there was widespread abuse of themining law that led to wasteful use of public lands .

in 1909 president taft withdrew 3 million acresof lands prospective for oil in wyoming and california from availability under the mining law of1872 .

taft requested congressional approval for his action , leading to the pickett act of 1910 ( 43u.s.c .

141-143 ) , which explicitly recognized executive branch authority to make such public landswithdrawals .

 ( 2 ) congress eventually decided that defense - related minerals - - including oil and gas - - shouldremain under federal ownership .

as a result , the mineral lands leasing act of 1920 ( 30 u.s.c .

181,et .

seq. ) .

removed oil and gas from the patenting process and placed it under a leasing system .

underthe leasing system , the federal government has raised billions of dollars in revenues from royalties,rents and bonus bids .

 ( 3 ) minerals owned by the federal government under lands held privately ( patented ) creates a"split - estate. .

there are other split - estate situations as well: surface and mineral rights held bydifferent private interests , or state owned mineral rights and privately held surface rights .

threemajor federal statutes ( 4 ) allowed the federal government to issue patents to land but reserve the right to the minerals .

underthese statutes the mineral estate became the dominant estate and the surface use servient .

there arespecific policies and procedures that must be followed by the mineral estate holder in order todevelop minerals .

generally , for oil and gas , a federal lessee must meet one of the followingconditions: a surface agreement ; written consent or a waiver from the private surface owner foraccess to the leased lands ; payment for loss or damages ; or the execution of a bond not less than$1,000 .

 ( 5 ) about 11% ofthe public lands are under the split - estate category .

however , in wyoming 50% of the lands aresplit - estate and in montana about 57% .

 ( 6 ) environmentalists have supported public land withdrawals and other restrictions because ofconcern that the mining law of 1872 and then the mineral leasing act of 1920 provided inadequateenvironmental protection .

recently , ranchers and other groups have expressed similar concernsspecifically about the impact of development on water and land .

conversely , development supporterscontend that numerous environmental laws are now in place to regulate oil and gas development onpublic lands .

they note that the federal government must comply with the national environmentalpolicy act ( nepa ) in leasing oil and gas and that the oil and gas industry must comply withapplicable requirements of the clean water and clean air acts , safe drinking water act , theresource conservation and recovery act , and state and federal reclamation standards , among otherlaws .

the industry complains that environmental and other reviews often create long delays indrilling exploratory and production wells on leased lands .

the proposed conference report on a comprehensive energy bill ( h.r .

6 ) and s. 2095 addresses some of the industry and bush administration concerns overincreasing domestic oil and natural gas supplies .

title iii of h.r .

6 and s. 2095 , if enacted , would establish a white house office of federal project coordination to helpexpedite permitting on public lands and identify restrictions and impediments to resourcedevelopment on public lands .

environmentalists and other public land users argue that theseprovisions would cause harm to the environment and prevent the land from being used in otherproductive ways .

the conference report has been approved by the house but not in the senate as aresult of a cloture motion on november 21 , 2003 that did not get the required 60 votes , ( 57- 40 ) .

thesenate's scaled - back substitute bill , s. 2095 is awaiting action .

this report provides a general overview of the oil and gas leasing system on u.s. publiclands , including information on permitting , production , and reserves .

the report describes thecontribution of onshore oil and gas towards meeting u.s. energy demand and discusses currentestimates of reserves in restricted areas .

an appendix provides some historical background on landswithdrawn from mineral development , the role of the bureau of land management ( blm ) , andapplication of the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) in the context of oil and gasdevelopment .

for information on u.s. offshore oil and gas development , see crs report rl31521 , outercontinental shelf oil and gas: energy security and other major issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

leasing of onshore federal public lands for oil and gas development is based on multiple - use / sustained yield resource management plans ( rmps ) developed by the bureau of land management in the department of the interior .

in accordance with those land - use plans , tracts of public land withoil and gas potential are offered for competitive leasing each quarter .

after a lease is awarded , adrilling permit is required for each exploratory or production well .

industry has long complainedthat this process is too lengthy .

in fy2002 , the federal government issued 1,765 new oil and gas leases on public landstotaling about 1.4 million acres .

through the end of fy2002 , about 18.6 million acres of publiclands had been leased for oil and gas development .

the availability of public lands for oil and gas leasing can be divided into three categories:lands open under standard lease terms , open to leasing with restrictions , and closed to leasing .

areasare closed to leasing pursuant to land withdrawals or other mechanisms .

much of this withdrawnland consists of wilderness areas , national parks and monuments , and other unique andenvironmentally sensitive areas that are unlikely to ever be reopened to oil and gas leasing .

 ( 13 ) some lands are closed toleasing pending land use planning or nepa compliance , while other areas are closed because offederal land management decisions on endangered species habitat or historical sites .

some of thoserestricted areas may be opened by future administrative decisions .

a blm study ( 14 ) determined that of the approximately 700 million acres of federal subsurface minerals under theagency's jurisdiction in 2000 , approximately 165 million acres have been withdrawn from mineralentry , leasing , and sale , subject to valid existing subsurface mineral rights .

 ( 15 ) lands in the national parksystem ( except national recreation areas ) , wilderness preservation system , and the arctic nationalwildlife refuge ( anwr ) are among those that are statutorily withdrawn .

also of the 700 millionacres , mineral development on another 182 million acres was subject to the approval of the surfacemanagement agency , and must not be in conflict with land designations and plans , according to theblm .

wildlife refuges ( except anwr ) , wilderness study areas , and roadless areas are examples oflands in this category , although many other wildlife refuges also are withdrawn from leasing .

public lands that are open to leasing may be subject to a variety of restrictions imposed bythe department of the interior .

such restrictions include leasing with no surface occupancy , areasgenerally off - limits with the exception of directional drilling ; leasing with timing limitations , whichprotect wildlife during certain times of the year ; and leasing with controlled surface use , whichrequires a mitigation plan for specific areas under the lease .

industry sources claim some of theselease stipulations are so stringent that they constitute "de facto" closures to oil and gas development .

however , development has proceeded under some of these stipulations .

energy and mineral industry representatives maintain that federal withdrawals inhibitexploration and limit the reserve base even when conditions are favorable for production .

theindustry argues that substantial amounts of public land have been unnecessarily withdrawn throughadministrative actions to pursue preservation goals .

however , environmental groups and othersgenerally contend the withdrawals are the most effective protection for the non - mineral values ofpublic lands .

coalbed methane gas is natural gas dissolved in water and trapped in a coalbed .

there areseveral important variables that determine the quantity of methane gas , including the depth of coal,pressure , temperature , thickness , and composition .

to extract coalbed methane ( cbm ) , water must be removed from the coal by pumping,which drops the water pressure that traps the gas and allows the gas to flow .

some operators fracturecoal formations and allow water and gas to move out of the coal .

concerns have arisen concerninggroundwater contamination .

the usgs reports that the water pumped out of coal beds can vary inquality .

some water can be discharged near the surface for reuse if "sufficiently fresh," or if the waterdoes not meet reuse standards , it can be disposed of by subsurface injection or surface discharge intowetlands , streams , or impoundments .

 ( 44 ) water quality and water disposal have become central concernsin the production of cbm .

a 1980 tax credit ( section 29 ) for unconventional fuel production provided a major incentivefor cbm development .

significant production of cbm began in 1987 .

production has increasedfour - fold since 1991 , and coalbed gas accounted for about 8% ( 1.6 tcf ) of the 18.8 tcf of natural gasproduced in 2002 in the united states .

 ( 45 ) in 2002 there were 10,000 cbm wells also producing 1.65million barrels of water ( 46 ) per day .

the leading producers are in new mexico , colorado,and wyoming .

production rates vary widely because of the heterogenous geology of coalbeds .

doeestimates that out of the 39,000 new wells anticipated by 2010 , 23,900 will be on federal lands .

 ( 47 ) cbm reserves are still largely undeveloped .

of the estimated 700 tcf of coalbed methane inthe united states , only about 100 tcf are classified as economically recoverable .

the previouslydiscussed eia study of u.s. oil and gas resources found that of the 293 tcf of unproved technicallyrecoverable unconventional fuels in the rocky mountain region , about 46 tcf are coalbed methane,of which about 20% would fall under the "no access" category .

coalbed methane proved reserveswere 18.5 tcf in 2001 , which was 10% of u.s. dry gas reserves .

cbm reserves have more thandoubled since 1991 .

two states , colorado and new mexico , account for more than half of u.s.cbm reserves .

wyoming , utah , and alabama also have significant reserves .

the san juanbasin ( 48 ) is the mostproductive .

it contains 65% of known reserves and 80% of production .

the warrior basin inalabama is the second most productive , claiming 9% of u.s. production and 8% of reserves .

 ( 49 ) usgs estimates cbmresources in the powder river basin ( prb ) at 39 tcf .

 ( 50 ) the federal government owns over half the mineral rights in the prb , while the majority ofthe surface rights are held privately , resulting in spilt - estates .

however , most of the currentproduction of cbm is taking place on private lands .

over 80% of the land overlying of cbm wellsis privately or state held in wyoming , and some surface owners oppose development and otherscontend they are not compensated fairly for surface use .

 ( 51 ) a number of concerns has come up regarding surface useagreements between the surface owner and the mineral lessee or mineral owner .

the central concernfor the surface owner is receiving adequate compensation for damages from cbm or productionfrom other extractive industries .

in wyoming , stakeholders such as the petroleum association,ranchers and the farm bureau federation established the wyoming split - estate initiative in 2002.they have created a new framework to help resolve conflicts between surface owners and mineralowners or lessees .

 ( 52 ) .

demand for oil is forecast to rise 1.6% annually to 28 mbd by 2025 in the eia reference case.because consumption would rise faster than domestic production , imports are projected to reachnearly 65% .

u.s. demand for natural gas is forecast to rise 1.4% annually , reaching 31.4 tcf by 2025 .

the outlook is mixed for increased oil and natural gas production from leases on u.s. publiclands or areas where the united states holds mineral rights .

while domestic natural gas productionand natural gas imports are expected to rise , it is unclear how much of the domestic supply will comefrom public lands that are currently restricted or off - limits .

the bush administration has initiatedactions to ease restrictions in instances where this can be done administratively .

how muchopposition these initiatives will generate is unclear .

the media has reported challenges based onalleged violations of blm's multiple - use mandate .

areas statutorily removed would requirecongressional action to change their status .

on available lands , production of conventional naturalgas is expected to remain steady , even though significantly more wells and higher - cost deeper wellswill be drilled .

onshore unconventional natural gas ( over 70% located in the rocky mountainregion ) is forecast to increase its share from 32% in 2002 to 43% of production in the lower 48 by2025 .

the central concern for industry is to have greater access to federal lands believed to possessoil and gas potential and to expedite the permitting process .

environmental groups and some surfaceowners are concerned that drilling and production would damage sensitive lands , wildlife habitat andsurface water and groundwater quality and quantity .

meeting u.s. energy demand will likely occur by using a mix of increased domestic outputplus higher imports .

the rocky mountain region might account for as much as 40% of u.s. naturalgas production in 2025 , up from about 25% in 2002 .

 ( 60 ) the united states will likely rely more on natural gas imports,primarily lng from stable countries , as well as increased production from the deepwater ocs .

a proposed alaskan natural gas pipeline , if built , could provide 2.71 tcf by 2025 .

oil and gas firms continue worldwide exploration and development seeking the bestreturn for their investment ; a significant resource base , political stability , and financing arefactors considered when making investment decisions .

the united states scores well for politicalstability and its resource endowment is still attractive , but other concerns such as the impact onthe environment , on residents and society must be weighed in making public land use decisions .

the terms for a competitive lease are: maximum acreage - - 2,500 acres , except alaska - - 5,760acres $2 / acre minimum bonus bid five - year term bond requirement - - $10,000 for noncompetitive leases , the terms are: maximum acreage - - 10,240 acres in all states no minimum bonus bid 10-year term $75 application filing fee bond requirement - - $10,000 rents and royalties on competitive and noncompetitive leases are: rentals - - not less than $1.50 / acre for 1-5 years rentals - - not less than $2 / acre each year thereafter royalty - - not less than 12.5% in amount or value of the productionremoved or sold from the lease table 8 .

oil and natural gas production in u.s. onshorefederal lands , 1991-2000 source: mms , mineral reserves , 2000 , p.80 .

the onshore leasing program brings in significant annual revenues to the u.s. treasury.revenues include bonus bids , rents and royalties ( see table 8 ) .

the revenues are collected by theminerals management service ( mms , an agency within the interior department ) and distributed tostates , the general fund of the u.s. treasury , and other designated programs .

all states exceptalaska receive 50% of the revenues collected from public land oil and gas leases within theirboundaries .

alaska receives 90% of all revenues collected .

revenues from federal leases varywidely over the years because of price fluctuations ; for example , revenues increased significantlyin 2000 over 1999 because of higher oil and gas prices .

the number of federal oil and gas leasesstood at 23,000 and encompassed over 17 million acres of federal public lands in 2001 .

the first public lands withdrawal took place in 1872 to establish yellowstone national park,and since that time congress has created other national parks at regular intervals .

 ( 61 ) the national park system ( nps ) was created in 1916 to "conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and the wildlife [in national parks] and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such a manner and by suchmeans to leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations" ( 16 u.s.c .

1 ) .

 ( 62 ) in the early days of thenps , its philosophy was not synchronized with the forest service ( fs ) .

the fs philosophy was that"all the resources of the forest reserves are for use and where conflicting interests exist the issue willbe resolved based on the greatest good for the greatest number of people in the long run. .

earlytension arose between "conservationists" promoting national parks and "utilitarians" promotingnational forests .

 ( 63 ) .

during the early 1900s the focus of the public lands withdrawal debate was on whether thecommander - in - chief had authority to make the withdrawal order based on national security .

withdrawals were defined as an administration action / order that changed the designation of aspecific parcel of land from available to unavailable for activities ranging from homesteading toresource exploitation .

the president acted as chief custodian of the public lands and with tacitapproval of congress withdrew public land from entry or location by the private sector .

theconstitution vests authority over public lands in congress rather than with the executive , butpresidents have repeatedly exercised "an inherent power to withdraw" or reserve some lands .

aprime example is the establishment of military reservations out of public lands .

withdrawals also occurred under the antiquities act of 1906 ( 16 u.s.c.a .

88 , 433-431 ) , thetaylor grazing act of 1934 ( 43 u.s.c .

315 et .

seq .

 ) , the organic act of 1897 ( 16 u.s.c.a .

473 ) ,the alaska native claims settlement act of 1971 ( 43 u.s.c.a .

1601 et .

seq. ) .

and the wildernessact of 1964 ( 16 u.s.c.a .

1131-36 ) .

national monuments can be created by the executive branchthrough statutory delegation under the antiquities act .

the president can reserve the "smallest areacompatible with the proper care and management" of the protected sites on federal lands that containhistoric landmarks , prehistoric structures , and other objects of scientific interest .

under the taylorgrazing act , 140 million acres were withdrawn from homesteading laws .

the organic act was usedto regulate and designate recreation and "primitive areas. .

under flpma , withdrawals can be madeby the executive branch or the congress .

congressional designations as "wilderness" were later considered essential by many becausean administrative wilderness designation could be revoked administratively any time .

the alaskanative claims settlement act withdrew large areas of alaska from availability for resource use ordevelopment pending congressional disposition .

the wilderness act required that the forest servicestudy 5.4 million acres of designated primitive areas and report on wilderness suitability .

wildernessis generally defined as an area "off limits to development to avoid destruction of pristinecharacteristics of nature. .

 ( 64 ) the wilderness act states that "no federal lands shall bedesignated as wilderness areas except as provided for in the wilderness act or by an act ofcongress" ( 16 u.s.c .

1131 ( a ) ) .

currently , there are four types of withdrawal: first , there are instances where congress hasthe sole authority to withdraw or reserve public lands .

for example , creating national parks andwilderness areas and in some cases national wildlife refuges can only be done by an act of congress .

second , the executive branch has used power delegated to it by congress under the previouslymentioned antiquities act of 1906 and the pickett act of 1910 .

third , congress may withdrawspecific resources such as when oil , gas , coal , and like minerals were removed from the generalmining law of 1872 .

lastly , there is the "general congressional" withdrawal , ( 65 ) which allows lands to beremoved from potential development pending "final disposition. .

 ( 66 ) .

modern executive withdrawals are governed by flpma .

 ( 67 ) flpma ( 68 ) established a federal landuse management policy that includes land use planning based on a multiple - use approach that allowsfor significant public and congressional input .

sections of flpma detail procedures ( see 43 u.s.c.1714 ( d ) ) for the sales and acquisition of public lands , withdrawals , and exchanges of public lands.under flpma , withdrawals can be made by the executive or the congress .

the withdrawal can betemporary or permanent .

flpma replaced the implied authority of the executive branch to withdraw public lands withspecifically defined procedures .

withdrawals of parcels exceeding 5,000 acres requirecongressional approval .

the land can be withdrawn for 20 years subject to renewal .

proposedwithdrawals must be submitted to congress with a report explaining the reasons for the withdrawalin detail , effects on the economy and environment , alternatives to withdrawal , how blm isconsulting with other agencies and groups , and the geological and mineral potential of the areasproposed .

the secretary of the interior , however , can make emergency withdrawals of any size forup to three years .

a report must be available three months following a withdrawal .

flpma mandated a review of public land withdrawals in 11 western states to determinewhether , and for how long , existing withdrawals should be continued ( 43 u.s.c .

1714 ( l ) ) .

therewere millions of acres withdrawn prior to flpma .

under the law , the secretary of the interior candetermine whether and for how long the continuation of existing withdrawals are consistent withstatutory objectives of the programs under which lands were dedicated in the first place .

blm continues to review approximately 70 million withdrawn acres , giving priority to about26 million acres that are expected to be returned by another agency to blm , or , in the case of blmwithdrawals , become available for one or more uses .

as of november 2000 , blm had completedreviewing approximately 7 million withdrawn acres , mostly blm and bureau of reclamation land ; the withdrawals on more than 6 million of these acres have been revoked .

according to the blm manual , retention of a withdrawal requires a compelling show of need , and an agency manager"recommending that lands not be opened to multiple use , particularly mining and mineral leasing.that manager must convince the blm director , the secretary , and watchful segments of the public,that there is no reasonable alternative to continued withdrawal or classification. .

the review processis continuous over the next several years , in part because the withdrawals must be considered inblm's planning process and be supported by documentation under the national environmentalpolicy act ( nepa ) .

some lands , through revocation and terminations , could be developed for oil and gasresources .

other areas deemed not suitable for mineral development , will likely remained closed orrestricted .

