on november 19 , 2012 , the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) , the country's largest and oldest guerrilla organization , announced a two - month unilateral ceasefire as peace talks continued in havana , cuba .

a month earlier , the colombian government began formal peace talks with the farc in oslo , norway .

 ( for more details , see " peace talks " below. ) .

on september 18 , 2012 , colombian drug kingpin daniel barrera ( also known as "el loco" ) was captured in venezuela in a joint colombian - venezuelan operation assisted by the u.s. and british intelligence agencies , with support from the u.s. drug enforcement administration .

the barrera arrest — hailed as the demise of the "last of the great kingpins" by president santos — signifies intensified counternarcotics cooperation between venezuela and colombia .

 ( see " relations with venezuela and ecuador " below. ) .

on september 4 , 2012 , president santos and farc leader rodrigo londoño echeverri , ( also known as "timochenko" ) announced that official peace talks would begin in oslo , norway , and continue in cuba .

in late august , president santos surprised many when he announced that the government had begun "exploratory peace talks" with the farc .

president santos said that the colombian military would retain its presence in every part of the country and that a smaller insurgent group was interested in joining in the negotiation process .

 ( see " peace talks " below. ) .

on july 30 , 2012 , the u.s. office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) announced that in its estimates colombia's potential cocaine production capabilities had fallen below peru's .

according to the estimate , colombia's 2011 potential cocaine production fell to 195 metric tons , 25% below the prior year estimate and 72% below the u.s. government estimate for 2001 .

 ( see " colombia and global drug trends " below. ) .

on june 27-28 , 2012 , the colombian congress , in a special session , voted to annul judicial reform legislation just approved in the prior regular session .

president santos refused to sign the final bill , which he claimed had been altered with "surprise" amendments .

the legislation , which was widely criticized , would have restricted the supreme court from investigating crimes committed by legislators , among other provisions .

the government had originally sponsored the judicial system reform .

 ( see " reforms under the santos administration " below. ) .

on may 15 , 2012 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement ( cfta ) went into force .

implementing legislation for the bilateral trade agreement had been approved by the u.s. congress in october and signed by president obama on october 21 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-42 ) .

 ( see " u.s. - colombia free trade agreement " below. ) .

on april 14-15 , 2012 , colombia hosted democratic leaders from 30 latin american countries , the united states , and canada at the sixth summit of the americas held in cartagena .

on april 2 , 2012 , the farc released its last 10 military and police hostages , some of whom had been held in the jungle for more than a dozen years .

the release of these kidnap victims , announced in february , was intended to show farc's willingness to engage in a peace process to end the armed conflict .

 ( see " current status of the farc " below. ) .

colombia is a south american nation of roughly 47 million people , the third - most populous country in latin america .

it is an ethnically diverse nation — 58% of the population is mestizo , 20% white , and 14% mulatto .

according to the u.s. department of state , official statistics suggest that afro - colombians and indigenous people are about 10% of the population , with 3% of the people self - identifying as indigenous .

at the same time , some nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) and human rights groups estimate that indigenous people and afro - colombians may make up 25% or higher .

colombia has one of the oldest democracies in latin america , yet it has been plagued by violence and a conflict that has lasted nearly five decades .

the country's rugged terrain historically made it difficult to establish state control over large swaths of the nation's territory .

high rates of poverty have also contributed to social upheaval in the country .

but colombia's economic picture has in recent years improved fairly steadily .

in 2011 , approximately 34% of colombians lived in poverty , down from 50% in 2002 .

colombia's economic growth rates have been strong , reaching 5.9% in 2011 and projected at 4.4% in 2012 .

security improvements and a more stable economy have attracted foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , which more than doubled in five years from roughly $6.5 billion in 2006 to more than $14 billion in 2011 , largely in the oil , manufacturing , and mining sectors .

nevertheless , income inequality and land ownership concentration are still significant problems .

the unemployment rate has hovered near or above 11% over the last five years , but is forecast to fall below 10% in 2012 according to some analysts .

the large , unregulated informal sector accounts for 50% to 60% of colombian workers .

drug trafficking has helped to perpetuate colombia's conflict by providing earnings to both left - and right - wing armed groups .

the two main leftist guerrilla groups are the farc and the national liberation army ( eln ) , both of which kidnap individuals for ransom , commit serious human rights violations , and carry out terrorist activities .

most of the rightist paramilitary groups were coordinated by the united self - defense forces of colombia ( auc ) , which disbanded in 2006 after more than 31,000 of its members demobilized .

all three groups ( the farc , eln , and auc ) were designated foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) by the u.s. government in the late 1990s and early 2000s .

members of the auc were accused of gross human rights abuses and collusion with the colombian armed forces in their fight against the farc and eln .

new illegally armed groups , including criminal bands some of which include re - armed paramilitaries , are now a significant challenge in colombian cities and towns .

drug production and trafficking continue to generate many millions of dollars annually for illicit groups .

as a result of the conflict and drug - related violence , colombia has one of the largest populations of internally displaced persons in the world , with more than 3.9 million displaced since 1997 .

from the 19 th century through much of the 20 th century , the liberal and conservative parties have dominated colombian politics .

but in recent years , these parties were weakened by their perceived inability to resolve the root causes of the violence in the country .

in 2002 , colombians elected an independent , álvaro uribe , as president , largely because of his aggressive plan to reduce violence in colombia .

uribe served two terms .

in 2010 , juan manuel santos was elected president from the national unity party ( described below ) .

the major political parties represented in the bicameral colombian congress include the liberal , conservative , alternative democratic pole , national unity , green and radical change parties , and several smaller political movements .

the leftist alternative democratic pole is the only major party in opposition to a "national unity" coalition that backs the santos government .

colombia's prominence in the global production of cocaine and heroin has long been a u.s. focus of counternarcotics efforts in the andean region .

on july 30 , 2012 , the u.s. office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) announced that in its estimates colombia's potential cocaine production capabilities had fallen below peru's and bolivia's .

according to the estimate , colombia's 2011 potential cocaine production fell to 195 metric tons , 25% below the prior year estimate and 72% below the u.s. government estimate for 2001 .

nearly the entire world's supply of cocaine is produced by just three countries: peru , bolivia , and colombia .

the major components of u.s. strategy have been drug crop eradication , interdiction , and alternative development programs , all with an eye to reducing the drug supply at its source .

until the mid - 1990s , peru and bolivia were the two major producers .

successful eradication and interdiction efforts in the 1980s and 1990s of coca and cocaine in peru and bolivia inadvertently pushed cultivation to colombia .

colombia eclipsed bolivia in 1995 and peru in 1997 .

cocaine production in colombia increased fivefold between 1993 and 1999 .

but by 2010 , cultivation of coca had decreased in colombia according to estimates published by the united nations , and pushed back into peru and bolivia .

this suggests the so - called "balloon effect" may be responsible .

this occurs when producers working to supply the illicit drug market move their operation to locations they perceive to have less enforcement — that is pressure in one part of the "balloon" moves the trade to another — yet total global production is mainly unaffected .

the estimates of the area under coca leaf cultivation and the volume of potential production of pure cocaine depend upon making assumptions from limited data .

the united nations office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) and the u.s. government have developed varying estimates that report midpoints in a range of likely cultivation and production , but u.s. and u.n. estimates often differ considerably .

the organizations also sometimes modify their estimates after more data is collected .

for example , unodc modified its 2008 calculation upward for colombia's production of pure cocaine from 430 metric tons to 450 metric tons .

on the other hand , the u.s. government changed its estimate of production of pure cocaine for 2008 downward from 295 metric tons to 280 metric tons .

in its annual coca cultivation survey for colombia published in june 2012 , unodc reported that 64,000 hectares of coca were grown in the country in 2011 .

this was a slight increase over the 62,000 hectares of coca detected in 2010 .

however , the unodc also estimated for 2011 that colombia's potential production of cocaine fell by 1% to 345 metric tons in 2011 .

in contrast , the u.s. government estimates for coca cultivation registered a 17% decline from 100,000 hectares in 2010 to 83,000 hectares in 2011 .

the white house office of national drug control policy announced that the u.s. government estimate for potential production of cocaine had in 2011 declined to 195 metric tons , a 72% reduction over the high point in 2001 of an estimated 700 metric tons .

the new u.s. production estimate placed colombia behind both peru and bolivia in pure cocaine production .

some observers maintain the divergent estimates are contradictory and do not present a coherent picture .

nevertheless , according to the state department's 2012 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) published in march 2012 , colombia produces about 95% of the cocaine seized in the united states .

in recent years , the colombian government , with significant u.s. assistance , has stepped up its eradication efforts .

ondcp has credited ongoing aerial spraying and manual eradication programs with recent declines in the cocaine productivity of the coca cultivated in colombia .

in the 2011 incsr , the state department notes that the eradication efforts goals were set lower based on what was accomplished in 2009 .

manual eradication in 2010 declined considerably to below its goal of 70,000 hectares , when the government managed to manually eradicate about 45,000 hectares of coca "due to budgetary disbursement delays , security concerns , and the dispersion of coca crops to smaller fields. .

in 2010 , the government eradicated nearly 102,000 hectares by spraying , slightly above its stated aerial eradication target .

in 2011 , according to the latest incsr , colombia manually eradicated 34,592 hectares and sprayed slightly over 102,000 hectares .

after a long period of stable prices , purity , and availability of illegal drugs in the united states , evidence indicated that the price of cocaine rose significantly between january 2007 and september 2010 .

according to the department of justice's national drug intelligence center ( ndic ) report , national drug threat assessment 2011 , the average street price for a pure gram of cocaine rose from $97.71 to just under $165 in that time period , while average street sale purity declined from 67% to 47% , a decline of 30% .

the supply of drugs is often judged by changes in price , with higher prices signifying decreased supply ( or increased demand which does not appear to be the case in the united states ) .

declining purity also measures decreased availability .

the ndic report , published in august 2011 , found a sharp decline in cocaine availability in the united states since 2006 that may have been responsible for price increases and purity declines .

the report identifies no single factor for the decline in cocaine availability .

rather , a combination of factors , including decreased ability to move cocaine from south america due to intercartel fighting in mexico and counterdrug activity , decreased production of cocaine in colombia , and cocaine flowing to non - u.s. markets ( such as europe ) , all likely contributed to decreased amounts being smuggled into the united states .

some observers express caution in interpreting recent trends in price , purity , and availability .

they maintain that short - term fluctuations are not uncommon and may not be sustainable .

analysts note that over the longer term retail cocaine prices have dropped dramatically since the mid - 1980s .

even with the significant increase in price for a pure gram of cocaine between 2007 and 2010 , the price has still not surpassed the level of 2001 ( a year after the inception of plan colombia ) , when it was $194 per gram .

most heroin consumed in the united states comes from mexico and a lesser quantity from colombia .

in an october 2008 report on plan colombia , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reported that opium poppy cultivation and heroin production had declined in colombia by about 50% between 2000 and 2006 .

in 2008 , the u.n. reported that opium production dropped to 394 hectares in colombia , the lowest figure in the last 14 years of reporting .

in 2009 and 2010 , the number of hectares under cultivation continued to decline dropping to a low of 346 hectares in 2010 .

another u.s. policy focus in the andean region is helping colombia deal with armed insurgencies that are involved in drug trafficking and have a destabilizing effect on regional security .

colombia shares a 1,367-mile border with venezuela , approximately 1,000 miles each with peru and brazil , and much smaller borders with ecuador and panama .

with porous borders amid rugged territory and an inconsistent state presence , all of colombia's border regions have been particularly problematic .

the conflict in colombia and its associated drug trafficking have led to spillover effects in colombia's neighboring countries , especially venezuela and ecuador .

colombia's relations with its neighbors have been strained by the spillover from colombia's counter - insurgency operations , including cross - border military activity .

colombia has asked both venezuela and ecuador for assistance in patrolling border areas where the farc and , in some cases , the eln are strong .

cooperation between colombia and its neighbors , venezuela and ecuador , who had tense relations with the uribe administration , has markedly increased under president santos .

both governments re - established diplomatic relations with colombia following the santos inauguration .

ties with ecuador were severed for 33 months because of the 2008 bombing raid by the colombian military on a farc camp located inside ecuador near the border .

in response to that raid , venezuela also broke off relations and sent troops to its border with colombia .

following a diplomatic intervention , venezuela restored relations .

personal relations between venezuelan president hugo chávez and president uribe were quite tense as both leaders accused one another of undermining their governments .

in july 2009 , venezuela withdrew its ambassador and imposed a trade embargo following colombian accusations that venezuelan government military equipment had been discovered in a farc camp .

by the year's end , bilateral trade fell by one - third as a result of the trade cut off , weakening one of colombia's most important trade relationships .

in october 2009 , a u.s. - colombia base agreement that was signed that permitted u.s. troops to use seven military facilities in colombia further inflamed president chávez .

he claimed that the placement of u.s. troops in colombia was a threat and described the now stalled base agreement as "fanning the winds of war" across the region .

in its last month in office , in july 2010 , the uribe government presented evidence at the organization of american states ( oas ) that the venezuelan government was harboring farc and eln fighters in numerous camps inside its territory .

these charges brought relations to a nadir .

after president santos took office , venezuela and colombia restored diplomatic ties in late august 2010 , and ecuador renewed full diplomatic relations with colombia in december 2010 .

since then , bilateral cooperation on issues such as trade , cross - border crime , and counternarcotics has been strengthened .

in 2011 , several farc operatives have been captured in both countries and extradited to colombia .

a number of alleged drug kingpins wanted in colombia have been arrested in venezuela , including maximiliano bonilla ( known as "valenciano" ) in november 2011 and daniel barrera ( alias "el loco" ) in september 2012 .

barrera's arrest in the venezuelan border state of táchira involved a joint venezuelan - colombian operation with support from u.s. and british intelligence agencies .

barrera was allegedly deeply involved in drug trafficking for more than two decades and served as a bridge between leftist insurgents , rightwing paramilitaries , and some of colombia's largest drug trafficking organizations .

the state department's country reports on terrorism 2011 , issued in july 2012 , cites the increasing bilateral cooperation of venezuela and colombia on security .

according to the report , president chávez made statements that illegal armed groups will not be tolerated on venezuelan territory .

however , the report also notes that four venezuelan government officials are targets of u.s. sanctions for their direct links to the farc's drug and arms trafficking activities .

despite government denials , many observers believe that venezuela is used for rest , resupply , and drug transit by the farc and to a lesser degree the eln .

to colombia's south , the report states "ecuador's greatest counterterrorism and security challenge remained the presence of colombian terrorist groups in the extremely difficult terrain along the porous 450-mile border with colombia. .

ecuador's ability to combat these groups has been limited by resources and capabilities .

ecuador has other issues with colombia .

it receives high numbers of refugees from colombia's conflict and opposes aerial spraying of coca in southern colombia that it fears drifts into ecuador and damages licit ecuadorian crops .

however , relations between colombia and ecuador have steadily improved under the santos administration , a process that began in the later months of the uribe administration .

many analysts see this regional diplomacy by president santos as an effort to build a more balanced approach to neighboring countries and to end colombia's relative isolation in the region that had grown during the uribe administration .

others maintain that future relations with venezuela are uncertain , given the unpredictability of recently re - elected president chávez and concerns about his health .

the supportive role of venezuela to the peace negotiations with the farc also elevates the relationship , which is decried by former president uribe and other critics of the peace talks .

the rapprochement with venezuela has had its trade offs for the united states .

when drug kingpin walid makled garcia was arrested in colombia on a u.s. warrant in august 2010 and requested for extradition by both venezuela and the united states , the colombian government honored the venezuelan request and returned makled to venezuela in may 2011 .

plan colombia was developed by president pastrana ( 1998-2002 ) as a strategy to end the country's 40-year - old armed conflict , eliminate drug trafficking , and promote development .

the initial plan was a $7.5 billion six - year plan , with colombia providing $4 billion of the funding and requesting $3.5 billion from the international community .

the u.s. congress approved legislation in support of plan colombia in 2000 , as part of the military construction appropriations act of 2001 ( p.l .

106-246 ) providing $1.3 billion for counternarcotics and related efforts in colombia and neighboring countries .

plan colombia was never authorized by congress .

subsequent funding has been appropriated for plan colombia and follow - on plans annually .

president bush continued support for the plan under the andean counterdrug program ( acp ) aid account .

the acp account funded counternarcotics programs in bolivia , brazil , ecuador , panama , peru , and , until fy2008 , venezuela .

the u.s. - colombian partnership , initially focused on counternarcotics , shifted in 2002 .

because narcotics trafficking and the guerrilla insurgency had become intertwined problems , congress granted the administration flexibility to use u.s. counterdrug funds for a unified campaign to fight drug trafficking and terrorist organizations .

formerly , the acp and foreign military financing ( fmf ) accounts supported the eradication of coca and opium poppy crops , the interdiction of narcotics shipments , and the protection of infrastructure through training and material support for colombia's security forces .

u.s. assistance supports alternative crop development and infrastructure development to give coca and opium poppy farmers alternative sources of income , and institution building programs to strengthen democracy .

in fy2008 , alternative development programs were shifted from the acp account to the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

u.s. assistance includes human rights training programs for security personnel in response to congressional concern about human rights abuses committed by colombian security forces .

congress has prohibited u.s. personnel from directly participating in combat missions .

it has also capped the number of u.s. military and civilian contractor personnel who can be stationed in colombia in support of plan colombia at 800 and 600 respectively , although numbers deployed have been well below the 1,400-person cap in recent years .

the united states also supports the interdiction of drug shipments through the air bridge denial ( abd ) program .

the air bridge denial program began as a joint interdiction effort between the united states , peru , and colombia to identify drug flights from peru to colombia and to interdict them by forcing them to land , or , if necessary , by shooting down suspect aircraft .

the program was suspended in 2001 after a small airplane carrying american missionaries was mistakenly shot down over peru .

following the establishment of new safeguards against accidental shootdowns , the program was renewed in colombia in 2003 .

in 2008 , the united states began turning over operational and financial responsibility for plan colombia programs to the colombians in a process of nationalization .

over the last four years , as u.s. funding for plan colombia has gradually declined , several programs were successfully nationalized , including the abd program and several police and military aviation operations .

the nationalization efforts are not intended to end u.s. assistance , but rather reduce it to pre - plan colombia levels adjusted for inflation .

upon taking office , president uribe announced that aerial eradication , along with alternative crop development , would form a significant basis of the government's efforts to reduce cocaine production .

the plan colombia eradication spraying program began in december 2000 with the u.s. - funded counternarcotics brigade in putumayo .

it should be noted , however , that spraying does not prevent , although it may discourage , the replanting of illicit crops .

according to the 2012 international narcotics control strategy report , manual eradication in colombia fell to 45,000 hectares in 2010 and was just over 34,000 hectares in 2011 not reaching the targets set due to "security concerns , budget issues , and the dispersion of coca to smaller fields. .

the report notes that 9 manual eradicators were killed in 2011 ( and 32 injured ) due to attacks from traffickers and other illegally armed groups .

as discussed above , the united nations and united states use different methodologies to estimate annual coca cultivation levels in colombia .

the different methodologies yield results that not only show different levels of cultivation , but sometimes different trends as well .

the area of cultivation is measured in hectares , and a hectare is equivalent to 2.47 acres .

the unodc maintains that if an adjustment is made for the prevalence of small fields that colombia's coca cultivation declines from a base estimate of 73,000 hectares in 2009 to 62,000 hectares in 2010 .

according to the state department's 2012 incsr , the u.s. government estimated that colombia's coca cultivation declined from 116,000 hectares to 100,000 hectares in 2010 , a 14% decline .

the u.s. government estimates for 2011 show another decline to 83,000 hectares whereas the unodc showed a slight increase to 64,000 hectares .

aerial eradication has been controversial both in colombia and the united states .

critics have long charged that it has unknown environmental and health effects , and that it deprives farmers of their livelihood , when carried out without coordination with alternative development programs .

with regard to environmental and health consequences , the secretary of state , as required by congress until fy2012 , has reported that the herbicide , glyphosate , does not pose unreasonable health or safety risks to humans or the environment .

in consultation for the certification , the u.s. environmental protection agency has confirmed that application procedures and concentration of the aerial spray program in colombia are within the parameters listed on u.s. glyphosate labels .

nevertheless , press reports indicate that many colombians believe the health consequences of aerial fumigation are grave , and many international ngos criticized the prior certification process for being analytically inadequate .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) funds alternative development programs to assist farmers of illicit crops in the switch from illicit to licit crops , and provides assistance with infrastructure and marketing .

the approach includes job creation for rural families in coca - growing and conflict - prone areas with economic development potential .

from 2002 through september 2009 , the united states completed 1,290 social and productive infrastructure projects with communities that agreed to remain free of illicit crops according to the state department .

the usaid mission in colombia reports significant progress since funding started flowing for alternative development through plan colombia .

by the end of fy2010 , alternative development programs had benefitted 479,221 families and supported 476,215 hectares of licit crops ( cumulative totals ) in both coca and poppy areas .

the success of alternative development in colombia has been limited both by security concerns and the limited scope of the program .

the 2008 gao report , among others , that examined the progress of plan colombia identified weaknesses in the program .

for example , a majority of the usaid alternative development projects in colombia were not located in areas where the majority of coca is grown and they have not been evaluated for meeting drug reduction goals or for their sustainability .

security concerns were blamed for the proposed withdrawal of usaid assistance from five departments where coca production was increasing , according to a usaid memo leaked to the press in october 2006 .

unodc reported in june 2006 that alternative development programs have been successful , but only reach 9% of colombian coca growers .

the organization called for a tenfold increase in international donor support for alternative development programs .

in 2006 , usaid redesigned its strategy to lure coca growers to relocate to geographic zones that offered economic opportunities from zones where coca had been grown .

the two core projects of the usaid strategy that ran between 2006 and 2011 were the more investment for sustainable alternative development ( midas ) and areas for municipal level alternative development ( adam ) .

both projects have generated thousands of hectares of licit crops and jobs .

in fy2010 , usaid reported that it helped rural families produce more than 95,000 hectares of licit agricultural products and to create more than 150,000 jobs .

however , the usaid projects have been criticized for neither reaching those most vulnerable to coca cultivation nor providing adequate income substitution during the comparatively long time needed for alternative crops to mature and generate sufficient and sustainable income .

several assessments of usaid's alternative development program under plan colombia cite the "zero coca" policy of the colombian government as actually a barrier to reaching those impoverished farmers most vulnerable to coca growing .

for example , in one assessment , researchers were told "alternative livelihoods assistance reaches only a small segment of the population in need , i.e .

either cultivating coca or vulnerable to coca cultivation. .

proponents of u.s. policy argue that both eradication and alternative development programs need time to work and that alternative development programs do not achieve drug crop reduction on their own .

alternative development in colombia was designed to support the aerial and manual eradication programs .

an integrated approach to alternative development was one element of the national consolidation plan officially launched by the colombian government in 2008 .

in early 2007 , the colombian ministry of defense announced a "policy of consolidation of democratic security" to guide security policy for the uribe administration's second term ( 2006-2010 ) .

the new strategy was intended to consolidate the gains of the democratic security policies that were successful in reducing violence in the first term and to consolidate state presence in marginal areas where insurgent activity by illegal armed groups , drug trafficking , and violence converged .

called "integrated action" and later the national consolidation plan ( pnc ) , the strategy combines security , counternarcotics , and development in a sequenced approach targeting remote , but strategically important , areas where illegal armed groups continue to operate .

first , security forces enter a contested zone to stabilize and hold the area so that civilian state institutions can come in to provide social services such as justice , education , health , and housing to establish a positive state presence .

the doctrine is based on the premise that all military and social actions are interdependent and no effort can be successful if the complementary efforts are not .

led by civilian and defense officials in the ministry of defense , this major shift in approach was declared to be a "strategic leap" forward by then - colombian defense minister juan manuel santos in march 2009 .

at the local level , this strategy is carried out at regional consolidation centers staffed by civilian , police , and military personnel .

the two best - known pilot projects , which have each received considerable u.s. and international support , are the regional coordination centers established in the macarena in the meta department and montes de maría near the central caribbean coast .

both are intended to function as models for consolidation efforts in other municipalities located in priority zones in colombia .

six municipalities in the macarena region ( formerly a high coca growing area ) reduced their coca cultivation by 85% between 2007 and august 2012 with minimal replanting , suggesting the consolidation efforts have been effective .

early critics argued that the blurring of lines between military and civilian activities poses some dangers and that there is a need for increased civilian leadership and greater representation of community interests .

usaid programs and the u.s. department of defense have strongly supported this approach and provided funding to consolidation programs since 2007 .

the colombia strategic development initiative aligns u.s. assistance with the new strategy .

according to the state department , the u.s. government collaborated with colombia since 2008 to pilot integrated counternarcotics initiatives in three regions that combined security , eradication and development .

in september 2010 , president santos "relaunched" the national consolidation plan so it dovetails with colombia's development plans and targets zones that can become the source of new economic growth in colombia .

the pnc has been refocused to concentrate on 51 priority municipalities ( out of a national total of 1,100 ) , and the current usaid "consolidation and livelihoods" programming goes to 40 of the priority municipalities .

according to the 2012 incsr , the u.s. government provides alternative development assistance for communities as they transition in the consolidation process .

in zones that have recently been recovered , the u.s. government provides support for immediate and short - term activities designed to meet immediate needs , such as quick impact projects to establish roads , bridges , health posts , and electrification to help communities recover from the impact of conflict and eradication .

for pnc municipalities that have been in the program longer , the u.s. government assistance includes strengthening producer associations , increasing marketing opportunities for licit crops , and technical assistance to colombian civilian agencies that are working to establish a permanent presence .

the 2012 incsr comments that coca cultivation and cocaine production reductions in colombia have demonstrated the success of a counternarcotics strategy that uses an "integrated , broad - based approach. .

it also warns , however , that colombia's counternarcotics gains are not irreversible .

from fy2000 through fy2012 , u.s. funding for plan colombia and its follow - on strategies totaled over $8 billion in state department and defense department programs .

from fy2000 to fy2009 , the united states provided foreign operations assistance to colombia through the andean counterdrug program ( acp ) account , formerly known as the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) , and other aid accounts .

in fy2008 , congress continued to fund eradication and interdiction programs through the acp account , but funded alternative development and institution building programs through the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

in the fy2010 request , the obama administration shifted acp funds into the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account .

in addition , support for aerial eradication programs is provided from the state department's air wing account .

the defense department requests a lump sum for all counternarcotics programs worldwide under sections 1004 and 1033 , and under section 124 , of the national defense authorization act .

dod can reallocate these funds throughout the year in accordance with changing needs .

while not considered a formal component of the acp program , the defense department has provided colombia with additional funding for training and equipment for a number of years , as well as the deployment of personnel in support of plan colombia .

in its october 2008 report , the gao stated that plan colombia had only partially fulfilled its drug reduction goals .

in the years 2000-2006 coca cultivation and production of cocaine had actually increased by about 15% and 4% , respectively .

the report concluded that while significant security gains were achieved by the colombian government with u.s. assistance , coca farmers had taken effective countermeasures against eradications , and alternative development programs had not been implemented where the majority of coca is grown .

moreover , the report criticized the "nationalization" of plan colombia programs — the transfer of u.s. - administered programs to the colombians — as advancing too slowly and lacking coordination .

in 2008 , there was significant debate in congress about the proper balance between so - called "hard - side" security assistance ( i.e. , equipment and training to the colombian military and police ) and "soft - side" traditional development and rule of law programs .

while some members of congress supported the bush administration's emphasis on security - related assistance to colombia , others expressed concerns that the administration put too much of an emphasis on the security assistance component .

many members have expressed a desire to see a more rapid transfer of responsibility for the military operations associated with plan colombia from the united states to colombia .

since fy2008 , congress has reduced assistance for security - related programs and increased economic and social aid in the annual foreign assistance appropriations legislation .

for example in the fy2012 foreign operations appropriations measure , the balance between "soft - side" traditional development and rule of law assistance and "hard - side" security and counterdrug assistance was close to 50 / 50 .

total assistance in support of plan colombia includes significant dod support .

the combined estimated assistance appropriated to colombia from state department and dod in fy2012 was $490 million ( see table 1 ) .

in fy2013 , the state department's budget request , in line with other foreign aid cuts , fell to about $332 million , approximately 13% lower than the amount appropriated for state department accounts in fy2012 .

table 1 provides a more detailed breakdown of u.s. assistance to colombia from fy2000 through the fy2013 request .

the obama administration's fy2013 budget request of roughly $332 million for colombian foreign assistance from state department accounts has broad support .

the senate appropriations committee version of the fy2013 foreign aid appropriations measure , s. 3241 , would provide additional funding exceeding the request in economic support and slightly more in counternarcotics ( including funds targeted at strengthening the colombian prosecutor general's office ) .

the house appropriations committee version of the bill , h.r .

5857 , would provide an additional $10 million over the request for foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and would increase support under the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account by $18.6 million to fund security and counternarcotics training and technical support by the colombian government to partners regionally and worldwide .

in september 2012 , congress passed a continuing appropriations resolution ( cr ) fy2013 ( h.j.res .

117 , p.l .

112-175 ) , which was signed into law on september 28 , 2012 and which expires on march 27 , 2013 .

under the cr , regular aid accounts are funded at the same level as in fy2012 plus .612% .

on october 30 , 2009 , the united states and colombia signed the defense cooperation agreement ( dca ) to provide the united states access to seven military facilities in colombia to conduct joint counternarcotics and anti - terrorism operations over a 10-year period .

the u.s. congress authorized $46 million for construction at the palanquero air base in central colombia in the defense authorization for fy2010 signed into law in october 2009 ( p.l .

111-84 ) .

however , on august 17 , 2010 , the colombian constitutional court declared the agreement unconstitutional because it had not been submitted to the colombian congress for approval .

since then , the santos administration has not submitted the agreement to congress .

the agreement had generated hostility toward colombia from some neighboring countries , such as venezuela and ecuador .

not moving ahead with the agreement appears to have lowered regional tensions .

the dca did not change the cap on the number of u.s. personnel deployed in colombia which remains the same as set by congress in 2004 ( p.l .

108-375 ) — 800 military personnel and 600 contractors .

u.s. personnel presence in recent years has declined to a level below half of the authorized 1,400-person cap , which is a trend that is expected to continue .

debate in the u.s. congress has continued to focus on allegations of human rights abuses by the farc and eln , paramilitary groups , and the colombian armed forces , and the extent of the investigation and prosecution of such crimes .

for example , as previously discussed ( see " human rights violations by colombian security forces " ) , the prosecutor general's office has been assigned over 1,700 cases ( involving more than 3,500 victims ) of extrajudicial killings allegedly committed by members of the colombian armed forces between 1985 through june 2012 .

the united nations and many ngos and human rights groups are deeply concerned that progress in reducing the backlog of cases of extrajudicial killing has proceeded slowly .

they are also alarmed that while allegations of extrajudicial executions by the security forces have declined sharply in recent years , there continues to be reports that the practice has continued .

since 2002 , congress has required that the secretary of state certify annually to congress that the colombian military and police forces are severing their links to the paramilitaries , investigating complaints of human rights abuses , and prosecuting those against whom credible charges have been made .

since 2002 , congress has made funding to the colombian military contingent on these certifications .

in the latest certification , issued on august 20 , 2012 , secretary clinton reported again that the colombian government and armed forces are meeting the statutory requirements with regard to human rights .

over the years , many ngos have criticized the positive certifications and report that they have presented evidence to u.s. state department officials that contradict u.s. findings .

some human rights groups have called the human rights certification "a flawed but useful tool" because the certification process requires regular consultation with colombian and international human rights groups by the u.s. government , and because over time the conditionality can improve human rights compliance .

congress has also regularly enacted another mechanism to prevent human rights abuses: the so - called leahy amendment in foreign operations appropriations legislation .

specifically , this provision states that units of a foreign country's security forces are prohibited from receiving assistance if the secretary of state receives credible evidence that such units have committed "a gross violation of human rights. .

 ( the restriction had been designated as section 620j of the foreign assistance act , but re - designated as section 620m and amended by the consolidated appropriations act of 2012 , ( p.l .

112-74 ) ) .

the secretary may continue funding if she determines and reports to congress that the foreign government is taking effective measures to bring the responsible members of these security forces to justice .

a similar provision applies to dod training of foreign security forces if the secretary of defense receives "credible information" that units of foreign security forces have committed "a gross violation of human rights. .

the most recent restriction on dod funding appears in section 8058 of p.l .

112-74 .

there have been colombian units that have been disqualified from receiving assistance and training under these provisions , or "not vetted for cause. .

despite these measures , human rights organizations contend that the u.s. government often ignores questionable activities of colombian security forces .

in 2003 , the george w. bush administration announced its intention to begin negotiating an andean region free trade agreement ( fta ) with colombia , peru , ecuador , and bolivia .

in its announcement , the administration asserted that an fta would reduce and eliminate barriers to trade and investment , support democracy , and fight drug activity .

after regional talks broke down , the united states separately pursued bilateral trade agreements with colombia and peru .

the united states and colombia signed the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement on november 22 , 2006 , also called the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement ( cfta ) .

nearly five years later , the u.s. congress approved implementing legislation for the cfta ( h.r .

3078 / s. 1641 ) on october 12 , 2011 , and president barack obama signed the measure on october 21 , 2011 ( p.l .

112-42 ) .

congressional approval of the implementing legislation for the agreement was delayed because of controversy .

proponents argued that the fta with colombia would improve market access for u.s. businesses , increase bilateral trade in a way that benefited both countries , and reward a close ally in south america .

critics of the agreement countered that colombia had a weak record on labor rights , unacceptably high levels of violence allegedly targeted at union members , and that perpetrators of such crime were rarely investigated or prosecuted ( as described in more detail below ) .

in congressional debate , human rights considerations raised by opponents included the victimization of labor activists and other human rights defenders .

some opponents also pointed to concerns that colombian workers in some sectors would be displaced .

proponents maintained that colombia had made progress over the past decade in reducing violence and enhancing security overall .

the obama administration , as part of its export development and job growth strategy , indicated an interest in 2011 in concluding pending bush - era free trade agreements with south korea , panama and colombia once "key issues" in each agreement were addressed .

the administration introduced implementing legislation for the three agreements in early october 2011 .

on a same - day vote on october 12 , 2011 , congress approved the u.s. - colombia agreement with a bipartisan vote of 262-167 in the house and 66-33 in the senate .

debate surrounding passage of the agreement centered on labor issues , including allegations of violence against trade unionists and inadequate government prosecution of such violence .

as part of the cfta legislation , congress renewed the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) through july 2013 for colombia and ecuador .

the law provides eligible countries with unilateral preferential access to the u.s. market for certain products to encourage legitimate economic activity in place of a dependence on the illegal narcotics trade .

the atpa renewal , which along with other trade preference measures allows about 90% of colombian imports to enter the united states duty free , gave colombia time to transition while awaiting the cfta's entry into force .

acknowledging that one of the key concerns of opponents of the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement involved the status of labor rights in colombia , on april 7 , 2011 , president santos and president obama announced they had agreed upon an action plan related to labor rights ( action plan ) .

this detailed plan addressed u.s. concerns about protection of labor rights in colombia , violence against labor leaders , and improving the investigation and prosecution of labor - related violence .

the obama administration stated that implementation of most of the measures in the plan , which consists of a series of actions the colombian government must take within defined time frames , would be a precondition for the president to declare the cfta's entry into force .

the action plan can be found on the website of the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) .

reaction to the action plan has been mixed .

although many contend that the plan , if fully implemented , would represent progress on some of the problems facing labor in colombia and view it favorably , others are concerned that weak enforcement may limit its prospects .

on april 15 , 2012 , at the summit of the americas held in cartagena , colombia , president obama and president santos announced that the cfta would enter into force on may 15 , 2012 .

they affirmed that the commitments of the action plan related to labor rights had been substantially met and that both countries had reviewed and revised their laws and regulations to meet their obligations under the agreement .

following its entry into force in may , the trade agreement immediately eliminated duties on 80% of the u.s. exports of consumer and industrial products , and will eliminate most remaining tariffs within 10 years of implementation .

although it is too early to evaluate its impact , u.s. investment in colombia and trade between the two countries has grown since the agreement entered into force .

the predominant concern that the action plan addressed was violence against labor unionists .

labor activist killings in colombia declined during 2002-2005 , but rose again in 2006 ( see figure 2 ) .

data on the number of labor unionists murdered in any given year vary by source .

in 2009 , the government reported a decline to 28 murders and the national labor school ( a respected colombian ngo ) reported a slight decline to 47 murders of labor unionists .

in 2010 , the colombian government recorded 34 murders , while the ens recorded 51 .

for more information about the reasons for the discrepancy between government and ngo counting of these murders , see crs report rl34759 , u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: labor issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

in 2011 , both the government and ens recorded a drop in labor unionist homicides .

for the year in which the action plan was signed , ens reported 29 homicides , but a continuing pattern of threats , including death threats , violence , harassment , and other practices against trade union representatives that inhibited their ability to exercise their right to free association including to engage in union activities .

violence against labor union members is in a context of high violence levels in the society in general .

colombia has greatly reduced its homicide rate over the past decade , but even in 2010 there were more than 15,400 homicides , with a rate of 34 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants ( far exceeding mexico's rate of 18.1 per 100,000 in 2010 ) .

the 51 homicides of labor unionists recorded by ens in 2010 were less than one - half of 1% of total homicides .

critics of the colombian government's record on protecting labor note that the politically intimidating effect of a labor murder is not equivalent to a random murder .

one unknown related to the controversy about these crimes is whether individual labor union members were killed because of their union activity or for some unrelated issue .

the colombian government has responded to u.s. concerns by pointing to the improvements in curbing violence overall .

total homicides dropped by 46% from a peak in 2001 to 2010 according to data from the colombian ministry of defense .

as presented in figure 2 , the reduction in labor union homicides from a peak in 2001 to 2010 is about a 70% decrease according to the ens data and more than 80% according to the government data .

some members of congress who opposed the cfta concede that the colombian government has made progress but maintain that continued violence against labor leaders and human rights defenders make it an unfit trade partner .

other critics have raised concerns about the continued high rates of violence endured by other vulnerable groups , such as afro - colombian activists , land return advocates , and indigenous leaders .

a major concern is the impunity for past acts of violence against labor leaders .

very few investigations have been completed .

more than 2,000 incidents of violence involving killings and threats between 1991 to 2006 have been alleged .

a special labor sub - unit of the colombian prosecutor general's office , set up in 2006 , employs 25 prosecutors and 150 investigators as of august 2012 assigned to investigate and process 1,465 labor - related cases .

a vast majority of these labor cases are either under investigation or in preliminary phases of the prosecutorial process .

according to the state department , the labor sub - unit has achieved 499 convictions against 597 individuals who committed violent acts against trade unionists ( including 91 convictions in 2011 ) .

labor groups argue much more needs to be done to end impunity for crimes targeting trade unionists .

human rights watch in its world report 2012 notes that closure of recent cases has been especially difficult .

out of the 195 trade unionist killings that human rights watch reports occurred since 2007 when the labor sub - unit became operational , the unit has only achieved convictions in six cases .

several measures in the april 2011 action plan include steps to strengthen the colombian judicial system with regard to labor violence prosecutions .

until investigations and prosecutions are completed , it is very hard to determine the motive behind killings and if indeed labor union members are targeted .

several human rights organizations , including human rights watch , have urged the colombian government to resolve labor cases that have languished in impunity .

in addition to the action plan's measures to prevent violence against labor activists , and to strengthen the prosecution of such violence , the action plan sets out steps to protect internationally recognized labor rights .

for instance , the action plan restricts the use of colombian "labor cooperatives" ( a form of labor contracting that can be exploitative which is frequently found in the sugar , flower , palm oil , mining and port industries ) and imposes sanctions on businesses that are violating colombian laws .

it requires an increased presence of the international labor organization ( ilo ) , an invitation that the ilo has accepted .

one of the few incomplete steps laid out in the action plan is the hiring of an additional 380 labor inspectors which must be accomplished by 2014 .

when president obama announced the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement's entry into force he asserted that most of the requirements of the action plan had been substantially met .

the u.s. trade representative's office , tasked with reviewing the documentation to ensure that colombia has completed the action plan steps , maintained that colombia had met all the important milestones to date .

technical meetings between the two governments and meetings between senior labor officials from each country are being held through 2013 to ensure ongoing compliance .

in the u.s. congress , some members have expressed continuing concern about labor action plan implementation .

with approval by the u.s. congress of the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement in 2011 and its entry into force in may 2012 , the u.s. - colombia partnership passed a major milestone .

congress is currently engaged in oversight of continued implementation of the related labor action plan in addition to its oversight of overall u.s. policy toward colombia .

supporters of the current u.s. policy towards colombia continue to express the importance of colombia as a regional partner of the united states in the counternarcotics effort .

colombia has also emerged as a regional leader , providing police and justice training to nations around the world including many in latin america .

proponents point to the progress that has been made in improving security conditions in colombia and in weakening the farc guerrillas .

they favor maintaining security assistance to colombia in order to help colombian security forces continue to combat the farc and eln , solidify their control throughout rural areas , and eradicate illicit narcotics .

many supporters accept a gradual decline in u.s. assistance in line with across - the - board foreign aid reductions and the gradual "nationalization" of plan colombia programs .

at the same time , they remain concerned about the use of neighboring countries' territory for refuge and re - supply by the leftist guerrillas , and that this has a potentially destabilizing effect in the region .

critics of current u.s. policy in colombia respond that the counterdrug program has used a repressive approach to curb drug production that has provoked a negative popular reaction in some rural areas .

they argue for halting aerial spraying of drug crops and limiting aid to the colombian military .

they maintain that interdiction and reducing illicit drug demand in the united states , rather than eradication , are more effective and less costly to peasant producers .

some critics of u.s. policy support a policy that focuses on providing economic and social aid to address what they consider to be the conflict's root causes , on curbing human rights abuses by successor paramilitary groups and security forces , and on providing support for a negotiated end to the fighting .

some members of congress , acknowledging the improvement in security conditions in colombia , continue to have grave concerns about labor activist killings and labor rights ; extrajudicial killings of colombian civilians by the colombian military ; and the para - political scandal ( linking colombian politicians with illegal paramilitaries ) .

many of these human rights issues were central in the debate over the cfta that took place in the fall of 2011 and will likely remain part of congress's oversight agenda .

