the national labor relations act of 1935 ( nlra ) , as amended , gives private sector workers the right to join or form a labor union and to bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other conditions of employment .

the act also requires employers to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees .

the nlra is administered and enforced by the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) .

this report begins with a brief overview of the nlra .

it then describes the basic procedures that employees and employers must follow during a unionizing campaign .

the report describes different types of mediation and arbitration that can be used to resolve bargaining disputes .

the report describes the jurisdictional standards that an employer must meet before the nlrb will exert jurisdiction over a question of union representation ( eg , for a small business ) .

finally , the report discusses some potential effects of changing union certification procedures .

the nlra , as amended , provides the basic framework governing labor - management relations in the private sector .

the act begins by stating that the purpose of the law is to improve the bargaining power of workers: the inequality of bargaining power between employees ... and employers ... substantially burdens and affects the flow of commerce , and tends to aggravate recurrent business depressions by depressing wage rates and the purchasing power of wage earners ... and by preventing the stabilization of competitive wage rates and working conditions within and between industries... .

it is hereby declared to be the policy of the united states to eliminate the causes of certain substantial obstructions to the free flow of commerce and to mitigate and eliminate these obstructions when they have occurred by encouraging the practice and procedure of collective bargaining... .

the nlra gives workers the right to join or form a labor union and to bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other conditions of employment .

under the act , workers also have the right not to join a union .

the act requires an employer to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees .

to protect the rights of employers and workers , the act defines certain activities as unfair labor practices .

the nlra does not apply to railroads or airlines , federal , state , or local governments , agricultural workers , family domestic workers , supervisors , independent contractors , and others .

the definition of "employee" in the nlra does not exclude unauthorized workers .

thus , unauthorized workers can engage in union activities .

section 9 ( a ) of nlra states that a union may be "designated or selected for the purposes of collective bargaining by the majority of the employees" ( emphasis added ) .

currently , there are three ways for employees to join or form a union .

first , a union that is selected by a majority of employees in an election conducted by the nlrb is certified as the bargaining representative of employees in the bargaining unit .

second , an employer may voluntarily recognize a union if a majority of employees in a bargaining unit have signed authorization cards .

finally , the nlrb may order an employer to recognize and bargain with a union if a majority of employees have signed authorization cards and the employer has engaged in unfair labor practices that make a fair election unlikely .

a union must be certified through a secret ballot election or recognized by an employer before collective bargaining can begin .

as discussed below under "certification," a union that is certified as the result of a secret ballot election has certain advantages over a union that is recognized by an employer without an election .

once a union is certified or recognized , the union and employer are not required to reach an initial contract agreement .

when a union and employer cannot reach an agreement on a collective bargaining agreement , the dispute is called an impasse .

an impasse may lead to a work stoppage .

workers may strike or the employer may lock out employees .

instead of resorting to a strike or lockout , a union and employer may use a neutral third party to help them reach a contract agreement .

a neutral third party may be used to reach an agreement on either an initial or successor contract .

the nlra does not include a statutory exemption for small businesses .

however , the nlrb does not certify bargaining units of only one employee .

nor does it assert jurisdiction over employers with annual revenues or sales below certain standards .

in recent congresses , legislation has been introduced that , if enacted , would change current union certification procedures .

some proposals would require the nlrb to certify a union if a majority of employees signed authorization cards .

other legislation would require secret ballot selections .

this section summarizes the most common arguments made in favor of requiring secret ballot elections and the most common arguments made in support of card check certification .

these changes could affect the level of unionization in the united states .

the section also reviews research on the effects of different union certification procedures on union success rates .

supporters and opponents of card check certification sometimes use similar language to support of their positions .

employers argue that , under card check certification , employees may be pressured or coerced into signing authorization cards and that employees may only hear the union's point of view .

on the other hand , unions argue that during an election campaign , employers may pressure or coerce employees into voting against a union .

proponents of secret ballot elections argue that unlike signing an authorization card , casting a secret ballot is private and confidential .

unions argue that during an election campaign , employers have greater access to employees ( eg , captive audience meetings and access to employees on company property ) .

unions argue that card check certification is less costly than a secret ballot election .

but employers maintain that unionization may be more costly to employees , because union members must pay dues and higher union wages may result in fewer union jobs .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

the nlra gives private sector workers the right to organize and bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other working conditions .

it also requires employers to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees .

the act says that the purpose of the law is to improve the bargaining power of workers .

this section considers whether there is an economic rationale for protecting the rights of workers to organize and bargain collectively .

governments may intervene in labor markets for a number of reasons .

one of these reasons is to improve competition .

according to standard economic theory , competitive markets generally result in the most efficient allocation of resources , where resources consist of individuals with different skills , capital goods ( i.e. , buildings and equipment and associated technology ) , and natural resources .

in turn , an efficient allocation of resources generally results in greater total output and consumer satisfaction .

in competitive labor markets workers are paid according to the value of their contribution to output .

under perfect competition , wages include compensation for unfavorable working conditions .

the latter theory , called the "theory of compensating wage differentials," recognizes that individuals differ in their preferences or tolerance for different working conditions — such as health and safety conditions , hours worked , holidays and annual leave , and job security .

if labor markets do not fit the model of perfect competition , increasing the bargaining power of workers may raise wages , improve benefits ( eg , for health care and retirement ) , and improve working conditions to levels that would exist under competitive conditions .

in labor markets where a firm is the only employer ( called a monopsony ) unionization could , within limits , increase both wages and employment .

on the other hand , increasing the bargaining power of employees in competitive labor markets may result in a misallocation of resources — and reduce total economic output and consumer satisfaction .

in competitive labor markets , higher union wages may reduce employment for union workers below the levels that would exist in the absence of unionization .

if unions lower employment in the unionized sector , they may increase the supply of workers to employers in the nonunion sector , lowering the relative wages of nonunion workers .

it is difficult , however , to determine the competitiveness of labor markets .

first , identifying the appropriate labor market may be difficult .

labor markets can be local ( eg , for unskilled labor ) , regional , national , or international ( eg , for managerial and professional workers ) .

second , measuring the competitiveness of labor markets is difficult .

finally , labor markets may change over time because of demographic , economic , technological , or other changes .

a second reason governments may intervene in labor markets is to reduce earnings inequality .

competitive labor markets may allocate resources efficiently , but they may result in a distribution of earnings that some policymakers find unacceptable .

unionization may be a means of reducing earnings inequality .

some economists argue that , during a recession , greater earnings equality may increase aggregate demand and , therefore , reduce unemployment .

finally , some economists maintain that unions give workers a "voice" in the workplace .

according to this argument , unions provide workers an additional way to communicate with management .

for instance , instead of expressing their dissatisfaction with an employer by quitting , workers can use dispute resolution or formal grievance procedures to resolve issues relating to pay , working conditions , or other matters .

the economic impact of requiring card check certification or secret ballot elections may rest on the desired objectives of policymakers .

by bargaining collectively , unionized workers may obtain higher wages , improved benefits , and better working conditions than if each worker bargained individually .

but , depending on how well labor markets fit the model of perfect competition , collective bargaining may improve or harm the allocation of resources ( i.e. , economic efficiency ) .

if labor markets are competitive , increasing the bargaining power of workers may reduce economic output and consumer satisfaction , but may increase equality .

on the other hand , if labor markets are not competitive , increasing the bargaining power of workers may improve the allocation of resources as well as increase equality .

by requiring card check certification , the number of organizing campaigns and the union success rate may increase .

conversely , by requiring secret ballot elections , the number of organizing drives and the union success rate may decline .

thus , compared with existing recognition procedures , requiring secret ballot elections may lower the level of unionization , whereas requiring card check certification may raise it .

accordingly , depending on the competitiveness of labor markets , requiring card check certification may either improve or harm economic efficiency .

similarly , requiring secret ballot elections may either improve or harm efficiency .

if either change were enacted , it may be difficult , however , to predict or measure the size of the effects .

regardless of the competitiveness of labor markets , requiring secret ballot elections may increase earnings inequality — if fewer workers are unionized .

requiring card check certification may reduce inequality — if more workers are unionized .

again , the size of the effects may be difficult to predict or measure .

