leaving aside supplemental appropriations to cover war costs , the fy2006 department ofdefense budget is about 4.5% above the regular , fy2005 non - war budget , or about 2% higher afteradjusting for inflation .

projections show a similar , modest rate of growth over the next five years ( see table 1 ) .

table 1 .

real growth / decline in national defense budgetauthority and outlays , fy2004-fy2010* ( current and constant fy2006 dollars in billions ) source: congressional research service from office of management and budget data .

* administration projections .

figures for fy2005 and beyond do not include additionalsupplemental appropriations for iraq and afghanistan , while the fy2004 figures includes such funds .

figure 1 .

national defense budget authority and outlays , fy1950-fy2010 this relatively modest pace comes after several years of substantially higher growth .

between fy2000 , the last budget controlled wholly by the clinton administration , and fy2006 , theregular , "non - war" dod budget has grown by about 45% in nominal terms or about 22% afterinflation .

the increases of the last few years have boosted defense spending , excluding funding foriraq and afghanistan , to a level above the peacetime average during the cold war and about equalto the peaks of the vietnam war and the buildup of the 1980s .

figure 1 shows the trend in nationaldefense funding , adjusted for inflation , since fy1950 .

figure 2 .

national defense outlays percentage of gdp,fy1950-fy2010 even with the recent increases , however , defense spending as a share of the economy hascontinued to decline over time .

figure 2 shows national defense outlays as a share of gdp sincefy1950 .

in more recent years , the decline reflects , in part , real reductions in the defense budgetbetween fy1986 and fy1998 .

for the most part , however , the trend is due simply to continuinggrowth in the u.s. economy that progressively reduced the economic burden of maintaining the coldwar and post - cold war military establishment .

some defense advocates argue that the nation can easily afford substantially greater defensespending , since it sustained a measurably larger burden in the past .

the issue is not only a matterof economics , however , but also of evolving federal budget pressures and priorities .

as figure 3 shows , overall federal spending has remained fairly steady at about 20% of gdp for the past 40years .

within the budget , mandatory programs , mainly entitlement programs like social security,medicare , and medicaid , plus interest on the debt have grown substantially , both as a share of figure 3 .

federal outlays by major category , percentageof gdp , fy1962-fy2010 thebudget and as a share of the economy .

meanwhile , non - defense discretionary spending has remainedquite stable as a share of gdp , while the decline in the defense share of the budget has offset theincrease in mandatory spending .

to increase defense spending substantially as a share of gdp,therefore , would require either increasing total federal spending above historical norms or imposingoffsetting cuts in other parts of the budget .

increased spending would require either higher taxes orgreater borrowing .

growth in mandatory budget accounts may put even more pressure on other partsof the budget - - including defense - - after 2010 , as members of the "baby boom" generation reachretirement age .

moreover , defense spending may be constrained , for the foreseeable future as it has been inthe past , by pressures to reduce the federal budget deficit .

for most of the past 25 years,congressional debate about both defense and non - defense federal spending has been dominated byapparently intractable budget deficits .

in november 1985 , in an effort to cope with budget deficitsthat reached a peak of 6% of gdp in fy1983 , congress passed the gramm - rudman - hollings deficitcontrol act , p.l .

99-177 .

the gramm - rudman - hollings law set annual targets for reducing thedeficit to zero in five years and imposed automatic cuts in spending if congressional action fell short,with 50% of the cuts in defense and 50% in non - defense expenditures .

congress amended the lawin 1987 , 1990 , 1993 , and 1997 , each time pushing out the date for balancing the budget .

 ( 3 ) in each of the 13 years from fy1986 through fy1998 , defense spending declined ininflation - adjusted dollars .

initially driven by deficit concerns , the decline in defense spendingcontinued with the end of the cold war and the subsequent reduction of almost one - third in the sizeof the force .

throughout the period , pressures to reduce the deficit remained a major factor shapingthe debate over defense spending .

the defense budget began to turn up again in fy1999 , once thebudget situation began to ease , and increases accelerated during the first four years of the bushadministration .

for a few years , projected budget surpluses fostered an atmosphere of budgetary abundancethat propelled tax cuts , increased spending on defense , and more money for domestic priorities liketransportation and , even after surpluses had disappeared , medicare prescription drug coverage .

thatinterlude was very brief , however .

now the bush administration has announced its intention toreduce the budget deficit by one - half between fy2004 and fy2009 .

and in congress , a sober,late - 1980s - style tone of fiscal abstinence has returned .

last year , proposals to reduce defensespending were , for the first time in many years , on the congressional agenda .

though the senaterejected a budget committee recommendation to pare $7 billion from the administration's defenseplan , the final , regular fy2005 defense appropriations bills were about $2 billion below the request .

more recently , in december 2004 , in the final stages of preparing the fy2006 budget request , thewhite house office of management and budget directed the defense department to trim $30 billionfrom the six - year fy2006-fy2011 program .

if the past is a guide , current plans to reduce budget deficits may prove more difficult toimplement than official projections anticipate .

as the congressional budget office and others havepointed out , administration estimates do not take into account additional war costs , the effects ofextending tax cuts after fy2009 , or the costs of indexing or repealing the alternative minimum tax .

the administration plan also assumes cuts in spending that have not yet been identified or enacted,and it includes no contingency for potential costs of changes in social security .

table 2 , based oncbo projections , shows alternative baseline deficit trends under various assumptions .

 ( 4 ) if deficits remain stubbornlydifficult to control , as they have proven to be in the past , then it may be too optimistic to expectdefense budgets to grow at even the moderate pace the administration is now projecting .

table 2 .

alternative federal deficit projections , fy2005-fy2015 ( outlays in billions of current year dollars ) source: congressional budget office , the economic and budget outlook: fiscal years 2006 to2015 , january 2005 , table 1-3 , with revised march 2005 baseline from congressional budgetoffice , cbo's current budget projections , march 2005 , online at http: / / www.cbo.gov / showdoc.cfm ? index=1944&sequence=0 .

* all figures include interest costs resulting from increased borrowing .

additional war cost outlaysin fy2005 are amounts resulting if the pending fy2005 $76 billion supplemental appropriationsrequest is enacted .

** amt / tax extension interaction estimated by crs as a proportion of the cost of tax extensions .

figure 4 .

dod budget authority by title,fy1976-fy2006 within the defense budget , when budgets are declining or growing only slowly , there arenecessary trade - offs between , on the one hand , costs of paying personnel and operating the force and,on the other hand , investments in modernizing the force by developing and procuring new weapons .

as a rule , the most variable part of the budget has been the amount spent to procure new weapons .

figure 4 illustrates the point .

funding for weapons procurement has varied dramatically , climbingrapidly when overall budgets were growing but also plunging disproportionately when budgetsdeclined .

in contrast , military personnel and operation and maintenance costs have been considerablymore stable , though there are some noteworthy trends .

military personnel funding fell in the 1990s,as the size of the force declined following the end of the cold war , but then began to climb .

operation and maintenance costs leveled off for several years after the mid - 1980s , again as the sizeof the force declined , but then also began to climb .

the leap in military personnel costs between fy2000 and fy2005 is particularly dramatic .

beginning with the fy2000 defense authorization bill , congress approved substantial pay andbenefits increases , partly with administration concurrence and partly over its objections .

theincreases include six years of pay raises of â½ percent above the "employment cost index," aneconomy - wide measure of wage costs , three rounds of "pay table reform" that gave much larger pay raises in middlegrades to improve retention of skilled personnel , a multi - year plan to eliminate differences in on - base and off - base housingcosts , approval of a phased - in plan to allow military retirees with a veteran's disabilityrating of 50% or greater to receive both retired pay and veteran's administration disability benefits , a program known as "tricare for life" under which 65 and older militaryretirees will have access to dod provided health care in addition to medicare , repeal of the 1986 "redux" retirement program which gave lower pensions tothose recruited after that time , and repeal of a measure that lowered benefits to survivors of military retirees oncethey qualified for social security benefits at age 62 .

figure 5 .

military personnel budget authority peractive duty troop indexed to fy1972 taken together , as figure 5 illustrates , these changes have driven up active duty personnelcosts by more than 30% , after adjusting for inflation , since 1999 .

the rate of increase in personnelcosts may slow over the next few years , though starting from a higher base than just a few years ago,provided congress does not authorize additional major increases in personnel benefits .

but thatproviso has become a matter of some controversy .

in january , david chu , the under secretary ofdefense for personnel and readiness , argued against further boosts in benefits for military retirees,saying "the amounts have gotten to the point where they are hurtful .

they are taking away from thenation's ability to defend itself. .

 ( 5 ) that judgment provoked some harsh recriminations from veteransorganizations and some members of congress .

 ( 6 ) the problem for defense planners is that many of the recent , large benefit increases , such astricare for life , concurrent receipt of va disability benefits and retired pay , redux repeal , andincreased survivor benefits , do not necessarily promote recruitment and retention of high qualitymilitary personnel .

they are , however , costly for the defense department , which is required tocontribute the actuarially determined cost of future benefits for current personnel into the militaryretirement fund in order to capture the full costs of personnel .

 ( 7 ) from the pentagon's point ofview , if recruitment and retention falter , it would be much cheaper to expand enlistment andreenlistment bonuses .

as under secretary chu commented , "i'd like to believe 19-year - olds paidattention to their annuity package , [but] .... [n]ineteen - year - olds want cash to buy a pickuptruck. .

 ( 8 ) for veteransgroups and for many legislators , however , the question has been whether military retirees and theirsurvivors are being treated equitably in view of their contributions to the nation , and congress hasapproved benefit increases for reasons quite apart from their effects on recruitment and retention .

figure 6 .

operation and maintenance budget authorityper active duty troop fy1955-fy2010 the growth of operation and maintenance spending is a longstanding phenomenon .

as figure 6 illustrates , o&m funding per troop has increased at an average annual rate of 2.6% aboveinflation ever since the end of the korean war .

many things explain the trend: ( 1 ) the steadilygrowing cost of operating and maintaining new generations of more capable and sophisticatedweapons ; ( 2 ) efforts to improve the extent and quality of military training ; ( 3 ) efforts to ensure thatthe quality of life in the military keeps up with the quality of life in the civilian sector as the militaryhas shifted to an all volunteer , older , more commonly married , and more skilled force ; ( 4 ) the growthin health care costs for military personnel and their dependents ; ( 5 ) requirements that the defensedepartment , like other federal agencies and private organizations , reduce pollution and clean upearlier contamination ; and ( 6 ) modest but steady real growth in the compensation of dod civilianpersonnel , most of whom are paid with o&m funds .

the cost of maintaining aging equipment inrecent years does not appear to be a major factor .

 ( 9 ) the growth in military personnel costs after 1999 , together with ongoing increases inoperation and maintenance costs , account for the largest share of the fairly substantial increases inmilitary spending in the first years of the bush administration .

as table 3 shows , under theadministration plan , the overall department of defense for fy2006 , not including war costs , isabout 45% greater than the fy2000 budget .

it is about 22% higher after adjusting for inflation .

much of the increase , however , has gone , not to buy or develop new weapons , but simply to pay thecost of paying the troops and operating the force .

table 3 .

changes in defense funding by title,fy2000-fy2006 ( current year dollars in billions ) source: congressional research service calculations based on data from the department of defenseand the office of management and budget .

specifically , table 3 compares the fy2006 request with the fy2000 budget , broken downby titles of the annual defense appropriations bill .

of the $131 billion difference in the dod portionof the budget , $77 billion , almost 60% , is in the "military personnel" and "operation andmaintenance" accounts ( see table 4 ) .

in effect , this is the cost of maintaining the current force,without significantly increasing the pace of weapons modernization .

the remaining 40% of the increase has still permitted substantial increases in weaponsprocurement and , particularly , in research and development , in which the growth rate , though froma smaller starting point , far outstripped any other category of the defense budget .

in the future,however , assuming that defense spending levels off as the administration is projecting , increasesin personnel and operating accounts may leave relatively little room for new initiatives in weaponsacquisition .

trade - offs between major weapons programs may become more contentious .

increasedfunding for army programs , for example , may come only at the expense of funding for navy andair force programs .

in addition , cost growth in major programs will drain funds for other priorities .

an environment in which a growing budget allows new priorities to be funded without cuttingsomething else is very different from one in which any new initiative may be seen as a threat toestablished programs - - and it may be less fertile ground for innovation .

table 4 .

allocation of changes in defense funding by title,fy2000-fy2006 ( budget authority , current year dollars in billions ) source: congressional research service calculations based on data from the department of defenseand the office of management and budget .

a perennial issue in defense policy is whether future weapons acquisition budgets will belarge enough to finance all of the programs that are in the pipeline .

there are a couple of variationson the theme .

one issue is whether a "bow wave" of acquisition costs will become unsustainable at somepoint in the future .

the term "bow wave" technically refers to the normal funding profile of a majorprogram: funding is small in the early stages of development , climbs during engineeringdevelopment , peaks during full rate procurement , and then declines again as production winds down .

when several weapons programs appear likely to grow in concert , then a large collective "bowwave" may appear to be looming in the future .

a second issue is whether projected weapons procurement budgets are large enough toreplace aging weapons as they reach the ends of their nominal service lives .

a 1999 report by thecenter for strategic and international studies ( csis ) , entitled the coming defense train wreck ,argued that projected procurement budgets would fall as much as 50% a year short of the amountneeded to maintain a modernized force .

 ( 10 ) that study evoked considerable controversy .

very differentestimates of the amounts needed to finance the weapons inventory would result from minor changesin assumed rates of cost growth from one generation of weapons to the next , in assumptions aboutpossible extensions of nominal service lives with upgrades , and in assumptions about whether someelements of the force ( such as strategic nuclear weapons ) need to be updated at all .

 ( 11 ) since 1999 , the congressional budget office has done a series of closely related studies ofwhat it calls a "steady state" procurement rate ( i.e. , the rate at which weapons would have to bereplaced to maintain a modernized force of a given size ) and also of the cumulative cost of thepentagon's actual weapons plans .

 ( 12 ) these assessments have been much less alarmist than the csis"train wreck" scenario .

cbo's initial "steady state" studies found a shortfall , but not of themagnitude csis projected .

cbo's most recent affordability studies , however , have warned againsta potentially substantial "cost risk" if program costs grow above what the services have beenprojecting .

now it appears that the future "cost risk" that cbo warned against is becoming an imminentthreat .

cost growth in major weapons programs has become so endemic and so severe that it maybe producing , if not a train wreck , then , perhaps , a ship wreck .

a key issue in congress this year is"whatever happened to the shipbuilding budget ? .

the navy's fy2006 shipbuilding plan calls forconstructing just four new ships , two fewer that the navy planned for the fy2006 budget last year,and far short of the 8-9 ships per year that the navy has said are needed to preserve the current sizeof the fleet in the long term .

 ( 13 ) navy plans have also been revised to procure fewer ships over the following five years .

adefense department budget decision in december 2004 , called "program budget decision 753" orpbd - 753 , reduced the planned procurement rate of dd ( x ) destroyers from two per year to one , cutplanned submarine production from three boats every two years to one per year , eliminated fundsfor an amphibious ship from the fy2008 plan , and delayed by one year planned funding for a newaircraft carrier .

navy officials have said that cost growth in navy shipbuilding is at the root of the problem .

in testimony before the senate armed services committee on february 10 , 2005 , the outgoing chiefof naval operations , admiral vernon clark , said that costs of the major types of ships had grownby as much as 400% beyond inflation over the past thirty years , that greater capabilities explain onlypart of the increase , that so few ships are being built that overhead costs are spread too narrowly , andthat the navy cannot afford more than 250 ships in the long run unless costs are brought undercontrol .

 ( 14 ) in hisprepared statement for the hearing , admiral clark said: among the greatest risks we face is the spiraling costof procurement for modern military systems , and shipbuilding is no exception .

when adjusted forinflation , for example , the real cost increase in every class of ship that we have bought since i wasan ensign , united states navy , has been truly incredible .

it becomes more so when taken incomparison to other capital goods like automobiles , where the inflation - adjusted cost growth hasbeen relatively flat over the same period of time .

shipbuilding cost increases have grown beyond ourability to control as compared to decades prior .

as we seek greater combat capability and greateroperational efficiencies through upgraded power , propulsion , and computing technologies , we finda ratio of cost growth beyond our seeming control , which may not be fully explainable solely byreduced economies of scale .

 ( 15 ) in recent years , the pace of growth in shipbuilding costs has not abated .

for the past severalyears , the navy has requested additional appropriations to cover cost growth in ships already underconstruction .

in the fy2006 budget , the navy is requesting $394.5 million for "completion of prioryear shipbuilding programs," and the navy's long - term program includes and additional $449.8million in fy2007 and $502.5 million for cost growth .

moreover , the navy is now beginning toreestimate future shipbuilding costs in light of recent experience .

the president of northropgumman's newport news shipbuilding division recently acknowledged that the cvn - 21 , thenext - generation carrier , will likely cost more $13 billion , compared to last year's estimate of $11.7billion .

 ( 16 ) and navyofficials are beginning to increase estimates of dd ( x ) destroyer costs substantially .

as recently as2003 , the navy estimated costs of $1.5-1.8 billion per ship after the initial design models of the shipwere built , but more recently has said $2.2-2.6 billion .

now it appears the cost of later ships in theproduction run could exceed $3 billion each .

 ( 17 ) pbd - 753 made cuts in a number of other major acquisition programs as well , notably,terminating f / a - 22 fighter production after fy2008 , terminating c - 130j cargo aircraft productionafter fy2006 , cutting $5 billion over the six year fy2006-fy2011 period from missile defense , andtrimming funds for a number of satellite programs .

the fate of the f / a - 22 may be an object lesson .

originally , as the aircraft was beingdeveloped in the late 1980s , the air force planned to buy 750 aircraft as replacements for 1970s - eraf - 15s .

when the defense department formally decided to begin engineering development in 1990,the program timeline was delayed by two years and the plan was for 648 aircraft .

the clintonadministration's 1993 bottom - up review of post - cold war requirements reduced the planned totalto 442 aircraft , enough for four deployable wings of 72 aircraft each , with spare aircraft for training,maintenance , and replacement reserves .

subsequently , projected program costs grew , procurement plans were delayed and trimmedfurther , congress imposed a ceiling on total production costs , costs grew yet again , and the plannedtotal production run was further reduced .

by 2004 , the total planned procurement was reduced to279 aircraft , about one - third of the original plan , to fit within the cost cap , though the air force stillwanted more than 330 to equip three deployable wings .

the initial air force development estimatesin 1990 projected a total program unit cost of $93 million per aircraft in fy1990 prices , or about$140 million in fy2006 prices .

in the end , the spiral of cost increases , production cuts , and furtherunit cost increases had pushed the price up to over $300 million per aircraft in fy2006 dollars .

nowthe defense department , against the wishes of the air force , has decided to halt production afterbuilding about 180 airplanes .

 ( 18 ) cost growth has also been severe in many other programs , including , air force / navy / marine corps f - 35 joint strike fighter: official dodestimates of jsf costs , provided to congress in quarterly selected acquisition reports , grew by $45billion , from $199.7 billion in the september 30 , 2003 estimates , to $244.8 billion in the december31 , 2003 estimates , in current year dollars , not adjusted for inflation , a 23%increase .

space launch systems: over the same period projected air force evolvedexpendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) program costs grew by $11.6 billion , from $20.8 billion to$32.3 billion , a 56% increase .

space - based infrared system - high ( sbirs - high ) , space tracking andsurveillance system ( stss ) ( formerly called the spaced - based infrared system - low ( sbirs - low ) ) ,and airborne laser ( abl ) programs: the sbirs - high , an air force - run program to develop a newmissile launch detection and tracking satellite that would be tied into a national missile defense , hasmore than doubled in cost since 1995 to over $8 billion , including a $2 billion estimate increase in2001 , and it still appears to be experiencing delays and cost growth .

last year , the air forceconfirmed reports that the cost would grow by another $1 billion and that satellite launches wouldbe delayed another two years .

there have been similar , though less severe delays and cost growthin the missile defense agency - run stss program to develop a low - earth - orbit missile trackingsatellite , though costs are now classified .

and the air force - run , missile defense agency - fundedairborne laser program has been delayed and has suffered enough cost growth that the air forcehas decided to use available r&d funds for one rather than two aircraft .

the army future combat system ( fcs ) : the fcs program remains at a veryearly stage of development , with several differing design alternatives still under consideration .

untillast year , production was planned to begin in 2008 with an initial operational capability in 2010 .

inan april 2004 report , gao found that 3 / 4 of the necessary technologies for the system wereimmature when the program started and that prototypes would not be available for testing untilshortly before production was planned .

 ( 19 ) subsequently , the army announced a major restructuring of theprogram which will delay major components for at least two years and increase total program costsby $25 to $30 billion .

 ( 20 ) a year ago , estimated procurement costs ( not including r&d ) were estimated at $92 billion .

recently , army officials said that procurement could total as much as $145 billion , not including$25 billion for an associated communications system .

 ( 21 ) taken together , constraints on future amounts of funding for procurement and for r&d , pluswidespread , substantial cost growth in major weapons programs , ( 22 ) draw into question theviability of long - term service weapons acquisition plans .

the program cuts imposed in pbd - 753in december may very well turn out to be only the first in a number of fairly substantial changesneeded to keep acquisition costs within bounds .

a final long - term question is how changes in the international environment - - and in u.s.perceptions of it - - will affect defense budget priorities .

currently , the defense department isengaged in a congressionally - mandated "quadrennial defense review" ( qdr ) , which is requiredto be completed no later than february 2006 , but which may well be reported before then .

this qdris the fifth such reassessment of u.s. defense policy in the post - cold war era - - the others were the"base force" analysis of 1990 , the clinton administration's "bottom - up review" of 1993 , and twoprevious qdrs in 1997 and 2001 .

while the 2001 qdr was released after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 - - specifically on september 30 - - it was prepared very early in the bush administration , and it did notreflect the full weight of developments in the post - 9 / 11 period .

significantly , it also preceded thebush administration's first statement of the "national security strategy of the united states," whichthe white house issued in september 2002 , ( 23 ) and which , among other things , called for the united states toact preemptively to prevent potentially unacceptable threats to u.s. security from arising .

and , ofcourse , it preceded the wars in afghanistan and iraq .

so the 2005-2006 qdr will be the first to reflect fully the lessons the defense departmenthas drawn from its post - 9 / 11 experiences .

and it will be the first to reflect , as well , the full imprintof changes in pentagon organization and procedures that have been instituted under secretary ofdefense donald rumsfeld .

perhaps the key issue in the qdr is to what extent defense department priorities may bereshaped in view of new assessments of long term challenges to u.s. security .

over the pastyear - and - a - half or so , senior defense officials have laid out what they call a new "strategicframework" that identifies "four challenges" to u.s. security .

 ( 24 ) priorities among the fourchallenges in turn , are based on the likelihood that threats will appear and on the perceivedvulnerability of the united states to such dangers .

"traditional" challenges from regional competitors like iraq under saddam areseen as unlikely and u.s. forces are seen as fully capable of coping with them , so vulnerability islow .

"irregular" challenges of unconventional warfare are highly likely , but thevulnerability of the u.s. homeland is seen as low .

"disruptive" threats from a future global peer or near - peer competitor thatwould attack u.s. military advantages - - through , for example , attacks on satellites or cyberwarfare - - are seen as unlikely , but vulnerability is seen as high .

and "catastrophic" threats from states or non - state actors with weapons of massdestruction are seen as likely and u.s. vulnerability as high .

it is possible to read into this list of priorities some far - reaching implications for future u.s.defense programs .

the f / a - 22 and the navy ships that the pentagon cut from its plan in december,2004 , for example , might well be classified as forces for traditional challenges .

an obviousquestion , then , is whether the reductions imposed by pbd - 753 are harbingers of deeper contractionsin major programs yet to come .

for their part , navy officials have said that they are redesigningforces to be more relevant to future challenges , so conflict in the littorals ( i.e. , in coastal areas ) andthe concept of sea - basing of forces to project power ashore are being emphasized .

 ( 25 ) army officials , similarly,have cast the current wholesale reorganization of the army as an attempt to make the army moredeployable in order cope with irregular threats that , in dod's view , are highly likely .

 ( 26 ) it remains to be seen,however , how disruptive and catastrophic challenges will be reflected in future budget trade - offs .

meanwhile , in congress and elsewhere , china's potential to pose a military challenge to theunited states has become a matter of increasing discussion , particularly since china passed ananti - secession law threatening military action if taiwan declares independence .

 ( 27 ) recent assessments fromthe defense department ( 28 ) and the intelligence community ( 29 ) have stressed chineseinvestments in military capabilities , including air and naval forces , that might challenge u.s. navalpredominance in east asia .

 ( 30 ) a potential future threat from china may be cited as a rationalefor more and more substantial shares of u.s. defense budgets .

