proponents of federal regulation of insurers make analogies to banks and their regulation .

they argue that insurers , like banks , should be allowed to elect whether to hold a state or a federal charter and to reap the perceived benefits of choosing their regulator .

the analogy of insurers to banks is useful — insurers and banks are both financial intermediaries performing similar important functions in the u.s. economy .

they are also both so important that our society has constructed protection for consumers holding contracts with insolvent financial intermediaries of both types .

the federal insurance funds of the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) , and the national credit union share insurance fund ( ncusif ) provide similar protections .

they operate differently , however , than the state - based system of insurance guaranty funds .

these differences may gain significance if congress considers federal regulation of insurers .

provision for policyholders of insolvent insurers began slowly in the late 1930s .

by the 1950s , some states had security funds for disabled workers covered by insolvent workmen's compensation insurers , and a few had similar provision for policyholders of insolvent automobile insurers .

then , in the late 1960s , congress considered creating a federal fund , similar to the fdic , to protect all property - liability policyholders .

state regulators and insurers objected to federal regulation , and they cooperated to create a model law that at least 47 states had enacted in some form by 1974 .

most states did not enact life and health insurance guaranty fund laws until after the baldwin - united insolvency in 1983 and the executive life insolvency in 1990 .

all states had enacted life and health insurance guaranty fund laws by late 1992 .

three principles guided the drafters of both model laws: policyholders should not lose their risk protection upon insolvency ; losses due to insolvency should be shared ; and claim payments should not be unduly delayed by an insolvency .

these principles operate differently in property - liability insurer insolvencies than they do in life and annuity insolvencies , as discussed below .

property and liability coverages are short - term contracts , usually no longer than one year , while life and annuity contracts are long - term contracts , often for the life of the insured .

under both model laws , once the home state insurance commissioner determines that the insurer — whether property - liability or life — is financially troubled , the commissioner is required to take steps to protect policyholders and claimants .

the commissioner can order the insurer to take corrective steps and to suspend business .

the commissioner can petition a state court either for an order of rehabilitation , if it is determined that the insurer's problems can be corrected , or for an order of liquidation , if it is not .

the court's order of liquidation appoints the commissioner as liquidator , and the commissioner appoints a receiver .

the receiver takes possession of the insurer's offices , records , and assets .

assuming the records are adequate , the receiver advises policyholders and claimants of the insurer's liquidation and of the process for filing a claim against the insurer's estate .

cooperation among the states where the insolvent insurer operated is essential .

usually the insurance commissioner in the insurer's state of incorporation — known as its "domicile" or "domiciliary state" — petitions first for an order of liquidation from a state court in that domicile , and that court retains principal jurisdiction over the insurer's liquidation .

the domiciliary insurance commissioner also appoints the lead receiver .

insurance regulators in the other states where the insurer operated will appoint ancillary receivers , after entries of orders of liquidation in those states .

the lead and ancillary receivers cooperate , with the assistance of the guaranty funds and the national associations of guaranty funds .

the order of liquidation in each state generally triggers the operation of that state's guaranty fund , though the trigger varies by state .

each guaranty fund is a mandatory association of all licensed insurers doing business in that state .

each fund has a board of those insurers , and the board governs the fund .

an accumulation of money does not actually exist until after the insolvent's liabilities and assets are evaluated , each participating insurer is billed for its proportionate share of the shortfall , and each insurer remits its allocated share for that particular insolvency .

the "fund" is the sum of those remittances .

the term "guaranty fund" can also refer to insurers' statutory obligation to participate in this protection system .

in general , each state's guaranty fund is responsible for the policyholders residing in that state , and the protection extends only to policyholders of licensed insurers within the limits of statutory coverage in that state of residence .

the fdic protects deposits in banks and savings associations .

the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) protects participants in defined benefit pension plans .

the national credit union share insurance fund ( ncusif ) protects "share" accounts in credit unions .

each represents legislative interest in maintaining confidence in financial intermediaries and legislative choices about how to spread potential losses should a financial intermediary fail , as does the insurance guaranty fund system .

unlike the insurance protection system , however , the fdic , pbgc , and ncusif are all congressionally created protection plans and are administered federally .

there are other differences among the protection systems , too , including whether the protection fund exists before the insolvency , whether the contributors to the fund pay based on the risk each presents to the system's solvency , and whether those contributors can recoup the costs of their payments to the system .

the similarities and differences among the various protection systems are summarized in a chart in the appendix .

opinions differ markedly over whether the current insurance guaranty fund system functions well or poorly .

supporters say that the current system has been very effective .

the president of the national conference of insurance guaranty funds ( ncigf ) notes that funds have paid out about $21 billion in claims that would have gone unpaid in the last four decades .

the national organization of life and health guaranty associations ( nolhga ) indicates that , since 1983 , guaranty funds have protected 2.2 million policyholders by guaranteeing more than $21.2 billion in benefits and contributed $4.4 billion to ensure that policyholders received their benefits .

some critics of the current state insurance guaranty fund system say it is inefficient , slow , parochial , and fragmented , and they urge that it be replaced with a federal system or significantly reformed .

other critics say the existence of guaranty funds distorts incentives by allowing some insurers to increase risk - taking behavior and by imposing the costs of that behavior on more conservative insurers .

the critics say that the current system "provide[s] a powerful risk subsidy incentive that [solvency] monitoring does not entirely offset. .

that effect is exacerbated by flat - rate assessments , they say .

these critics argue for risk - based assessments similar to that required by the fdic .

one critic has observed that incentives are further distorted by "the existence of tax offsets and by the insurers' ability to pass some of these costs to policyholders. .

whether to change the current system of policyholder protection would be a significant policy issue in any legislation to authorize or require federal regulation of insurers .

in the 110 th congress , senators john sununu and tim johnson introduced the senate version of the national insurance act of 2007 ( s. 40 ) , and representatives melissa bean and ed royce introduced a house version ( h.r .

3200 ) .

both bills would require all federally licensed insurers to participate in state guaranty funds , with the possibility of a federal guaranty fund if the state guaranty funds do not treat national insurers in the same manner as state insurers .

versions of the national insurance act ( s. 2509 and h.r .

6225 ) were also introduced in the 109 th congress , by senators sununu and johnson and representative royce .

in the 108 th congress , senator ernest hollings introduced legislation ( s. 1373 ) to require all interstate insurers to be federally licensed and regulated .

it would have established a pre - funded national insurance guaranty association and required all interstate insurers to pay into the fund .

in the 107 th congress , representative lafalce introduced legislation ( h.r .

3766 ) to allow insurers to elect federal licensing and regulation .

it would have required all insurers electing federal regulation to participate in state guaranty associations .

senator chuck schumer proposed similar legislation in the 107 th congress to create an optional federal charter for insurers .

it also would have required federally regulated insurers to participate in a state - based system of policyholder protection operating generally as it does now .

some of the policy issues that congress might confront should it consider federal chartering for insurers are as follows: should federal legislation create a federally based protection system for federally chartered insurers , or instead require them to participate in the state - based guaranty fund system ? .

creating a federally based protection system would entail direct federal costs at least for establishing and maintaining its administrative infrastructure , even if the system were administered by the fdic .

requiring federally regulated insurers to participate in a state - based protection system would entail significant , though unquantifiable , indirect costs to policyholders , insurers , and taxpayers .

this is because incentives would be misaligned: that is , the costs of insolvencies would fall on the states , not on the federal regulator , and the states , though bearing the financial burden , would have no control over the effectiveness of federal regulation for solvency .

these conflicting objectives could create the potential for significant economic inefficiencies .

if congress considers federal regulation of insurers , should it also consider creating a federal system of policyholder protection ? .

creating a federal policyholder protection system for federally regulated insurers might stress the federal budget and arguably undermine market discipline .

on the other hand , it might more directly align behavioral incentives , because a federal regulator would have both the responsibility for regulating for solvency and the responsibility for all or some portion of the unfunded claims of an insolvent insurer , as well as for administering the liquidation .

should any federal system of policyholder protection include or exclude state - regulated insurers ? .

including state - regulated insurers in any federal policyholder protection system could distort incentives , because it would bifurcate the responsibility for solvency regulation of state - charted insurers from the consequences of any failure of that regulation .

on the other hand , excluding state - chartered insurers from any federal system might destabilize either or both of the federal and state protection systems .

this is because fewer insurers would be members of either system , which would mean that any assessments would be imposed on a reduced premium base .

if congress were to create a federal protection system , what limits should apply ? .

the principal issues would be deciding what types of policyholders would be protected in the event of an insurer's insolvency and what the limits on their recovery should be .

this would be challenging , especially for property coverages for regional disasters , such as earthquakes and hurricanes , and for business liability coverages .

also , if congress wished to protect only policyholders of federally regulated insurers , then constituents might have different levels of protection depending on whether their insurers were state - regulated or federally regulated .

alternatively , congress might require states to adopt levels of protection identical to the federal levels .

if congress were to create a federal policyholder protection system , should it be pre - funded or post - funded ? .

insurers would likely argue strongly for post - funding , as they have been historically averse to paying for any government - held fund .

their competitors in the financial intermediation marketplace , such as banks and savings institutions , might argue that insurers should be subject to pre - funding like themselves .

there would be technical issues , too , such as whether to maintain separate funds for life insurers and property - liability insurers and how to calculate an appropriate fund balance .

if congress were to create a federal policyholder protection system , should an insurer ' s assessments be based on its risk profile ? .

though some argue that flat assessment rates dilute market discipline , determining how to profile insurers' risks could become technically complicated and politically contentious .

insurers are required currently to hold additional capital based on their risks .

very generally speaking , life insurers calculate that additional required capital based on a categorization of the riskiness of their investments , and property - liability insurers calculate it based on the types of insurance they underwrite and their past experience in each line of insurance .

whether analogous calculations would be feasible for guaranty fund assessments has not been studied .

other issues would include whether insurers should have access to the federal reserve board's discount window and the relationship of any federal system of policyholder protection to the fdic .

whether to maintain some level of policyholder protection against insolvency may be a significant issue in any congressional consideration of federal regulation of insurers .

how to offer that protection will likely entail more difficult decisions .

policy considerations could include whether to offer federal protection or to require federally regulated insurers to participate in the existing state system .

should congress decide to offer federal protection , technical issues could include how to fund the protection , its scope , the location of the administering agency in the executive branch , and how to enforce market discipline fairly .

