the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) is the primary federal statute dealing with minimum wages , overtime pay , and related issues .

under section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the act , employers of persons employed "in a bona fide executive , administrative , or professional capacity" ( eap employees ) are freed from the act's otherwise applicable minimum wage and overtime pay requirements .

employees classified as executive , administrative or professional are not protected by the act's regular wage and hour provisions .

the section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) exemption was written into the initial version of the flsa in 1938 and , in one form or another , has continued to be a part of the statute .

on march 31 , 2003 , the wage and hour division , united states department of labor ( dol ) , proposed revision of the regulations ( 29 cfr 541 ) that define the terms executive , administrative and professional and govern implementation of the flsa exemption .

when the opportunity for public comment closed on june 30 , 2003 , the department had received in excess of 75,000 communications and the issue had become a focus of intense debate , both with the public and in congress .

when a final rule was issued on april 23 , 2004 , debate continued .

within the weeks that followed , the new regulation was the subject of various congressional hearings and had been subject to floor action both in the senate and in the house of representatives .

in late august 2004 , the new rule was implemented .

public debate would continue throughout the fall , but without avail .

this report sketches the evolution of the section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) since 1938 , noting the occasions on which the regulations governing the exemption ( 29 cfr 541 ) were modified .

it identifies entries in the federal register ( with other related sources ) to which one might refer for the precise language of the evolving regulation .

it does not trace each nuance of change as each modification to the definitions of executive , administrative and professional was added .

following a year of hearings and debate , congress approved the federal wage and hour law ( the fair labor standards act ) in june 1938 .

the act provided , inter alia , for minimum wages ( section 6 ) and overtime pay ( section 7 ) for covered workers .

neither then nor now were all workers covered under the protections of the statute ; but , in section 13 , congress wrote into the act certain specific exemptions .

among them was the following: the provisions of sections 6 and 7 shall not apply with respect to ( 1 ) any employee employed in a bona fide executive , administrative , professional ... capacity ... ( as such terms are defined and delimited by regulations of the administrator.... ) the act went on to create within the department of labor a sub - unit — the wage and hour division — to be presided over by an administrator to be "appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate. .

through the next several years , various proposals surfaced that urged modification of the eap regulation .

however , given the exigencies of world war ii , public policy concerns seem to have been deflected into other areas .

in october 1947 , the division initiated a new round of hearings on 29 cfr 541 to commence on december 2 , 1947 .

as in 1940 , the hearings led to publication of a study of the executive , administrative and professional exemption .

prepared by harry weiss who presided at the hearings , it was published in june 1949 .

the hearings "continued for 22 separate days" and heard "more than 100" witnesses .

in addition , briefs were filed "in lieu of personal appearances ... by more than 150 groups and individuals. .

the proposed regulatory revisions were published on september 10 , 1949 , and a new final rule was published on december 24 , 1949 , under authority of william r. mccomb , the new wage and hour administrator .

among the changes in the regulation was an increase in the earnings threshold: to be exempt , an executive was to be paid "on a salary basis at a rate of not less than $55 per week ( $30 in puerto rico or the virgin islands ) " ; an administrator was to be paid "on a salary or fee basis at a rate of not less than $75 per week ( $200 per month in puerto rico or the virgin islands ) " ; and a professional was to be paid "on a salary or fee basis at a rate of not less than $75 per week ( $200 per month in puerto rico or the virgin islands ) . .

in each category a worker paid not less than $100 per week — and meeting certain other specified duties requirements — would be deemed to qualify for exempt status .

 ( see discussion of " paid on a salary basis " below. ) .

on december 28 , 1949 , the division published in the federal register a lengthy interpretive bulletin explaining the regulation in detail and defining the terms used in the regulation .

the interpretive material would be incorporated within 29 cfr 541 as subpart b .

the weiss report would continue through a decade to provide a context for discussion of how executives , administrators , and professionals were to be treated under the flsa .

gradually , a more detailed policy would evolve .

during the early 1960s , the wage / hour division took up two aspects of the section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) exemption .

first , there was the continuing issue of adjustment of salary thresholds .

second , there was a broader concern about how exemption should be applied , especially in retail and service industries to which wage / hour protections had been extended under the 1961 flsa amendments .

in june 1969 , wage and hour administrator robert d. moran noted that "significant increases in wages and salary levels have taken place since the salary tests were last amended. .

therefore , he proposed an across the board increase with a public hearing on the projected increase to be held on september 16 , 1969 .

a salary threshold as an indicator of executive or administrative status had been instituted under andrews and , extended to professionals , expanded upon by his successors .

some may argue that the system was flawed: that the thresholds were too low or , conversely , too high .

some suggested that the thresholds be indexed in order to retain a fixed value ; others urged that they be dispensed with altogether , classification for exemption resting upon the duties tests .

threshold elimination was never , formally , adopted as a policy goal: indeed , their retention and updating would be continuously espoused .

but , in practice , they came to be dispensed with after 1975 — and remain so , subject to resolution of the march 31 , 2003 , proposal .

entering office early in 2001 , the bush administration was confronted with the on - going issue of 29 cfr 541: the eap regulation .

it , too , noted that the regulation was outdated and pledged to engage in "outreach and consultation. .

the spring of 2002 saw yet one more deferral — with action targeted for early 2003 .

the final rule governing section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) was published on april 23 , 2004 .

the 152-page document was divided into two parts .

section one summarizes comments received by dol , together with the department's reaction and policy justification for the final rule .

the second section constitutes the rule per se .

both segments are essential to an understanding of dol's intent and to the interpretation of its policy .

the final rule quickly sparked hearings and floor debate .

beginning during the last week of april 2004 , as members and staff attempted to digest the lengthy and complex text of the final rule , hearings would be held before three congressional separate committees .

further , the final rule would repeatedly be the focus of floor debate , both in the senate and in the house of representatives .

as time for implementation of the new rule came closer , the options of critics seemed to fade .

congress could intervene directly with amendment of the flsa ; but that would seem unlikely , given the position of the administration .

congress might have taken up the specter proposal for a study commission ; but given the position of the administration , that , too , may have seemed an unlikely solution .

two bills remained before congress that could have affected the department's rulemaking .

first .

there was the jobs act , s. 1637 ( with its counterpart in the house , h.r .

4520 ) , having already been passed by the senate with the harkin and gregg amendments included .

second .

there was the fy2005 appropriations bill for the department of labor that might have been amended to include language to eliminate ( or restrict ) funding for all or part of dol's contentious rulemaking process .

on october 15 , 2004 , with only two months of experience behind them , the department of labor's solicitor howard radzely reportedly proclaimed a certain amount of satisfaction with the result of the overtime pay regulation .

"the predictions were not accurate," radzely said , referring to critics of the plan .

"almost without exception , the reports indicate people are gaining overtime protection. .

but , the reports were anecdotal and fragmentary .

others agreed .

in early november , thomas sullivan , chief counsel for advocacy at the small business administration , asserted that the new rule "has produced the greatest cost savings for small businesses since the administration began attempting to streamline its regulatory system. .

todd mccracken , national small business association president , "concurred with sullivan's assessment that the dol overtime rule had produced the single biggest cost savings to the small business community. .

tammy mccutchen , the author of the new rule ( and now with the law firm of dickstein shapiro morin & oshinsky ) , asserted that the rule was "still alive , despite "'an afl - cio misinformation campaign , misleading media reports , and eight congressional votes to revoke the changes.' .

she reported that "a substantial number of cases involving incorrect classifications ... of overtime is 'on the horizon.' .

mostly , she said , the cases involve calculation of the "'regular rate'" of pay .

but , mccutchen suggested , the overtime reform was only the beginning of changes needed in flsa administration .

in a speech in naples , florida , in early april 2005 , dol's radzely affirmed that the final rule has "clarified and significantly strengthened" the law .

"we have not seen a single incident — let alone the predicted 6 million incidents — of an employee who has lost pay as a result of the regulations. .

he described the rule as "more user friendly" for both attorneys and human resources personnel and "at least as protective as the old" where workers were concerned .

he observed: "[o]nce we got past the extreme rhetoric ... there have been surprisingly few issues" in contention .

but , some problems still existed and , radzely affirmed: "when employees are 'on - the - line,' in terms of exempt / nonexempt status , you can change their job duties , so that they will become clearly exempt again.... .

early in the 109 th congress , senator harkin rose to address "an issue that my colleagues have heard me speak about on numerous occasions during the course of the past two years. .

once more , he invoked the matter of overtime protection for america's workers .

senator harkin reviewed the history of the fair labor standards act and of its importance to workers , especially to those at the margins of the economy .

"overtime pay rewards work , and it reduces exploitation. .

the 40-hour workweek , he suggested , "creates jobs .

requiring time - and - a - half pay for overtime work encourages employers to hire more workers , rather than requiring additional hours of work from existing employees. .

to compensate such workers , who are engaged through extended periods , he stated , is "simple fairness. .

at this point , senator harkin proposed a new bill , s. 223 of the 109 th congress , that addressed the current flsa regulations in two ways .

first .

it set aside the existing regulations ( those in effect since august 2004 ) , allowing all workers to be covered under the act on the basis of the regulations in effect on march 31 , 2003 .

the proposal states: "that portion of such regulations ( as in effect on march 31 , 2003 ) that would prevent such employee from being exempt shall be reinstated. .

second .

it provided for indexation of the coverage formula under a new rule: that all persons earning less than $591 per week would be exempt from the rule , that is , covered by the standard wage and hour provisions of the act .

it then provided that , not later than december 31 of each calendar year , "the secretary shall increase the minimum salary level for exemption under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) by an amount equal to the increase in the employment cost index for executive , administrative , and managerial occupations for the year involved. .

indexation of the exemption , harkin affirmed , would "avoid future loss of overtime protections due to inflation. .

senator kennedy , a co - sponsor of the bill , stated: "this change will bring it to the level it would be if we'd made annual adjustments for wage inflation over the last 30 years. .

the bill was referred to the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

on april 19 , 2005 , senator richard durban ( d - il ) introduced s. 846 , a bill to protect the overtime rights of workers employed as executive , administrative , or professional employees .

like the harkin bill , it would set aside existing regulations ( those in effect since august 2004 ) and index the formula under which exemption under section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) would be allowable .

the bill was read a second time and placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders , calendar no .

80 .

the various measures , in so far as they addressed the overtime pay issue , died at the close of the 109 th congress .

if overtime pay remained on the agenda for the members of congress , it did not otherwise reappear , nor was it an issue in the 110 th congress when minimum wage legislation was considered and adopted .

on april 23 , 2004 , dol promulgated its final rule on overtime pay under section 13 ( a ) ( 1 ) .

the target date for its implementation was august 23 , 2004 .

with the new rule in effect , any administrative or legislative change of the regulatory structure would be difficult to achieve .

thus , the last week of august was regarded , in practical terms , as a deadline of sorts — not absolute , but with change , thereafter , more difficult to effect .

those who opposed the final rule attempted a number of strategies designed to block its promulgation in final form and , ultimately , its implementation — notably , with the fy2005 dol appropriations measure .

none of these were successful .

critics of the new rule confronted a serious disadvantage .

congress , long ago , had given to the secretary the authority to modify the regulation governing executive , administrative and professional — and to define precisely what those terms meant .

