the 10-year statutory ban on the manufacture , transfer or possession of "semiautomatic assault weapons" ( saws ) and "large capacity ammunition feeding devices" ( lcafds ) that are capable of holding more than 10 rounds expired on september 13 , 2004 .

the expiration of the saw - lcafd ban has been , and will likely remain , controversial .

bills were introduced that would have extended the ban ( s. 2190 , s. 2498 ) , made it permanent ( s. 1034 ) , or expanded it to include other "military style" firearms ( h.r .

2038 / s. 1431 ) .

on march 2 , 2004 , the senate passed an amendment to s. 1805 , that would have extended the ban for 10 years , but the bill was not passed .

a key consideration for congress is whether violent gun crimes , particularly crimes involving multiple gunshot victims and gunshot wounds per victim , were reduced by the ban .

as in 1994 , an underlying question for congress is whether saws are more dangerous than other semiautomatic firearms and , if so , should the ban be extended or made permanent , and possibly expanded to include other "military style" firearms .

this report focuses on the use and interpretation of firearms trace data produced by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) .

ban supporters have presented trace data to support extending the ban , making it permanent , and perhaps strengthening it .

ban opponents counter that there are serious limitations regarding these trace data .

meanwhile , researchers continue to debate the proper use and interpretation of these data .

please note that this report provides no coverage of legal challenges to the saw - lcafd ban .

in 1994 , congress imposed a 10-year ban on the possession , transfer , or manufacture of saws and lcafds ( capable of holding more than 10 rounds ) that were not legally produced or possessed prior to september 13 , 1994 — the date of enactment .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reports annually on the number of law enforcement officers killed and assaulted in the line of duty .

from cy1993 through cy2002 , 708 law enforcement officers were feloniously killed , including 72 in the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , 591 with firearms , and 45 by other means .

while most saws are rifles , handguns were used in 75% of the firearm - related officer killings .

while the fbi does not determine whether the firearms used in the officer killings were saws , of the 591 firearm - related killings , 65 ( 11% ) involved rifles chambered to use one of the two most common saw rifle calibers of ammunition , 7.62x39 mm and .223 remington , though it should be noted that both calibers are used in rifles that are not semiautomatic , as well as in saws and other semiautomatics .

the vpc has reviewed unpublished fbi data and conducted additional research into the circumstances surrounding firearms - related officer killings for cy1998 through cy2001 .

while unverified by the fbi , their research indicates: that at least 41 of the 211 law enforcement officers slain in the line of duty between january 1 , 1998 , and december 31 , 2001 , were killed with assault weapons .

using these figures , one in five law enforcement officers slain in the line of duty was killed with an assault weapon .

there are two things about the vpc's interpretation of these data that should be noted .

first , excluding the 72 officers killed in the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , there were 224 officers feloniously killed in the 1998-2001 period , of which 211 officers were killed with firearms .

second , 20 of the 41 firearms that the vpc counted as "assault weapons" may not meet the statutory saw definition .

for example , the vpc counted the m - 1 carbine , the mini - 14 , the sks , and the mak90 as assault weapons , but none of these rifles was banned by the 1994 act .

when such weapons are discounted , it lowers the number to 20 out of 211 ( or 224 ) officers killed with weapons that may be saws , or one in 11 .

in addition , fbi incident summaries on the officer killings suggest that only in a handful of the killings did the criminals fire more than 10 rounds of ammunition , the number of rounds to which the ban limits magazines made since the ban took effect .

furthermore , several other firearms the vpc counted as saws , may or may not have been saws , as it is unclear whether these weapons were actually pre - ban saws , or versions of these weapons that were manufactured and transferred legally after the ban ( copycats / legal substitutes ) .

nevertheless , some would likely argue that even if these firearms were not strictly saws by definition , they ought to be banned .

opponents of the ban have questioned the reliability of such data .

bills have been introduced in the 108 th congress to extend or make permanent the ban on saws and large capacity ammunition feeders .

other bills would modify the definition of "semiautomatic assault weapon" to cover a greater number of firearms by reducing the number of features that would constitute such firearms , and expand the list of certain makes and models of firearms that are statutorily enumerated as banned .

s. 1034 , as introduced by senator dianne feinstein , would make the ban permanent , as would h.r .

2038 and s. 1431 , as introduced by representative carolyn mccarthy and senator frank lautenberg , respectively .

the latter two bills would modify the definition and expand the list of banned weapons .

senator feinstein has also introduced s. 2190 and s. 2498 that would extend the ban for 10 years .

on march 2 , 2004 , the senate passed an amendment to s. 1805 , the gun industry liability bill , that would have extended the ban for 10 years , but did not pass the bill .

the expiration of the saw - lcafd ban has been , and is likely to remain , controversial .

a key consideration for congress is whether violent gun crimes , particularly crimes involving multiple gunshot victims and gunshot wounds per victim , were reduced by the ban .

as in 1994 , an underlying question for congress is whether saws are more dangerous than other semiautomatic firearms and , if so , should the ban be extended or made permanent , and possibly expanded to include other "military style" firearms .

as noted in the report , however , there is a lack of definitive data on saws and lcafds .

there are steps that could be taken to improve such data .

for example , report forms issued to state and local law enforcement by the fbi for purposes of compiling the annual report on law enforcement officers killed and assaulted could be modified to capture additional information about incidents in which firearms are used .

in addition , as part of the national incident based reporting system ( nibrs ) , which is the basis for uniform national crime reporting , the fbi could modify its data collection and submission requirements for firearm - related homicides — particularly in regard to those incidents that involve multiple shots , multiple victims , and multiple gunshot wounds per victim .

in regard to firearm traces , it may be possible to revamp the atf's firearm tracing system to improve the quality of data .

for example , besides modifying data submission procedures , controlled firearm trace surveys could be conducted in certain geographic areas to determine whether saws , or other firearms , are the guns - of - choice for youth gangs and drug traffickers .

similar surveys are already underway as part of the youth crime gun interdiction initiative and have yielded useful data on crime guns to assist local law enforcement agencies in formulating city - wide or regional firearms - related violence reduction strategies .

in conclusion , improved incident - based reporting and firearm trace data could provide useful insights into the lethality and criminal use of saws and other military - style firearms , as well as other crime guns .

in the interim , until more definitive data are available , congress faces exercise of its collective value judgement on the lethality and relative dangers posed to society by these firearms versus the diminution of the freedom to bear arms as set out in the constitution .

