improving border and transportation security ( bts ) are essential strategies for improving andmaintaining homeland security .

border security entails regulating the flow of traffic across thenation's borders so that dangerous and unwanted goods and people are detected and denied entry .

this requires a sophisticated border management system that balances the need for securing thenation's borders with facilitating the essential free flow of legitimate commerce , citizens , andauthorized visitors .

transportation security involves securing the flow of people and goods alongthe nation's highways , railways , airways , and waterways .

 ( 1 ) while in the immediate aftermath of 9 / 11 efforts primarilyconcentrated on an expanded federal role in aviation security ( in particular on the heightenedscreening of passengers and baggage ) , increasingly attention is being turned towards other modesof transportation .

recent congressional actions concerning terrorism and border security fall into severalcategories including broad efforts to understand the terrorist threat ( including several commissions:gilmore , bremer , and hart - rudman ) ; structural changes to provide a proper framework for action ( enacting legislation , p.l .

107-296 , to create the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , andenacting the usa patriot act , p.l .

107-56 ) ; highly specific actions to prevent immediate threats ( legislative activity concerning aviation security , visa policy , bioterrorism , and maritime security ) ; and a return to broader and more comprehensive approaches ( including the creation of the 9 / 11commission , and the recently passed intelligence reform bill ) .

the indications are that in both alegislative and oversight capacity , the 109th congress will be dealing with issues that confront bordersecurity and homeland security issues in a comprehensive and more integrated fashion .

this report is intended as an overview of selected concepts and issues that may be of interestto the 109th congress , and should not be considered exhaustive .

it provides a brief description ofselected agencies and their border and transportation security responsibilities .

 ( 2 ) the paper then discussesselected concepts that are prominently featured in recent bts debates ; and provides a summary ofbts - related provisions of the 9 / 11 commission report , and the intelligence reform and terrorismprevention act of 2004 .

finally , this report presents some specific border and transportation securityissues that may be of interest to the 109th congress .

 ( 3 ) .

dhs is the primary agency responsible for the security of the borders .

the homelandsecurity act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) transferred the relevant funding and most of the personnel of22 agencies and offices to the newly created department of homeland security .

dhs was organizedinto four main directorates: border and transportation security ( bts ) ; emergency preparednessand response ( epr ) ; science and technology ( s&t ) ; and information analysis and infrastructureprotection ( iaip ) .

border security functional responsibilities are at their most vivid at the point at which goodsor people are expected to cross borders .

 ( 4 ) the border and transportation security responsibilities of dhs areprimarily located within the bts directorate .

the coast guard is a stand alone agency within dhs,but has significant border security responsibilities .

within the bts directorate , customs and border protection ( cbp ) has responsibility forsecurity at and between ports - of - entry along the border .

these responsibilities include inspectingpeople and goods to determine if they are authorized to enter , and maintaining border crossingstations to process persons seeking entry to the u.s .

the inspection and border - related functions ofthe customs service ; the inspection functions of the former immigration and naturalization service ; the border patrol ; and the inspection functions of the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) program are consolidated under the cbp .

within cbp , the united states border patrol ( usbp ) is the agency responsible for the enforcement of federal immigration laws between ports ofentry .

as currently comprised , the usbp's primary mission is to detect and prevent the entry ofterrorists , weapons of mass destruction , and unauthorized aliens into the country , and to interdictdrug smugglers and other criminals .

also within bts , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) focuses onenforcement of immigration and customs laws within the united states , as well as investigations intosuch activities as fraud , forced labor , trade agreement noncompliance , smuggling and illegaltransshipment of people and goods , and vehicle and cargo theft .

in addition , this bureau overseesthe building security activities of the federal protective service , formerly of the general servicesadministration ; the operations of the air and marine operations unit ; and the federal air marshalsservice ( fams ) transferred to ice from transportation security administration ( tsa ) in augustof 2003 .

the bureau combined the investigations and intelligence functions of the u.s. customsservice and the former ins , the air and marine interdiction functions of those agencies , and theimmigration detention and removal programs , as well as the operations of the federal protectiveservice .

ice conducts investigations to develop intelligence to reduce illegal entry into the unitedstates , and is responsible for locating and removing illegal aliens by inspecting places ofemployment for undocumented workers .

ice is responsible for identifying and finding persons whohave overstayed their visas , and the bureau also develops intelligence to combat terrorist financingand money laundering , and to enforce export laws against smuggling and fraud .

the tsa , created by the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ; p.l .

107-71 ) , wasestablished to increase the protection of people and commerce as they traveled into and throughoutthe united states .

tsa's primary focus in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks has been aviationsecurity , which includes protecting the air transportation system against terrorist threats , sabotageand other acts of violence through the deployment of passenger and baggage screeners ; detectionsystems for explosives , weapons , and other contraband ; and other security technologies .

tsa alsohas responsibilities for marine and land modes of transportation including assessing the risk ofterrorist attacks to all non - aviation transportation modes , issuing regulations to improve the securityof the modes , and enforcing these regulations to ensure the protection of the transportation system .

tsa is further charged with serving as the primary liaison for transportation security to the lawenforcement and intelligence communities , and with conducting research and development activitiesto improve security technologies .

the coast guard is the lead federal agency for the maritime component of homeland security .

as such , it is responsible for border and transportation security as it applies to u.s. ports , coastal andinland waterways , and territorial waters .

the coast guard also performs other missions , includingsome ( such as fisheries enforcement and marine rescue operations ) that are not related to homelandsecurity .

the law that established dhs ( p.l .

107-296 ) directed that the coast guard be maintainedas a distinct entity within dhs and that the commandant of the coast guard report directly to thesecretary of dhs .

accordingly , the coast guard exists as its own agency within dhs and is notpart of dhs's border and transportation security directorate .

the coast guard does , however , workclosely with the bts directorate .

the department of state ( dos ) and the department of justice ( doj ) also have a role to playin border security .

foreign nationals not already legally residing in the united states who wish tocome to the united states generally must obtain a visa to be admitted .

 ( 5 ) under current law , threedepartments - - dos , dhs , doj - - play key roles in administering the law and policies on theadmission of aliens .

 ( 6 ) dos's bureau of consular affairs is responsible for issuing visas .

dhs's citizenship andimmigration services bureau ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions .

in addition,doj's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) plays a significant policy role through itsadjudicatory decisions on specific immigration cases .

with this as background , the report now turns to a discussion of selected concepts thatfrequently appear in bts debates .

this section of the paper discusses several bts - related concepts that will likely be featuredduring the relevant legislative debates of the 109th congress .

this section of the report highlights some of the bts - related issues that may be of concernto the 109th congress .

it should be noted that this list contains selected issues and should not beconsidered comprehensive .

this appendix provides summaries of the bts - related provisions of the 9 / 11 commissionrecommendations , ( 21 ) the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) of 2004 , and a summary ofhspd - 11 .

hspd - 11 is the administration's response to one of the 9 / 11 commissionrecommendations , and significant portions of the irtpa similarly reflect these recommendations .

oversight of the changes made by the irtpa , and legislative activity surrounding those 9 / 11commission recommendations that were not included are likely to be of interest to the 109thcongress .

the 9 / 11 commission made numerous recommendations relating to border and transportationsecurity .

these recommendations include ( but are not limited to the following ) : the united states should combine terrorist travel intelligence , operations , andlaw enforcement in a strategy to intercept terrorists , find terrorist travel facilitators and constrainterrorist mobility ; the u.s. border security system should be integrated into a larger network ofscreening points that include our transportation system and access to vital facilities , such as nuclearreactors ; the president should direct the department of homeland security to lead theeffort to design a comprehensive screening system , addressing common problems and settingcommon standards with systematic goals in mind ( see the summary of hspd - 11below ) ; the department of homeland security , properly supported by congress , shouldcomplete , as quickly as possible , a biometric entry - exit system , including a single system forspeeding qualified travelers , [i]t should be integrated with the system that provides benefits toforeigners seeking to stay in the united states ; the u.s. government ... should do more to exchange terrorist information withtrusted allies , and raise u.s. and global border security standards for travel and border crossing overthe medium and long term through extensive international cooperation ; the federal government should set standards for the issuance of birthcertificates and sources of identification , such as drivers licenses ; the u.s. government should identify and evaluate the transportation assets thatneed to be protected , set risk - based priorities for defending them , select the most practical andcost - effective ways of doing so , and then develop a plan , budget , and funding to implement theeffort , [t]he plan should assign roles and missions to relevant authorities ( federal , state , regional , andlocal ) and to private stakeholders ; improved use of "no - fly" and "automatic selectee" lists should not be delayedwhile the argument about a successor to capps continues , [t]his screening function should beperformed by tsa , and it should utilize the larger set of watchlists maintained by the federalgovernment , [a]ir carriers should be required to supply the information needed to test and implementthis new system ; the tsa and the congress must give priority attention to improving the abilityof screening checkpoints to detect explosives on passengers , ... each individual selected for specialscreening should be screened for explosives ; and the tsa should conduct a human factor study ... to understand problems inscreener performance and set attainable objectives for individual screeners and for the checkpointswhere screening takes place .

the president issued homeland security presidential directive ( hspd ) - 11 on august 27,2004 .

 ( 22 ) this directivewas issued in response to one of the 9 / 11 commission recommendations .

hspd - 11 concerns"comprehensive terrorist - related screening procedures" which are defined in the directive to mean: "the collection , analysis , dissemination , and use of information related to people , cargo,conveyances , and other entities and objects that pose a threat to homeland security. .

hspd - 11 statesthat it is the policy of the u.s. to enhance terrorist - related screening through comprehensive,coordinated procedures ; while safeguarding legal rights , freedoms , civil liberties , and informationprivacy ; in a manner that facilitates the efficient movement of people , cargo , conveyances andassociated activities of commerce .

hspd - 11 further states that this comprehensive and coordinatedapproach is to be implemented in "immigration , law enforcement , intelligence , counterintelligence,and protection of border , transportation systems , and critical infrastructure. .

hspd - 11 required the secretary of homeland security ( in coordination with the heads of allthe appropriate departments ) to submit to the president a report outlining a strategy to enhance theeffectiveness of terrorist - related screening activities , and developing comprehensive , coordinated,and systematic screening procedures .

this report was submitted to the president on november 9,2004 .

 ( 23 ) hspd - 11required an additional report ( due november 24 , 2004 ) describing a 'prioritized investment andimplementation plan' for the policies and activities outlined by the first report .

further , the secretaryof dhs is required to provide a status report on the implementation of the plan six months after theissuance of the directive ( february of 2005 ) .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) has numerousbts - related provisions , many of which embody some of the recommendations made by the 9 / 11commission .

title iv of the act relates to transportation security .

subtitle a of title ivimplements the 9 / 11 commission recommendations by requiring the secretary of dhs , jointly withthe secretary of transportation , to develop and implement a national strategy for transportationsecurity .

subtitle b of title iv implements the 9 / 11 commission recommendations to improvepassenger prescreening for both domestic and international flights , and improve the use of no - fly and automatic selectee lists while ensuring that the watchlists do not violate privacy or civil liberties .

subtitle b also contains a provision implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendation to givepriority attention to screening passengers and their baggage for explosives .

further , this subtitle alsocontains provisions: requiring tsa to develop a plan for implementing enhanced explosive detectionequipment ; preserving the anonymity of federal air marshals ; improving screener performance ; enhancing in - line baggage screening ; improving the security of pilot licenses ; improving biometrictechnology and technology to protect against the threat of shoulder fired missiles .

subtitle c of title iv concerns air cargo security and: requires tsa to develop bettertechnologies for air cargo security ; authorizes funding for equipment , research and development ; requires dhs to finalize its air cargo requirements within eight months ; and requires a pilot programusing blast - resistant containers .

subtitle d of title iv concerns maritime security and requires tsato begin screening cruise ship passengers and crew against consolidated terrorist databases within180 days , and requires maritime - security plans to be submitted in a timely fashion .

title v contains provisions relating to border protection , immigration and visa matters .

subtitle a authorizes pilot programs on the northern and southern borders which would testadvanced technologies to increase border security between ports of entry .

subtitle b requires thesecretary of dhs to submit a plan to the president and the congress to use remotely piloted aircraftto surveil the southwest border .

this subtitle also authorizes funding to implement this plan as apilot program .

subtitle b also requires the secretary of dhs to increase staffing each year duringfiscal years 2006-2010 ( subject to the availability of appropriations ) by the following amounts: thenumber of border patrol agents by not less than 2,000 each year ; the number of immigration andcustoms enforcement agents by not less than 800 agents per year ; and the number of detention bedspaces by not less than 8,000 per year .

subtitle c contains provisions: requiring in - personinterviews of certain applicants for nonimmigrant visas ; requiring applicants for nonimmigrant visasto completely and accurately provide information requested in the application ; and making therevocation of a nonimmigrant visa grounds for removal .

subtitle d contains provisions concerningthe smuggling and harboring aliens , the deportation of aliens who receive military training from oron behalf of designated terrorist organizations .

subtitle e contains provisions concerning theinadmissibility and deportation of aliens who commit acts of torture , extrajudicial killings , or otheratrocities abroad .

title vii is entitled the 9 / 11 commission implementation act of 2004 , and subtitle bcontains a number of bts - related provisions .

subtitle b establishes the human smuggling andtrafficking center , and an interagency program devoted to countering terrorist travel ; and requirestraining improvements for border , consular , and immigration officers so they can better detectterrorist travel indicators .

the provisions in subtitle b also authorize an additional 150 consularofficers in each of the fiscal years 2006-2010 ; requires the secretary of dhs in consultation with thedirector of the national counter - terrorism center ( ncc ) to establish a program overseeing dhs'sterrorist travel responsibilities ; and establishes a visa and passport security program within thebureau of diplomatic security at the department of state .

further subtitle b provisions call for theaccelerated deployment of the biometric entry - exit system , and for individuals entering into the u.s.to bear a passport or other citizenship document ( including u.s. citizens , and visitors from canadaand other western hemisphere countries ) .

subtitle b , also requires dhs to issue regulations onminimum identification standards for passengers boarding domestic flights ; includes placing moreu.s .

immigration experts at foreign airports , and increases the number of airports where u.s. - boundpassengers will be pre - inspected .

