the current tax system , with its graduated tax on individual incomes , its separate tax on corporate profits , its gift and estate taxes on the transfer of wealth , and its separate wage tax to fund the social security and medicare systems , has many critics .

it is said to cost the country in lost time , economic efficiency , trade , and contentment .

reform proposals have proliferated , ranging from a broader - based , flatter - rate income tax to scrapping the system altogether in favor of a national sales tax or some other form of national consumption tax .

this report surveys some of the issues to be considered in debating such drastic tax changes , considering not only a broader based income tax but also three basic forms of consumption taxes: the hall - rabushka "flat tax," the value - added tax ( vat ) , and the national retail sales tax .

after a brief overview of some of the current proposals , the sections that follow discuss economic efficiency issues , foreign trade issues , effects on different economic sectors , short - run adjustment costs , compliance and administration , and revenue and distributional implications .

the idea of replacing our current income tax system has been a topic of perennial congressional interest .

although many recent proposals are referred to as "flat taxes," most actually go much further than merely adopting a flat - rate tax structure and would change the tax base from income to consumption .

more recently , the president has indicated some interest in such fundamental tax reform , and his advisory commission has proposed a modified flat tax .

probably the most often repeated argument in favor of switching to a flat - rate consumption tax is that it will make the economy more efficient and will increase private savings .

when evaluating this argument , however , comparisons should not be made between the current income tax system and an ideal consumption tax .

compared to a theoretically ideal tax ( whether the base is consumption or income ) , the existing tax system will always appear flawed .

for policy evaluation , therefore , a more appropriate comparison is between a theoretically pure consumption tax and a theoretically pure income - based tax .

among the arguments for switching from an income tax to a consumption tax is the assertion that a consumption tax would make u.s. industries more competitive and help the u.s. balance of trade .

when analyzing the effects of tax policy changes on international trade it is important to differentiate between a nation's perspective and a firm's perspective .

a nation engages in trade because through trade it can obtain the goods and services its people want or need at a smaller resource cost than if it were to produce those goods and services itself .

a nation exports its products as a means of paying for what it imports .

on the other hand , a firm's ultimate goals are to sell its products and maximize its profits .

exports provide a means to achieve these goals .

the proposed tax reforms would affect the allocation of economic resources .

some sectors , generally those that are capital intensive and growing , will gain .

slower growing firms will lose .

other sectors that might be adversely affected by broadening the base to more fully reflect income and by removing itemized deductions are the non - profit sector , the state and local sector , the residential real estate industry , and the health care sector .

these are sectors that receive special benefits under the income tax .

proposals to shift the tax base from an income base to a consumption base ( most proposals ) , while generally increasing business investment , would differentially affect firms , depending on their growth rate , capital structure , and employee benefit structure .

they would also make investment in pensions , insurance policies , owner - occupied housing , and tax - exempt bonds relatively less attractive , and investments in ordinary stocks and bonds more attractive .

one of the most difficult issues to address in considering a shift to consumption taxes is the transition from the current system to the new tax regime .

while all shifts to a consumption tax cause some common transitional disturbances and windfall gains and losses , the most serious problems arise from a shift to a national retail sales tax or to a value added tax .

in these cases , a tax formerly largely collected from individuals is now collected at the firm level — either from retailers on total sales or from both final and intermediate producers' value added .

flat taxes avoid this problem but can result in confiscatory taxes on existing assets .

the complexity and cost of the current tax system is one of the most potent arguments used by the tax reform advocates .

each of the proposals discussed in this paper is advertised to be simpler and less costly to comply with and to administer than the current income tax .

even tax evasion is sometimes blamed on the complexity of the income tax .

many of the tax reform proposals have not been subject to detailed analysis .

based on those analyses that have been done , however , a number of the flat - tax proposals could , in their current form , lose revenue , perhaps substantial amounts .

they would also reduce the progressivity of the tax .

most proposals have been designed to be revenue neutral , but have not been evaluated by official revenue estimators .

the treasury department , however , has analyzed a version of the flat tax with a proposed rate of 17% , finding a revenue shortfall .

 ( this estimate , however , was made in 1995 before the major tax cuts were enacted. ) .

the treasury found that the revenue - neutral flat - tax rate in the proposal , given the level of exemptions ( ranging from about $10,000 for a single individual to about $30,000 for a family of four ) , would be around 21% ( 20.8% ) , about four percentage points above the proposed permanent rate of 17% .

alternatively , the 17% rate could be maintained and the exemptions cut by over half to maintain revenue neutrality .

with neither revision , treasury estimated the proposal would lose $138 billion annually .

there has been considerable dispute about whether the 23% tax rate proposed for the fair tax , a national retail sales tax with a rebate for low income families would be adequate to replace the income tax ( and payroll tax ) .

reasons for the dispute include technical questions about the requirements to keep government spending fixed in real terms , the degree of evasion , the effects on economic growth , and whether the tax is replacing the current level of tax revenues following the recent tax cuts or the level after these tax cuts expire .

other proposals with lower rates and / or more exemptions would presumably lead to larger revenue losses .

adding deductions , such as the payroll tax deduction , or restoring itemized deductions , such as those for mortgage interest and charitable contributions , would cause larger revenue losses .

value - added taxes or sales taxes ( which are equivalent to the flat tax except that they have no exemptions ) could presumably raise adequate revenue at lower rates if the base were kept broad .

the required rates in other proposals will depend on the base .

any revenue losses would either lead to higher deficits and debt or require spending cuts ; generally the latter option has been proposed .

some proponents have incorporated in their plans the presumption that tax rates can be lowered in the future due to economic growth .

it is important to note that a number of these taxes have a consumption base ; thus any growth that arises from increased savings would contract , rather than expand , the tax base in the short run .

increases in labor supply would increase the tax base .

our knowledge of the likely effects on labor supply and savings is very limited , however .

any flattening of the tax rates would have distributional consequences across income classes .

in addition , a switch from an income to a consumption base for taxation could cause large changes in the distribution of taxes across generations and family types as well as income classes .

holding revenue constant , flat - tax proposals would reduce tax burdens on higher - income individuals ; if the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) is repealed , the burden would rise on low - income individuals , as well as the middle class .

based on the 21% tax rate , and using percentage change in disposable income as a measure , poor individuals would experience decreases of 6% - 7% under the flat tax and middle income individuals decreases about 3% to 5% , while the highest income class will gain about 9% , according to the treasury analysis ( again based on estimates before the recent tax cuts ) .

these effects would be more pronounced if revenue neutrality were achieved through lower exemptions rather than a higher tax rate .

there are , however , conceptual problems in assessing distribution of consumption taxes .

value - added and sales taxes would reduce tax progressivity further because they do not permit exemptions , unless a credit mechanism were introduced .

proposals with a graduated rate structure would be more progressive than other proposals , but they have not been closely examined by the treasury or the joint committee on taxation .

proposals to shift the tax base from an income to a consumption base ( most proposals ) would shift the tax burden substantially across generations .

the flat tax , for example , has a consumption base , although it appears to be a wage tax for individuals .

the burden of tax would be shifted from wages and capital income to consumption , which is equivalent to wages and old capital ( both principal and return ) .

since older individuals own capital , the burden would tend to be shifted to those individuals .

the ways in which a consumption tax burdens old capital are complex , and the incorporation of generations as well as income in distributional analysis is limited at this time .

in general , however , younger individuals who are in taxable status and who will save substantial sums over their lifetimes would benefit relatively from the tax , while middle and higher income older individuals consuming assets would bear a greater burden .

wealthy individuals would have their tax burdens reduced over their lifetime if they maintain and increase their assets .

poor individuals with little savings over their lifetime would be relatively unaffected by the change in the base , as long as transfer payments are indexed to changes in the price level needed by a tax revision .

the rate structure is more important for these low - income individuals .

the marriage neutrality of the tax system is a function of the tax structure , not the choice of tax base - income or consumption .

hence , both an income and a consumption based tax can be marriage neutral if the accompanying tax structure is designed appropriately .

marriage penalties and / or bonuses can be avoided if taxes are levied on individual rather than family income or consumption and if standard deductions and tax rate brackets for married couples are twice the size of those for single taxpayers .

under the current income tax when married couples are compared to single filers , marriage tax penalties are confined to very low - income married couples who claim the earned income tax credit and to high - income married couples above the 25% marginal income tax threshold .

all other married taxpayers receive marriage tax bonuses , or at worst , a neutral tax treatment when compared to two singles with the same combined income .

a flat - rate consumption tax , with two filing statuses - married and single , and with a standard deduction for married couples that is twice the size of the standard deduction for a single individual would eliminate all marriage tax penalties and bonuses .

the same result , however , could also be achieved under an income tax by adopting a single tax rate and standard deductions that are twice as large for married couples as for single individuals .

there are no marriage bonuses or penalties with a sales or value added tax .

