the existence , possible scope and importance of the common law experimental use privilegein patent law remains the subject of considerable debate .

however , it should be noted that the patentact of 1952 includes a limited statutory experimental use privilege for patents on pharmaceuticals,medical devices , and certain other products regulated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

this provision , enacted as part of 1984 legislation known as the hatch - waxman act , ( 91 ) applies to firms seekingto market generic equivalents of brand - name products .

in addition , congress has enacted otherintellectual property legislation that incorporates provisions shielding researchers from infringementliability .

this report considers these topics in turn .

should congressional interest continue in this area , a variety of options are available .

if thecurrent scope of the common law experimental use privilege is deemed to be appropriate , then noaction need be taken .

alternatively , congress could enact legislation confirming the narrowlycabined view of the experimental use privilege as set forth in madey v. duke university andpredecessor cases .

if reform of the experimental use privilege is deemed prudent , however , another possibilityis the introduction of some additional form of the experimental use privilege into the patent act of1952 .

this infringement exemption could supplement or replace the narrow experimental useprivilege introduced by the hatch - waxman act .

one option is to incorporate a generally applicableprivilege of the sort contemplated by the proposed , but unenacted patent competitiveness andtechnological innovation act of 1990 .

h.r .

5598 was introduced before the 101st congress onseptember 12 , 1990 .

section 402 of that bill provided: it shall not be an act of infringement to make or use apatented invention solely for research or experimentation purposes unless the patented invention hasa primary purpose of research or experimentation .

if the patented invention has a primary purposeof research or experimentation , it shall not be an act of infringement to manufacture or use suchinvention to study , evaluate , or characterize such invention or to create a product outside the scopeof the patent covering such invention .

h.r .

5598 was reported by the house judiciary committee on october 26 , 1990 .

other intellectualproperty statutes , including the plant variety protection act , semiconductor chip protection act,and the vessel hull design protection act , also provide examples of the manner in which agenerally applicable statutory experimental use privilege could be drafted .

a more limited statutory experimental use privilege presents another law reform option .

such a privilege might be limited to patented inventions that arise in particular technological fields,in the fashion of the proposed , but unenacted genomic research and diagnostic accessibility actof 2002 .

h.r .

3967 would have exempted from patent infringement the use of genetic sequenceinformation for purposes of research .

in addition , this bill would have limited the remedies that theowner of a patent on genetic diagnostic testing could obtain during infringement litigation .

following its introduction in the 107th congress on march 14 , 2002 , h.r .

3967 was referred to thesubcommittee on courts , the internet and intellectual property on may 6 , 2002 , but no further actionwas taken .

another possibility would be to limit the experimental use privilege to patented researchtools , in whatever technological field they might arise .

yet another option is to grant anexperimental use privilege in favor of universities or non - profit research institutions , but retain thecurrent law of experimental use with respect to for - profit enterprises .

consideration of any sort of statutory reform with respect to experimental use privilegeshould take into account the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual propertyrights .

 ( 124 ) theunited states is a signatory to the so - called "trips agreement," which is a component of theinternational agreements that form the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the trips agreementin part requires its signatories to grant patent owners the right to exclude others from making , using,offering for sale , selling , or importing a patented invention .

 ( 125 ) further , under article27 of the trips agreement , such rights must be "enjoyable without discrimination as to the placeof invention , the field of technology and whether products are imported or locally produced. .

the trips agreement does allow member states to limit patent rights under certaincircumstances , however .

as stated in article 30 of the trips agreement: members may provide limited exceptions to theexclusive rights conferred by a patent , provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflictwith a normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interestsof the patent owner , taking account of the legitimate interests of thirdparties .

article 30 presumably allows its signatories to provide for a generally applicable experimental useprivilege .

many wto members , including germany , ( 126 ) japan ( 127 ) and the united kingdom , ( 128 ) already incorporatesuch a privilege into their patent statutes .

however , a more limited form of the experimental useprivilege may raise concerns under the non - discrimination provision of article 27 .

to the extent thatthe experimental use privilege is available for some sorts of inventions and not others , it may conflictwith the article 27 obligation not to discriminate as to the "field of technology" in which a patentableinvention arises .

 ( 129 ) finally , the experimental use privilege need not be an all - or - nothing proposition .

anotheroption is to grant researchers the ability to experiment with the patented inventions of others - - provided they compensate the patent holder at a specified royalty rate .

this regime would effectivelyamount to a "compulsory license" available to researchers .

 ( 130 ) janice mueller , amember of the faculty of the university of pittsburgh law school , posits that this approach wouldensure "a royalty award of sufficient amount to maintain incentives for the development andpatenting of new research tools , yet [alleviate] the access restrictions and up - front costs currentlyassociated with acquisition and use of many proprietary research tools. .

 ( 131 ) in weighing this approach to the experimental use issue , it is also important to note that thetrips agreement places some restrictions upon the ability of wto members to grant compulsorylicenses .

article 31 , which is among the more detailed provisions in the trips agreement , in partrequires that each application for a compulsory license be considered on its individual merits ; thatthe proposed user must have made efforts to obtain a license from the patent owner ; and that thelegal validity of such a license be subject to review by the courts or other independent authority .

 ( 132 ) deliberations over a"compulsory license" approach to the experimental use privilege may wish to account for theseobligations .

whether the patent law's experimental use privilege should be retained as a narrowlyconfined doctrine of limited availability , or expanded to encompass additional experimentalactivities , technologies , and researchers , continues to be the subject of active discussion in thescientific and legal communities .

a limited experimental use privilege may best encouragetechnological advancement by rewarding successful researchers with patent rights that are not easilycircumvented .

however , some commentators believe that the circumscribed nature of theexperimental use privilege may in fact restrict researcher access to state - of - the - art technologies andthus discourage further technological development .

although the courts have relied upon existinglaw in order to reach their decisions in particular cases , whether a narrow experimental use privilegemost appropriately serves the contemporary scientific research community remains open to policydebate .

