under the higher education act ( hea ) , institutions of higher education ( ihes ) must be accredited by an agency or association recognized by the secretary of the u.s. department of education ( ed ) to participate in hea title iv federal student aid programs .

while this process is voluntary , failure to obtain accreditation could have a dramatic effect on an institution's student enrollment , as only students attending accredited institutions are eligible to receive federal student aid ( eg , pell grants and student loans ) .

accrediting agencies are private organizations set up to review the qualifications of member institutions based on self - initiated quality guidelines and self - improvement efforts .

this process and its critical role in determining institutional eligibility to participate in title iv has sometimes been controversial .

as the 110 th congress considers reauthorizing the hea , it may consider making changes to the role accreditation plays with respect to federal student aid or to the accreditation process itself , such as the factors accrediting agencies must consider when evaluating an institution .

this report provides an overview of some of the possible accreditation issues that congress may address during the reauthorization process , a discussion of the findings and recommendations regarding accreditation from the secretary of education's commission on the future of higher education's final report , and a brief overview of relevant legislation from the 109 th congress that addressed accreditation issues .

there are several key issues related to accreditation that may arise during the reauthorization of the hea .

these issues include , but are not limited to , the use of accreditation as a gauge of institutional quality , the elimination of accreditation as a prerequisite for participation in hea title iv programs , accreditation and distance education , accreditation and transfer of credit , and due process requirements that apply to accrediting agencies .

in september 2006 , the secretary of education's commission on the future of higher education  ( the commission ) released its final report examining the current state of higher education .

the report included recommendations for improving access to higher education and making higher education more affordable for students .

included in its examination of higher education and related recommendations were several findings and recommendations specifically related to accreditation .

the commission found that accreditors play a gate - keeping function with respect to federal student aid programs .

despite this public function and increased attention to outcome measures , much of the information collected by accreditors is kept private .

the information that is made public tends to focus more on the results of process reviews , rather than providing information about learning outcomes and costs .

to meet the needs for increased accountability , quality , and transparency , accreditation must change .

they also argued that accreditation and federal and state regulations impede innovation in higher education , which diminishes the ability of ihes to address national workforce needs and compete globally .

in addition , the commission noted that it needs to be easier for students to transfer between different kinds of institutions .

current institutional policies with respect to the transfer of credit are often not clear and result in lost time and money for students and create the need for additional federal student aid .

the commission also noted that while accreditation once represented a private relationship between an accreditor and an institution , it is now a public policy issue and the process needs to be made more transparent to the public .

the commission made several recommendations regarding changes to the accreditation process .

for example , the commission recommended that accreditation agencies move more quickly to accredit new institutions and new programs at already accredited institutions , and increase their focus on results and quality , rather than prescribing requirements for process , inputs , and governance that perpetuate the current models of evaluation and impede innovation in higher education .

the commission also recommended that accrediting agencies make performance outcomes the priority over measures of inputs or process .

accrediting agencies need to create a framework to align and expand existing standards to permit comparisons across institutions on performance and outcome measures , to encourage innovation and continuous improvement , and to require institutions , based on their specific missions , to move toward world class quality and demonstrate progress in relation to national and international peers .

finally , the overall accreditation process must become more transparent and the final findings of the accreditation process must be made publicly available .

since the release of the commission's report , the secretary has continued to focus national dialogue on issues related to accreditation .

in november 2006 , the secretary convened representatives from accrediting organizations and other key stakeholders to address the commission's recommendations .

she has also scheduled a higher education summit for march 2007 ; accreditation will be a key topic considered at the summit .

this section provides a brief overview of relevant provisions contained in h.r .

609 , the college access and opportunity act of 2005 , and s. 1614 , the higher education amendments of 2005 — the primary vehicles for hea reauthorization in the 109 th congress .

h.r .

609 was passed by the house on march 30 , 2006 , by a vote of 221-199 ( h.rept .

109-231 ) .

s. 1614 was reported by the senate health , education , labor , and pensions committee on november 17 , 2005 , without a report .

a report ( s.rept .

109-218 ) was subsequently filed on february 28 , 2006 .

it was not considered on the senate floor during the 109 th congress .

both the house and senate bills would have made several changes related to accreditation issues .

for example , both bills would have altered accountability requirements that accrediting agencies must use in evaluating institutions , adding a new requirement that accrediting agencies consider the stated mission of the institution , including religious missions , when applying and enforcing standards to ensure the courses and programs offered by an institution are of sufficient quality to achieve their stated objective .

both bills would have added new requirements related to distance education , including requiring accrediting agencies to have standards that adequately evaluate distance education programs in the same areas as regular classroom - based programs and requiring accrediting agencies to ensure that ihes had implemented a process whereby the institution could determine that the student who registered for a distance education course or program was the same student who participated in , completed , and received credit for the course .

h.r .

609 and s. 1614 would also have prohibited ihes from denying the transfer of credit based solely on the accreditation held by the sending institution and would have required ihes to publicly disclose their transfer of credit policies .

finally , both bills would have modified existing due process requirements .

for example , both bills would have prohibited the appeals panel from including current members of the accrediting agency's decision - making body that made the adverse decision , and the appeals panel would have been subject to a conflict of interest policy .

