medical malpractice and malpractice insurance continue to be issues of great concern tophysicians , consumers , legislators , and others .

 ( 1 ) most of the discussion about the rising cost of malpracticeinsurance has centered on limiting the damage awards in malpractice suits .

some attention has beengiven to insurance market reforms .

a third , related area that has received less consideration inmalpractice discussions is patient safety .

patient safety refers to the panoply of rules , practices , and systems related to the preventionof patient injury , also known as "adverse events. .

intrinsic to patient safety efforts are strategies toprevent medical errors ; i.e. , the use of an incorrect medical treatment or the failure of a specifictreatment to achieve the intended result .

 ( 2 ) while patient safety and medical errors have generated a great dealof discussion in the media and in legislatures in the past several years , such discussion typically hastaken place separately from the vigorous debates concerning malpractice litigation .

legislationconsidered during the 109th congress has been no exception .

s. 544 , the patient safetyand quality improvement act of 2005 , established a system for the voluntary submission andanalysis of medical error data .

similar to other medical error reporting bills in recent years , itprohibited use of error data in administrative , civil , and criminal proceedings .

s. 544became p.l .

109-41 on july 29 , 2005 .

however , medical liability issues are addressed in otherlegislation - - specifically , h.r .

5 / s. 354 , the help efficient , accessible,low - cost , timely healthcare ( health ) act of 2005 ; s. 22 , the medical care accessprotection act of 2006 ; and s. 23 , the healthy mothers and healthy babies access tocare act .

 ( 3 ) all of thesebills focus on tort reform as the solution to increasing malpractice premiums .

 ( 4 ) the separation of patient safety concerns from medical malpractice issues has not alwaysbeen the case .

during the first malpractice insurance "crisis" in the mid - late 1970s , california passeda pioneering bill , the medical injury compensation reform act ( micra ) , which includedprovisions not only limiting damage awards and other legal reforms , but also strengthening patientsafety and physician disciplinary activities .

but the controversy over damage awards eclipsed thoseother topics , and subsequent state and federal legislative activity centered on reforming malpracticetort law .

this dynamic was repeated during the second malpractice insurance "crisis" during themid - late 1980s .

another spate of malpractice tort reforms were proposed and debated , separate fromthe proposals related to health care quality and the mostly academic discussions concerning patientsafety .

through most of the 1990s , patient safety issues did not command widespread legislativeattention , despite research that found that medical errors caused significant health and financialproblems for the individuals injured , their families , and the nation as a whole .

it wasn't until a 1999 institute of medicine study on medical errors , which avoided includingdiscussion about the malpractice insurance controversy , that the issue of patient safety finallyreached national prominence .

since publication of that report , the intense media attention helpedpropel patient safety issues to the forefront of health care debates and legislative proposals .

giventhe interest in patient safety and observations by some that the nation is in the midst of its thirdmalpractice insurance "crisis," some federal and state legislators have developed proposals to addressthese issues .

therefore , it may be appropriate to consider these issues collectively , and re - visit therole patient safety initiatives could play in the prevention of both medical errors and medicalmalpractice .

the link between malpractice and medical error has its detractors .

some health careobservers refer to studies that found that the majority of malpractice claims filed do not involvenegligent medical care .

 ( 5 ) in other words , the majority of patients who file malpractice claims have suffered medical injuries,but not of the type that would be "legally compensable" on the grounds of provider negligence .

 ( 6 ) moreover , a seminal medicalerrors study showed that many lawsuits are won by patients even though expert reviewers cannotestablish any evidence of negligence .

at the same time , only a small proportion of patients whoseinjuries are caused by negligence actually end up filing a malpractice claim .

some observers citethe gap between malpractice claims and provider negligence as evidence of a faulty litigation systemin need of reform .

thus , they support solutions that target the legal system , such as malpractice tortreforms .

 ( 7 ) other observers argue that the emphasis on liability and damage awards negatively impactsthe patient - provider relationship which , in turn , affects malpractice claims .

a number of studieshave shown that communication breakdowns lead to patient frustration and anger , which increasesthe likelihood of litigation .

 ( 8 ) some health care observers assert that the collapse incommunication and trust , in addition to a health care delivery system in which time spent providingservices has been compressed , adds an unhealthy , antagonistic component to modern medicine .

they conclude that this adversarial element acts as a significant barrier to quality improvement andpatient safety efforts .

such an assessment was reflected in an editorial by several well - respected patient safetyresearchers who observed that the threat of malpractice liability to deter bad medical care has "hadlimited impact on reducing patient injuries. .

 ( 9 ) indeed , the variety of disciplines involved in this debate ( i.e.,medicine , insurance , law , government ) speaks to the complexity of the issues .

it follows that anymeaningful discussion about them necessitates a thorough analysis , including an analysis of patientsafety .

while concern about patient injuries is not new , data about adverse events was sparse andlimited until fairly recently .

a small , pioneering study looked at a sample of 23 california hospitalsin 1974 .

 ( 10 ) thatanalysis found that nearly 5% of hospitalizations involved injuries to patients .

extrapolating fromthe number of hospitals in the sample to all ca hospitals , the study investigators estimated that therewere 140,000 patient injuries in that state alone in 1974 .

a more comprehensive study wasundertaken in 1991 , largely in response to the lack of robust patient injury data , by members of theharvard medical practice study ( hmps ) group .

the group analyzed 1984 data from over 30,000discharges at 51 new york hospitals and more than 67,000 litigation records , and the study isconsidered to be the most influential patient injury study .

the hmps found that the proportion ofhospitalizations involving medical injuries was around 4% .

lucian l. leape , one of the hmpsinvestigators , later extrapolated from the ny data and estimated that 180,000 individuals diedannually in the u.s. as a result of medical injury .

he noted that this was equivalent to "threejumbo - jet crashes every 2 days. .

 ( 11 ) in 1992 , a subset of the hmps investigators conducted avalidation study by reviewing 15,000 discharges from a sample of 28 hospitals in colorado and utah .

the findings of the co - ut study largely corroborated those of the ny study .

some patient safety advocates point out that medical malpractice claims and awards are nota reliable gauge of an individual physician's competence .

as discussed earlier , only a smallpercentage of patients who experience medical injuries end up filing malpractice claims , and of thosewho do file claims a majority did not experience injuries that meet the legal definition fornegligence .

therefore , even the most conscientious physicians face uncertainty as to whether theywill be sued , and negligent physicians may not be held accountable through the legal system .

 ( 17 ) in addition , questions remain as to whether the prior experience of being sued or the threatof possible litigation make physicians practice medicine more safely .

some studies point out thata "large body of research has accumulated showing that medical malpractice liability causes doctorsto practice defensive medicine. .

 ( 18 ) the premise underpinning defensive medicine is that the fearof liability and the potential negative outcomes associated with malpractice claims lead physiciansto administer additional health care treatments or avoid high - risk services primarily to reduce theirliability risk .

the implication is that defensive medicine results in either an increase in overallspending for health care that may not be medically necessary , or a decrease in access to certainservices or for certain patients .

detractors suggest that the growth of cost - conscious managed carehas limited physicians' ability to provide care that provides marginal medical benefit .

they arguethat empirical studies on defensive medicine have produced mixed findings , with "most failing todemonstrate any real impacts on medical practice arising from higher malpractice premiums or priorexperience of being sued. .

 ( 19 ) another issue for consideration is that many physicians may notface the full financial consequences of their professional conduct .

most physicians are insuredagainst medical malpractice , and premiums for professional liability insurance are not adjusted toreflect provider experiences with malpractice claims or other disciplinary actions , ( i.e. , malpracticepremiums are not "experience rated" ) .

how then can patient safety be improved with the individual provider in mind ? .

some havesuggested that serious deviations from quality care can be addressed by strengthening licensure andaccreditation requirements , and modifying physician disciplinary procedures .

others recommenda less - punitive , less - adversarial approach of assessment , feedback , and ongoing professionaleducation .

with the majority of medical error studies based on inpatient data and the iom report'semphasis on addressing system failures , most patient safety initiatives thus far have focused onhospitals .

an abundance of solutions have been proposed , such as reporting hospital performance,disseminating clinical protocols , and adopting innovative technology to aid hospitals in the creationof a "culture of safety. .

this endeavor was further energized by the implementation of patient safetystandards by the nation's largest hospital accrediting body , the joint commission on accreditationof healthcare organizations ( jcaho ) .

the jcaho standards stressed not only a hospital's role inthe prevention of medical errors , but also its responsibility for disclosing to patients when they havebeen harmed by such errors .

the specific challenges associated with it adoption reflect the larger concerns regardingadoption of patient safety programs in general .

individual initiatives have resulted in promisingoutcomes , but the overall impact of these efforts has been mixed .

to some degree , this is the casebecause implementation has not been as pervasive as initial intentions suggested , and also becausenot enough research has been done to identify , enumerate , and assess patient safety efforts .

congressional interest in activities at the federal and state levels has evolved from genericquality issues to concerns related specifically to medical errors and patient safety .

as part of thisevolution , the development and implementation of legislative proposals has varied in scope , focus,and purpose .

since the states traditionally play the role of regulator of provider behavior , the federalgovernment's presence historically has been small .

but there was growing realization in the latter1970s and throughout the 1980s that the need for quality improvement in health care was sopervasive and severe that efforts of individual states could benefit from federal initiatives .

in the1980s , congress passed a number of legislative proposals designed to address health care qualitythrough a variety of mechanisms .

those mechanisms included state reporting systems , a nationaldata bank , medicare peer review , and practice guidelines .

in general , the proposals focused on theperformance of individual providers and generic quality issues .

 ( 59 ) legislation to addresssystem problems specifically relating to patient safety issues did not come to fruition until the releaseof the iom's to err is human report .

several patient safety bills were introduced in the 106th congress to address the issues raisedin the iom report .

many members from both chambers and parties expressed support for patientsafety legislation , and introduced bills to develop guidelines for error reporting , establish a federalquality improvement center , and fund demonstration projects , among other initiatives .

however,patient safety was overshadowed by other legislative priorities and all six stand - alone bills failed towin passage .

the only federal action taken on this issue was a $50 million appropriation to theagency for health care research and policy ( later reauthorized as ahrq ) to support medical errorsresearch .

 ( 60 ) most ofthe patient safety legislation first introduced in the 106th congress was reintroduced in the 107th .

once again , not much legislative action took place .

during the 108th congress , a number of patient safety bills were introduced .

h.r .

663 , the patient safety and quality improvement act , was the bill that receivedthe most legislative attention and enjoyed broad bipartisan support .

h.r .

663 proposedthe establishment of a voluntary reporting system and provided civil and administrative protectionsfor certain types of documents and communications termed "patient safety work products. .

onmarch 12 , 2004 , the house passed h.r .

663 by a vote of 418-6 .

on the senate side , thehelp committee took up s. 720 .

the senate bill was broadly similar to thehouse - passed legislation .

s. 720 also established a voluntary system for the reporting ofmedical errors to patient safety organizations .

but there were a few differences between s.720 and h.r .

663 .

the key difference was that the senate bill provided greaterprotection for providers who submitted medical error information .

under s. 720 , thesubmitted information was shielded from use not only in civil and administrative proceedings , butin criminal actions as well ( with exception ) .

on july 22 , 2004 , the senate incorporated s.720 in h.r .

663 as an amendment , and passed h.r .

663 by unanimousconsent .

during the first session of the 109th congress , senator jeffords introduced s. 544 , the patient safety and quality improvement act of 2005 .

s. 544 was identical to thesenate - passed patient safety bill , s. 720 .

it established a system for the voluntarysubmission and analysis of medical error data , and prohibited the use of patient safety data inadministrative , civil , and criminal proceedings .

the senate amended and passed s. 544unanimously on july 21 , 2005 .

six days later , the house voted overwhelmingly to pass the bill .

s.544 became p.l .

109-41 on july 29 , 2005 .

 ( 61 ) while the majority of patient safety and medical malpractice bills address problems relatedto only one of these issues , a few bills have included provisions that address both issues .

forexample , s. 1337 would authorize the hhs secretary to award grants to states todevelop , implement , and evaluate alternatives to tort litigation for the purposes of resolvingmalpractice claims and utilizing patient safety data .

each state must demonstrate how the alternativeapproach encourages prompt and fair resolution of malpractice claims , promotes disclosure ofmedical errors , increases patient safety , and preserves access to medical malpractice insurance .

another bill , s. 1784 , would establish the office of patient safety and health carequality to administer the national medical error disclosure and compensation ( medic ) program .

this new federal program would analyze information submitted by program participants aboutmedical errors and patient safety events , provide grants for the development and implementation ofprograms to disclose medical errors to patients , and require program participants to offer to negotiatewith individuals injured by medical errors for some level of compensation .

the bill also includesprovisions for a number of separate studies to analyze provider accountability within the health caresystem , factors related to medical liability premiums , and cases that were not negotiated through theprogram .

a couple of other bills also introduced during the 109th congress ( h.r .

3359 and h.r .

3378 ) use a comprehensive approach that addresses multiple issue areas , suchas tort reform , mediation , insurance reform , medical errors reporting , and physician supply .

the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) was charged with promulgating rulespursuant to the patient safety and quality improvement act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-41 ) .

this task wasgiven to the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) within hhs , and specifically tothe center for quality improvement and patient safety within ahrq .

in march 2006 , ahrq helda series of public meetings to inform its rulemaking process .

these meetings solicited feedback fromthe public on specific topical areas , including provider - patient safety organization ( pso ) relationships , contracts and disclosures ( march 8 , 2006 ) ; the operation of a component pso ( 62 ) ( march 13 , 2006 ) ; andsecurity and confidentiality issues ( march 16 , 2006 ) .

although the meetings specifically asked forcomments relating to these topics , participants were generally encouraged to provide comments onany issue they believed was relevant to the rulemaking process .

a broad range of stakeholders wasrepresented at the meetings , with an average of 200 participants at each meeting .

 ( 63 ) the first meeting invited comments on provider - pso relationships , disclosures , andcontracts .

 ( 64 ) thepatient safety and quality improvement act provides for extensive privilege and confidentialityprotections for certain patient safety information , deemed patient safety work products .

specifically,information is afforded these protections if it is considered to be existing within a patient safetyevaluation system ( pses ) .

 ( 65 ) in other words , this information is considered to be a patientsafety work product if it is created within the boundaries of a pses .

for this reason , ahrq needsto provide clear guidance as to the boundaries and scope of a pses to make clear what informationfalls under its aegis and therefore is protected .

in addition , the statute requires entities pursuingcertification as a pso to provide the secretary with relevant information regarding their existingrelationships with health care providers that might constitute a conflict of interest , and ahrq wasinterested in gathering information from the public regarding what type of relationships specificallywould trigger concerns about an entity's ability to perform independently as a pso .

the second meeting focused on the issues arising during the operation of a component pso ( meaning an entity that is a component of another organization ) .

specifically , the statute hasadditional security - related requirements for component psos to ensure that privacy of the patientsafety work products it collects is not compromised .

in particular , these requirements help to makecertain that protected information is not shared with the parent organization .

finally , the third meeting solicited comment on broader issues relating to security andconfidentiality .

specifically , the statute allows for certain exceptions to the protection ofinformation , and ahrq was interested in learning more about how this would affect existing clinicaloperations .

in addition , since it is possible that a pso might receive information about events thatare outside of any contractual relationship it has with a provider , ahrq wanted feedback on howpsos should handle such information .

the agency also was interested in receiving commentsrelating to standards for de - identifying data and securing identifiable health information .

according to ahrq , the information generated through these meetings has been analyzedby the agency but is not publicly available .

the comments received highlighted several importantissues , which may be helpful to the agency as it moves forward .

ahrq is formulating a draft rule,and expects to release it in the immediate future .

as this will be ahrq's first operational program,and since the legislation raises a plethora of policy issues , a substantial amount of energy is beingdirected toward this effort .

more information about these meetings can be found on ahrq's websiteat http: / / www.ahrq.gov / about / pso06.htm .

state activity in health care quality preceded the release of to err is human .

a jcahosurvey found that at least a third of the states had implemented reporting systems by the late 1990s .

the purpose of those reporting systems was mainly to collect information on patient injuries orissues related to health care facilities ( eg , structural problems ) .

most of the reports came fromhospitals and nursing homes , but some states also collected data from other facilities , such asambulatory care centers .

these systems reportedly protected data confidentiality , though privacypolicies varied from state to state .

only a few states aggregated the information or conducted trendanalysis .

the overall effectiveness of these programs was hampered by resource and datalimitations .

 ( 66 ) on the issue of patient safety specifically , many state legislatures did not wait for their federalcounterpart to act .

the number of patient safety - related bills introduced in the states tripled in theyear following the release of the iom report , then nearly doubled in the year after that .

out of the22 states that introduced bills in 2001 - - two years after the release of the iom report - - half of themwere introducing medical error legislation for the first time .

however , during the 2005 legislativesessions , states made limited progress .

three states ( kentucky , virginia , and wyoming ) "enactedlegislation to address medical errors and to improve patient safety in the first quarter of 2005. .

 ( 67 ) as previously noted , 28 states have some type of medical error reporting mandate in place .

the requirements cover a spectrum of issues , such as the type of information to be reported , to whomthe information is submitted , and for what purpose .

for example , washington requires the reportingof medication - related errors , but new jersey requires the reporting of "serious preventable adverseevents. .

connecticut requires medical facilities to contract with patient safety organizations for datacollection and recommendations on improving patient safety .

in contrast , new york requireshospitals to report infection rates , which are included in an annual report published by the statehealth department .

while federal medical malpractice legislation usually did not include patient safetyprovisions , there was some evidence that the link between the two issues has been made at the statelevel .

for example , pennsylvania passed bills in 2002 and 2003 that contained provisionsconcerning malpractice tort reform , insurance reform , and patient safety enhancement .

accordingto governor rendell , the comprehensive approach was an attempt to address concerns aboutmalpractice insurance and medical safety .

 ( 68 ) a couple of other states passed or debated similar bills that alsolinked those issues .

state patient safety centers .

a buddingmovement in the states is the creation of state patient safety centers .

the common purpose of theseentities is to promote patient safety efforts within the state .

approaches , which vary by state , includeeducating consumers and providers about safety issues , developing systems for error reporting andanalysis , recommending patient safety goals to the state , and supporting collaboration among publicand private sector organizations .

while it is too early to assess the impact of these centers , the statecommitment of authority and resources towards these centers lends legitimacy and expectation toefforts that primarily had been conducted on a voluntary basis ( eg , patient safety coalitions ) .

statepatient safety centers may yet play an active role in generating the systemic changes cited as key toenhancing patient safety .

 ( 69 ) .

