international law consists of "rules and principles of general application dealing with the conduct of states and of international organizations and with their relations inter se , as well as with some of their relations with persons , whether natural or juridical. .

while the united states has long understood international legal commitments to be binding upon it both internationally and domestically since its inception , the role of international law in the u.s. legal system often implicates complex legal principles .

the united states assumes international obligations most frequently when it makes agreements with other nations or international bodies that are intended to be legally binding upon the parties involved .

such legal agreements are made through treaty or executive agreement .

the u.s. constitution allocates primary responsibility for such agreements to the executive branch , but congress also plays an essential role .

first , in order for a treaty ( but not an executive agreement ) to become binding upon the united states , the senate must provide its advice and consent to treaty ratification by a two - thirds majority .

secondly , congress may authorize executive agreements .

thirdly , the provisions of many treaties and executive agreements may require implementing legislation in order to be judicial enforceable in u.s. courts .

the effects of customary international law upon the united states are more ambiguous and difficult to decipher .

while there is some supreme court jurisprudence finding that customary international law is incorporated into domestic law , this incorporation is only to the extent that "there is no treaty , and no controlling executive or legislative act or judicial decision" in conflict .

this report provides an introduction to the role that international law and agreements play in the united states .

for purposes of u.s. law and practice , pacts between the united states and foreign nations may take the form of treaties , executive agreements , or nonlegal agreements , which involve the making of so - called "political commitments. .

in this regard , it is important to distinguish "treaty" in the context of international law , in which "treaty" and "international agreement" are synonymous terms for all binding agreements , and "treaty" in the context of domestic american law , in which "treaty" may more narrowly refer to a particular subcategory of binding international agreements that receive the senate's advice and consent .

the effects that international legal agreements entered into by the united states have upon u.s. domestic law are dependent upon the nature of the agreement ; namely , whether the agreement ( or a provision within an agreement ) is self - executing or non - self - executing , and possibly whether the commitment was made pursuant to a treaty or an executive agreement .

the constitution sets forth a definite procedure whereby the president has the power to make treaties with the advice and consent of the senate , but it is silent as to how to terminate them .

although the supreme court has recognized directly the president's power to conclude certain executive agreements , it has not addressed presidential power to terminate those agreements .

the following section discusses historical practice and jurisprudence related to the withdrawal from and termination of international agreements .

customary international law is defined as resulting from "a general and consistent practice of states followed by them from a sense of legal obligation. .

this means that all , or nearly all , nations consistently follow the practice in question and they must do so because they believe themselves legally bound , a concept often referred to as opinio juris sive necitatis ( opinio juris ) .

if nations generally follow a particular practice but do not feel bound by it , it does not constitute customary international law .

further , there are ways for nations to avoid being subject to customary international law .

first , a nation that is a persistent objector to a particular requirement of customary international law is exempt from it .

second , under american law , the united states can exempt itself from customary international law requirements by passing a contradictory statute under the "last - in - time" rule .

as a result , the impact of customary international law that conflicts with other domestic law appears limited .

in examining nations' behavior to determine whether opinio juris is present , courts might look to a variety of sources , including , inter alia , relevant treaties , unanimous or near - unanimous declarations by the united nations general assembly concerning international law , and whether noncompliance with an espoused universal rule is treated as a breach of that rule .

uncertainties and debate frequently arise concerning how customary international law is defined and how firmly established a particular norm must be in order to become binding .

some particularly prevalent rules of customary international law can acquire the status of jus cogens norms — peremptory rules which permit no derogation , such as the international prohibition against slavery or genocide .

for a particular area of customary international law to constitute a jus cogens norm , state practice must be extensive and virtually uniform .

although the united states has long understood international legal commitments to be binding both internationally and domestically , the relationship between international law and the u.s. legal system implicates complex legal dynamics .

in some areas , courts have established settled rules .

for example , courts clearly have recognized that the constitution permits the united states to make binding international commitments through both treaties and executive agreements .

and the supreme court has held that only self - executing international agreements have the status of judicially enforceable domestic law .

but other issues concerning the status of international law in the u.s. legal system have never been fully resolved .

the scope of presidential power to make executive agreements , the role of non - self - executing agreements and customary international law , and the division of power to withdraw from international agreements — like many international - law - related issues — have long been the subject of debate .

because the legislative branch possesses significant powers to shape and define the united states' international obligations , congress is likely to continue to play a critical role in dictating the outcome of these debates in the future .

