on november 18 , 2005 , the house voted to adopt the conference report ( h.rept .

109-305 ) to accompany the military construction , military quality of life and veterans affairsappropriations act , 2006 .

 ( 1 ) the senate adopted h.rept .

109-305 by unanimous consent thatsame day .

the military construction , military quality of life and veterans affairs appropriationsact , 2006 ( mil - con - qual - va appropriations act , p.l.109-114 ) was signed into law by thepresident on november 30 , 2005 .

the mil - con - qual - va appropriations act appropriated$22.5 billion for medical services , of which $1.2 billion was designated as an emergencyappropriation .

 ( 2 ) furthermore , p.l.109-114 appropriated $2.9 billion for medical administration , $3.3 billion formedical facilities , and $412 million for medical and prosthetic research .

the mil - con - qual - vaappropriations act did not recommend any of the fee increases proposed by the president .

on december 19 , 2005 , the house adopted the conference report ( h.rept .

109-359 ) toaccompany the fy2006 department of defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

2863 ) .

thesenate agreed to the conference report on december 21 , 2005 .

the conference agreement includes$225 million for the veterans health administration ( vha ) to address recovery activities relatedto the hurricanes in the gulf of mexico , and to prepare for a possible pandemic influenza outbreak,and excludes the department of veterans affairs ( va ) programs from a 1% across - the - boardrescission for all non - emergency discretionary programs .

 ( 3 ) the department of defense appropriations act , 2006 ( p.l.109-148 ) was signed into law on december 30 , 2005 .

with the enactment of p.l .

109-148 , the totalamount of funds appropriated for vha is $29.3 billion .

the total amount of funds available forvha is $31.5 billion , including $2.2 billion in collections ( copays and third - party insurancepayments ) .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides benefits to veterans who meet certaineligibility rules .

benefits to veterans range from disability compensation and pensions , education,training and rehabilitation services , hospital and medical care , and other benefits , such as home loanguarantees and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

va carries out its programs nationwidethrough three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans healthadministration ( vha ) is responsible for health care programs .

the veterans benefitsadministration ( vba ) is responsible for providing compensation , pensions , and education assistanceamong other things .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintainingnational veterans cemeteries .

va's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatoryfunding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , vocational rehabilitation , and lifeinsurance , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array ofbenefits and services , including medical care .

in fy2005 , discretionary budget authority accountedfor approximately 48% of the total va budget authority , with most of this discretionary fundinggoing toward supporting va medical care .

vha operates the largest direct health care delivery system in the nation .

 ( 4 ) in fy2004 , vha operated157 hospitals , 134 nursing homes , 42 residential rehabilitation treatment centers , and 862 ambulatorycare and community - based outpatient clinics .

vha also pays for care provided to veterans byindependent providers and practitioners on a fee basis under certain circumstances .

in addition,vha provides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities , andcollaborates with the department of defense ( dod ) in sharing health care resources and services .

during fy2004 , vha provided medical services to an estimated 4.7 million unique veteranpatients , a caseload that is expected to reach approximately 4.8 million in fy2005 .

according tovha , this number will decrease to approximately 4.7 million by the end of fy2006 .

 ( 5 ) the total number of outpatientvisits reached 49.9 million during fy2004 , and is projected to increase to 52.8 million in fy2005and 55.8 million in fy2006 .

in fy2004 , vha spent approximately 56% of its medical careobligations on outpatient care .

in addition , vha manages the largest medical education and health professions trainingprogram in the united states .

veterans' health care facilities are affiliated with 107 medical schools,55 dental schools and more than 1,000 other schools offering students allied and associatededucation degrees or certificates in 40 health profession disciplines .

in fy2004 , over 84,000 healthcare professionals received training in va medical centers .

 ( 6 ) this report provides: ( 1 ) a basic overview of the federal appropriation process ; ( 2 ) a briefoverview of vha's enrollment process and its enrollment priority groups ; ( 3 ) a brief summary offunding levels for vha for fy2005 ; ( 4 ) a discussion of the fy2005 and fy2006 budget shortfall ; ( 5 ) a discussion of supplemental appropriations for expenses related to gulf coast hurricanes andavian flu preparation ; and ( 6 ) an analysis of total vha funding for fy2006 , followed by a discussionof the administration's major budget proposals for fy2006 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 ( p.l .

108-447 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) appropriated $28.1 billionin fy2005 for vha .

as shown in table 1 , p.l .

108-447 appropriated $19.3 billion to financemedical services , $4.7 billion for medical administration , $3.7 billion for medical facilities , and $402million for medical and prosthetic research .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 , alsoincluded $370 million from the construction major account and $182 million from the constructionminor account for capital asset realignment for enhanced services ( cares ) - relatedactivities .

 ( 15 ) it shouldbe noted that these amounts are not included in the total vha budget since construction major andconstruction minor accounts are funded through separate construction accounts .

the consolidatedappropriations act , 2005 , did not approve the administration's proposal to fund vha through analternative account structure , and did not include any copayment changes that were proposed in thepresident's budget request .

 ( 16 ) on october 13 , 2004 , the military construction appropriations and emergency hurricanesupplemental appropriations act , 2005 ( p.l .

108-324 , h.rept .

108-773 ) was signed into law .

asenumerated in table 1 , this bill provided an additional $87 million for vha for fy2005 .

onaugust 2 , 2005 , the fy2006 department of the interior , environment , and related agenciesappropriations bill ( p.l .

109-54 , h.rept .

109-188 ) was signed into law .

p.l.109-54 provided $1.5billion in supplemental appropriations for veterans medical services for fy2005 , with carryoverauthority for fy2006 as well .

this action was taken by congress in response to the fy2005 budgetshortfall of more than $1 billion announced by the administration ( see discussion under fy2005 andfy2006 budget shortfall ) .

the total amount appropriated for vha for fy2005 was $29.7 billion .

as shown in table1 , this included $20.9 billion for medical services , $4.7 billion for medical administration , $3.8billion for medical facilities , and $402 million to finance medical and prosthetic research .

furthermore , $2.0 billion in medical care cost collections ( eg , copays and third - party insurancepayments ) was available for the medical services account .

therefore , the total amount of fundsavailable for vha for fy2005 was $31.7 billion .

in its fy2006 budget proposal the administration is recommending a set oflegislative and regulatory proposals .

the administration asserts that these proposalswill refocus the veterans' health care system to better meet the needs of high prioritycore veterans - - those with service - connected conditions , those with lower incomes,and veterans with special care needs .

some of these proposals were proposed infy2004 and fy2005 as well , and were rejected by congress .

 ( 35 ) .

source : department of veterans affairs .

note: service - connected disability means with respect to disability , that such disabilitywas incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in the active military , naval or air service .

source: president's task force to improve health care delivery for our nation'sveterans note: veterans receiving a pension for a nonservice - connected disability from va,veterans with incomes below $10,162 ( if no dependents ) , and $13,309 ( with onedependent plus $1,734 for each additional dependent ) , veterans receiving care forconditions such as agent orange , military sexual trauma and combat veterans withintwo years of discharge , and veterans who are former pows are exempt from payingoutpatient prescription copayments for nonservice - connected conditions .

a .

an annual medication copayment cap has been established for veterans enrolled inpriority groups 2-6 .

medication will continue to be dispensed after copayment capis met .

an annual copayment cap has not been established for veterans enrolledin priority groups 7 or 8. b .

veterans in receipt of a purple heart are in priority group 3 .

this change occurredwith the enactment of the veterans millennium health care and benefits act ( p.l .

106-117 ) on nov. 30 , 1999. c. priority group 7 veterans who are determined to be catastrophically disabled and whoare placed in priority group 4 for treatment are still subject to the copaymentrequirements as a priority group 7 veteran .

d. priority group 6 - - health insurance and all applicable copayments will be billed whencare is for conditions not related to the veteran's experience or exposure .

veteransin this priority group could be subject to full medical care copayments or reducedinpatient copayments under means - test criteria for nonservice - connectedconditions .

combat veterans receiving care for a potential service relatedcondition within two years of discharge from the military are in priority group 6. e. priority group 7 veterans - - for inpatient copayments only , veterans enrolled in thispriority group are responsible for 20% of the inpatient copayment ( in traditionalinsurance this is known as a deductible ) and 20% of the inpatient per diemcopayment .

the means - tested copayment reduction does not apply to outpatientand medication copayments and veterans will be assessed the full applicablecopayment charges for nonservice - connected care .

f. priority group 8 veterans - - for inpatient copayments only , veterans enrolled in thispriority group are responsible for the full inpatient copayment ( in traditionalinsurance this is known as a deductible ) and the inpatient per diem copayment .

veterans in this priority group are also responsible for the full outpatient andmedication copayments for nonservice - connected care .

there is no means - testedcopayment reduction .

medical services .

this accountprovides funds for treatment of veterans and eligible beneficiaries in va medical centers,nursing homes , outpatient clinic facilities , and contract hospitals .

hospital and out patientcare is also provided by the private sector for certain dependents and survivors of veteransunder the civilian health and medical program of va ( champva ) .

funds are alsoused to train medical residents , interns , and other professional , paramedical andadministrative personnel in health science fields to support va's medical programs .

overhead costs associated with medical and prosthetic research are also funded by thisaccount .

medical administration .

this accountprovides funds for the management and administration of va's health care system .

fundsare used for the costs associated with the operation of va medical centers , other facilities,vha headquarters , costs of veterans integrated service network ( visn ) offices , billingand coding activities , and procurement .

medical facilities .

this accountprovides funds for the operation and maintenance of vha's infrastructure .

funds are usedfor costs associated with utilities , engineering , capital planning , leases , laundry , foodservices , groundskeeping , garbage disposal , facility repair , and selling and buying ofproperty .

medical and prosthetic research .

thisaccount provides funds for medical , rehabilitative , and health services research .

themedical and prosthetic research program is an intermural program .

in addition to fundsfrom this appropriation , reimbursements from the department of defense ( dod ) , grantsfrom the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and private sources supports va researches .

medical research supports basic and clinical studies that advances knowledge so thatefficient , and rational interventions can be made to prevent , care or alleviate disease .

theprosthetic research program is involved in the development of prosthetic , orthopedic andsensory aids to improve the lives of disabled veterans .

the health services researchprogram focuses on improving the outcome effectiveness and cost efficiency of healthcare delivery for the veterans population .

overhead costs associated with medical andprosthetic research are also funded by the medical services account .

medical care collections fund ( mccf ) .

va deposits copayments collected from veterans obligated tomake such payments for either medical services or inpatient pharmacy benefits foroutpatient medication , and third - party insurance payments from service - connectedveterans for nonservice - connected conditions into mccf .

previously copayments , third - party insurance payments , and fees for services otherthan medical services or inpatient pharmacy benefits were deposited in several medicalcollections accounts .

in fy2004 , the administration's budget requested consolidatingseveral medical collections accounts into mccf .

the conferees of the consolidatedappropriations act of 2004 ( h.rept .

108-401 ) recommended that collections that wouldotherwise be deposited in the health services improvement fund ( former name ) , veteransextended care revolving fund ( former name ) , special therapeutic and rehabilitationactivities fund ( former name ) , medical facilities revolving fund ( former name ) , and theparking revolving fund ( former name ) should be deposited in mccf .

 ( 50 ) theconsolidated appropriations act of 2005 , ( p.l .

108-447 , h.rept .

108-792 ) provided vawith permanent authority to deposit funds from these accounts into mccf .

the fundsdeposited in mccf would be available for medical services for veterans .

these collectedfunds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended .

