nonproliferation assistance programs are a relatively new tool in combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

the cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) programs , funded by the department of defense ( dod ) , are the most visible of these programs .

begun in 1991 , ctr initially aimed to help russia meet its start obligations to reduce strategic nuclear weapons .

within a decade , however , ctr took on the goal of reducing the threat of terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

experts realized that russia needed to protect its cold war overhang of wmd materials , scientists , and equipment from those who might exploit insider opportunities and who had incentives ( particularly financial ) to sell wmd technology to anyone .

now , however , many analysts support expanding cooperative threat reduction programs beyond russia to other geographic areas .

the bush administration stated in early 2003 that it had "expanded the strategic focus of the ctr program" to support the war on terrorism .

in the fy2004 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

108-136 , sec .

1308 ) , congress authorized the bush administration to spend $50 million of unobligated funds from the cooperative threat reduction program in states outside the former soviet union .

as of september 2006 , the administration had spent $38.5 million in albania for the purpose of eliminating chemical weapons stockpiles .

the report of the 9 / 11 commission called for continued support for threat reduction assistance to keep wmd away from terrorist groups .

this report surveys options for applying ctr programs to states that pose a wmd and terrorism threat .

it describes potential recipients of such funding ( those states with wmd programs and terrorism problems ) ; the kinds of assistance that may be possible ; potential legal , political , and technical constraints on assistance ; and potential costs and benefits to the united states of providing such assistance .

the report begins with a brief review of why ctr programs might be considered applicable to the threat of wmd terrorism and then takes a more detailed look at the threat of wmd terrorism .

it reviews how certain kinds of ctr assistance might help defuse the threat and presents some options tailored for specific countries .

the report also looks at constraints involved in providing assistance and broader implications of such assistance .

the threat of terrorist access to wmd is a relatively new concern for nonproliferation experts .

first , the nonproliferation regime has always focused on controlling ingredients at the source as the most effective first line of defense .

such an approach already addresses two kinds of terrorist threats: that an insider might collaborate to sell or give a terrorist some materials and that terrorists might seek to steal materials themselves from facilities .

second , the regime has controls for transfers to anyone ( not just states ) outside the regime .

third , apart from aum shinrikyo's use of sarin gas on the tokyo subway , few non - state actors have conducted or attempted to conduct an attack with a functional nuclear , chemical or biological weapon .

on the other hand , the perception of an increased threat of terrorist use of wmd has grown since the september 2001 attacks on the united states .

there is evidence that al qaeda assigned a high priority to acquiring a wmd capability and some observers believe that chemical and biological weapons ( cbw ) capabilities are increasingly available .

the central intelligence agency ( cia ) estimated that "the threat of terrorists using chemical , biological , radiological and nuclear ( cbrn ) materials remained high" in 2003 [note the use of the word "materials," not weapons] .

the cia also concluded that "terrorist groups probably will continue to favor long - proven conventional tactics such as bombings and shootings. .

by february 2006 , the director of national intelligence john negroponte told congress that today , we are more likely to see an attack from terrorists using weapons or agents of mass destruction than states , although terrorists' capabilities would be much more limited .

in fact , intelligence reporting indicates that nearly 40 terrorist organizations , insurgencies , or cults have used , possessed , or expressed an interest in chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear agents or weapons .

many are capable of conducting simple , small - scale attacks , such as poisonings , or using improvised chemical devices .

however , negroponte provided no further evidence to support those claims .

according to the 2002 national security strategy , "rogue states" are those that: brutalize their own people and squander their national resources for the personal gain of the rulers ; display no regard for international law , threaten their neighbors , and callously violate international treaties to which they are party ; are determined to acquire weapons of mass destruction , along with other advanced military technology , to be used as threats or offensively to achieve the aggressive designs of these regimes ; sponsor terrorism around the globe ; and reject basic human values and hate the united states and everything for which it stands .

the cia has reported a growing concern that traditional state recipients of wmd technology "may follow north korea's practice of supplying specific wmd - related technology and expertise to other countries or non - state actors. .

when those states are designated state sponsors of terrorism , there is the possibility they may provide the terrorist organizations that they support with wmd materials or weapons .

while there is very little evidence to support this assumption , it cannot be ruled out .

because these countries tend to be "pariah" states , however , they may offer few footholds for cooperation .

nonetheless , some of the new and reinvigorated cooperation in counterterrorism since 2001 may help spur cooperation in other areas .

equally risky is the category of states that have terrorist activity on their soil and wmd programs .

these pose a different kind of risk: that terrorists may gain access to wmd without the authority or knowledge of the host government , either through insider ties or through instability engendered by terrorist activity .

table 1 , below , cross - references wmd capabilities and terrorist activities .

estimates of wmd capabilities are drawn from semiannual cia unclassified reports to congress ( per section 721 of the fy1997 foreign intelligence authorization act ) , " unclassified report to congress on the acquisition of technology relating to weapons of mass destruction and advanced conventional munitions. .

for the purposes of analysis , terrorism activity is divided into "state sponsors" of terrorism ( per section 6j of the export administration act of 1979 ) ; and those with activity ( terrorist incidents ) on their soil .

it could be argued that the list of state sponsors of terrorism corresponds poorly with the threat because most of the formal state sponsors of terrorism provide support , or used to provide support , for older groups and not necessarily those that appear to be most threatening now .

however , such a list provides a starting point for analysis .

for over a decade , u.s. government agencies ( particularly the departments of energy and state ) have spent nonproliferation assistance funds in countries outside of the former soviet union ( fsu ) .

given the relatively new ability to expend dod's ctr funds outside of the fsu , however , it may be useful to examine the ctr program for precedents , including the origin of the program , its objectives , kinds of work funded , and problems encountered .

congress enacted the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program in 1991 , addressing , in senator lugar's words , "the dominant international proliferation danger: the massive nuclear , chemical and biological weapons infrastructure of the former soviet union. .

as the soviet union began to dissolve , russia could not meet its obligations to reduce strategic nuclear weapons under the start treaty .

further , it became clear that the unraveling of the military industrial complex could have security consequences that transcended the former soviet union's borders .

the initial legislation allowed the department of defense to use unobligated funds to destroy and dismantle strategic nuclear weapons , make transportation and storage of weapons no longer in the stockpile secure , and convert former wmd facilities and scientists .

the ctr program had four key objectives: destroy nuclear , chemical , and other weapons of mass destruction ; transport , store , disable , and safeguard these weapons in connection with their destruction ; establish verifiable safeguards against the proliferation of these weapons , their components , and weapons - usable materials ; and prevent the diversion of scientific expertise that could contribute to weapons programs in other nations .

destruction and dismantlement activities included removing warheads , deactivating missiles and eliminating launch facilities for strategic weapons under the start i agreement .

efforts to improve the safety , security , and control over nuclear weapons and fissile materials have included providing storage containers , bullet - proof blankets , secure rail cars , and building a plutonium storage facility at mayak .

demilitarization projects have included defense conversion projects and international science and technology center projects to help wmd scientists pursue work with peaceful objectives and military - to - military contacts .

ctr programs have evolved and expanded over time , adjusting to russian , fsu states , and u.s. priorities , as well as to changing perceptions about which threats posed the greatest risk .

the programs have also bowed upon occasion to bureaucratic intransigence and practical considerations .

in one notable incident , department of energy officials provided blankets to facility guards who were leaving their posts to collect wood to build fires .

as the economy worsened in russia in the mid - 1990s , ctr projects sought to provide alternative employment and sources of income for unpaid or out - of - work wmd scientists .

increased reports of attempts to steal nuclear material highlighted the need for ctr to address material protection , control and accounting ( mpca ) measures for nuclear material , consolidation of nuclear weapons and material , and secure transportation .

the united states developed a practical approach: "quick - fixes," like bars on windows , blast - proof doors , fences , followed by a second stage that included more sophisticated security measures like sensors , cameras , and personnel access measures .

the idea that two former adversaries could cooperate on such sensitive matters as nuclear weapons and material security was radical in 1991 , but so too was the prospect of russia's wmd infrastructure unraveling .

the circumstances surrounding ctr's inception were unique: there was previous agreement under the start treaty to destroy nuclear weapons , agreement on both sides that those legitimate weapons needed to be secured before they were destroyed , and absence of international inspections because of russia's status as a nuclear weapons state .

russia had already agreed to destroy weapons — the only questions were how to implement those reductions quickly and who would pay for them .

that soviet nuclear weapons had been targeted at the united states for so many years presented a compelling reason for the united states to help .

the same situation arose years later when russia signed the cwc and ctr funds were used to help destroy those weapons .

an issue that could arise in the context of expanding ctr's scope is whether states with stocks of chemical weapons that are bound to destroy them by 2007 under the cwc ( india and one anonymous state ) will see this as an opportunity to have their obligations paid for by the united states .

ctr assistance to states outside the fsu might use four types of programs: those that help secure weapons , sites , materials , and personnel .

these correspond roughly to the ctr missions of weapons destruction , ensuring transportation safety , verifiably safeguarding against proliferation , and preventing diversion of scientific expertise .

a few differences stand out from the soviet case: 1 ) not all of the countries of concern here have actual weapons ; 2 ) some that do have weapons programs belong to treaties that they may be currently violating ; and 3 ) others that have weapons programs have no international restrictions on them and may not have any interest in giving up their weapons .

these differences will affect the kinds of assistance the united states might want to provide to those countries and possibly also the kinds of assistance it can legally provide .

there is currently no coordinated plan for prioritizing expanded ctr assistance .

table 2 , below , summarizes potential assistance to critical states in the nexus of wmd and terrorism , divided into three tiers .

the first tier includes the two "axis of evil" states ( north korea and iran ) ; the second includes other state sponsors of terrorism ( cuba , sudan , and syria ) ; and the third includes states with wmd programs and terrorist activity on their soil .

there may be political , technical , and legal constraints on u.s. assistance to some of the states mentioned above .

above all , these countries have to be willing to negotiate with the united states on reducing the wmd threat .

in the best possible world , that would mean abandoning their wmd programs ( like libya has done ) ; less desirable would be for them to curtail such programs .

and in some cases , it may even be difficult for countries to admit they have such programs .

states would need to calculate the value of such wmd programs to the state's national security , prestige , and regional stature , the potential benefits for abandoning such programs , and the likelihood of punitive actions by the united states ( and / or the world community ) if it does not abandon such programs .

such political constraints may pose the most formidable hurdles to u.s. assistance .

technical hurdles are clearly secondary constraints , but they can lead to questions about the effectiveness of verifying threat reduction programs .

ctr programs in the former soviet union , despite political willingness to participate in the ctr program , have been dogged for years by questions about their effectiveness for both political and technical reasons .

technical constraints stem primarily from incomplete knowledge of a country's wmd program , which makes it difficult to scope and prioritize the proliferation problems .

lastly , there may be legal hurdles in providing assistance , both because of u.s. treaty obligations and domestic laws prohibiting assistance to proliferators and state sponsors of terrorism .

the united states has provided nonproliferation assistance to many countries over many years .

in some instances , the united states funded projects or programs because the country in question did not have the resources to fix proliferation problems .

however , as the united states looks increasingly to bilateral "fixes," two questions need to be raised: are there enough resources for the united states to tackle these multiple problems , and do bilateral approaches undermine the multilateral nonproliferation regime ? .

two potential costs of undermining international institutions are decreased global pressure on proliferators and possibly decreased international support for u.s. policy objectives in other areas .

a bilateral approach may risk capturing the "easy" proliferation problems — like libya — and undermining support to tackle the "hard" proliferation problems — like pakistan and north korea .

without clear disarmament steps , assistance could be seen as rewarding bad behavior , which has been a recent u.s. concern in the case of north korea .

many u.s. administrations have fought both proliferation of wmd and terrorism but few have connected or coordinated the two .

a policy that seeks to eliminate the nexus of terrorism and wmd confronts more than a few challenges .

one particular challenge is obtaining active cooperation from a diverse group of states around the world , many of which are not traditional allies of the united states .

according to one observer , the united states hasn't made really clear "how...a former state supporter of terrorism stand ( s ) with the united states and with the rest of the international community in dealing with that common scourge. .

libya may provide an unfolding example of how a former state supporter of terrorism can be redeemed .

an equally challenging question may be how states that were considered former proliferators stand with the united states and the rest of the international community .

here , libya may not offer the best example .

although a long - time successful supporter of international terrorism ( albeit with waning activity in the last decade ) , libya was at best a mediocre proliferator , and decided to give up both activities in exchange for the lifting of burdensome economic sanctions .

a more troubling example is states that retain their wmd programs but not the stigma of being a proliferator .

pakistan raises the largest issue for the bush administration in its matrixed war against terrorism and weapons of mass destruction proliferation: has one goal assumed priority over the other ? .

there have been ample statements from administration officials since 2001 to the effect that pakistan has not been pressed on its proliferation activities because of its strong support in the war against terrorism .

despite evidence of sales of uranium enrichment equipment to iran and libya ( and , the bush administration maintains , to north korea ) , pakistani proliferation activities since 2001 are no longer reported to congress in the semi - annual unclassified section 721 ( of the fy1997 intelligence authorization act ) reports on the acquisition of technology relating to weapons of mass destruction and advanced conventional munitions .

the sea change in nonproliferation policy can be traced to the september 2002 national security strategy , in which president bush noted that "the gravest danger our nation faces lies at the crossroads of radicalism and technology .

our enemies have openly declared that they are seeking weapons of mass destruction. .

a few months later , the december 2002 strategy to combat weapons of mass destruction opened with the statement , "weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) — nuclear , biological , and chemical — in the possession of hostile states and terrorists represent one of the greatest security challenges facing the united states. .

[emphasis added] focusing on the terrorism axis has shifted policies to combat wmd proliferation away from global approaches ( at least rhetorically ) to tailored approaches .

paradoxically , this focus on hostile states and terrorists may leave the global community vulnerable to the proliferation activities of friendly states , whoever those happen to be at the time .

the 109 th congress considered the following legislation that could restrict the provision of ctr assistance to some countries .

the state department's annual foreign operations appropriations bill , the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , includes provisions that prohibit assistance to certain countries .

section 507 of the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations bill ( p.l .

109-102 ) states that no funds will be "obligated or expended to finance directly any assistance or reparations to cuba , libya , north korea , iran , or syria. .

the fy2007 bill passed in the house ( h.r .

5522 ) and awaiting passage in the senate includes the same provision .

the iran freedom support act , introduced in both the house and the senate ( h.r .

282 / s. 333 ) , could make supplying ctr assistance to iran more difficult .

the iran - libya sanction act ( p.l .

104-172 ) has been extended through september 2011 , pursuant to the iran freedom support act ( p.l .

109-293 ) .

sudan has been severely limited from receiving u.s. assistance since 1997 by a combination of executive order and u.s. law .

these include executive order 13067 , section 520 of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( p.l .

109-102 ) , the comprehensive peace in sudan act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-497 ) and the sudan peace act ( p.l .

107-245 ) .

the 109 th also considered legislation that could affect third party states , or any state that could potentially receive ctr assistance , to the extent such states are considered for these initiatives .

for example , section 542 of the fy2006 foreign operations bill ( p.l .

109-102 ) prohibited assistance to countries that provide lethal military equipment to state sponsors of terrorism .

other examples include p.l .

109-267 which extended the iran - libya sanctions act , the iran nonproliferation amendments act ( p.l .

109-112 ) , which added syria to that act , and the north korea nonproliferation act of 2006 ( s. 3728 ) , which added north korea to the iran — syria nonproliferation act .

in its oversight capacity , congress may wish to consider whether or not expanding ctr assistance could have a "snowball" effect , particularly if the united states insists on using its own resources rather than existing multinational inspectorates .

costs of assistance are likely to be minimal the first one or two years , but these could escalate , depending on the objectives of the program .

in the nuclear area , the nuclear programs of india , pakistan , israel , and north korea are far smaller than russia's and unlikely to incur the kinds of costs that the ctr program has thus far incurred .

on the other hand , data are scarce on the state of nuclear materials in those countries , so it is difficult to determine the scope and time - frame of such a program .

at a minimum , however , such a program is likely to be incrementally implemented .

costs could be minimal if a quick - fix , low - technology , information - oriented approach is taken or they could be more substantial if a sophisticated , high - technology approach is taken that would incorporate cameras , encryption , remote monitoring , and other means .

the same is true in the bw and cw areas ; the scope of the undertaking in russia greatly outweighs the combination of programs of relevant states .

however , the management of multiple programs could present particular difficulties .

in 1991 , the legislation that created the nunn - lugar program stipulated that u.s. assistance in destroying nuclear and other weapons may not be provided to the soviet union , any of its republics , or successor entities unless the president certifies to the congress that the proposed recipient is committed to: making a substantial investment of its resources for dismantling or destroying such weapons ; forgo any military modernization that exceeds legitimate defense requirements or is designed to replace destroyed wmd ; forgo the use of fissile materials and other components from destroyed nuclear weapons in new nuclear weapons ; facilitate u.s. verification of weapons destruction that uses u.s. money ; comply with all relevant arms control agreements ; and observe internationally recognized human rights , including the protection of minorities .

certifications , according to some administration officials , allow the united states to hold the recipient states' "feet to the fire," providing a source of leverage .

in the view of others , however , they pose unnecessary and even dangerous delays in implementing ctr programs .

in the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-163 ) , section 1303 of title xiii extended the three - year authority to waive certification requirements indefinitely .

section 1304 of s. 2766 , the senate's version of the fy2007 national defense authorization act , would have repealed all certification requirements .

however , the version of the defense authorization act passed in conference ( h.r .

5122 ) does not include provisions to repeal restrictions .

congress may wish to consider the implications of providing u.s. assistance to countries that are not democratically governed .

section 508 of the foreign operations bill ( p.l .

109-102 ) in the 109 th congress prohibited direct assistance "to the government of any country whose duly elected head of government is deposed by decree or military coup. .

most of the six state sponsors of terrorism would fall in this category .

in addition , pakistan has been subject to such restrictions .

p.l .

107-57 , which exempted pakistan from existing restrictions prohibiting foreign assistance to any country governed by a military that overthrew a democratically elected regime , requires the president to determine that foreign assistance "facilitates the transition to democratic rule in pakistan" and "is important to united states efforts to respond to , deter , or prevent acts of international terrorism. .

pakistan's exemption was to run out by october 1 , 2003 , but this was extended through the end of fy2004 by language in the emergency supplemental bill ( p.l .

108-106 ) , and then through subsequent foreign operations bills .

currently it is extended through the foreign operation fy2006 appropriation bill ( p.l .

109-102 ) until the end of fy2006 , and would be extended through fy2007 if the foreign operation fy2007 appropriation bill passes congress in its current form ( h.r .

5522 ) .

the law raises two pertinent issues: will president musharraf restore democracy to pakistan and if not , how would continued military leadership in pakistan affect u.s. cooperative efforts , particularly if new military leadership emerges ? .

in the absence of regime change , similar questions might be raised about efforts conducted with cuba and syria .

relevant treaty texts relating to obligations not to assist non - weapon states in acquiring nuclear , chemical , or biological weapons capabilities .

nuclear nonproliferation treaty , article i: the npt states in article i that nuclear weapon states commit: not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or devices , directly or indirectly ; and not in any way to assist , encourage or induce any non - nuclear weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices , or control over such weapons or explosive devices .

chemical weapons convention , article xx the cwc extends the prohibition to all states , stating that each state party to this convention undertakes never under any circumstances: ( a ) to develop , produce , otherwise acquire , stockpile or retain chemical weapons , or transfer , directly or indirectly , chemical weapons to anyone ; ( b ) to use chemical weapons ; ( c ) to engage in any military preparations to use chemical weapons ; ( d ) to assist , encourage or induce , in any way , anyone to engage in any activity prohibited to a state party under this convention .

the biological and toxin weapons convention , article iii each state party to this convention undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever , directly or indirectly , and not in any way to assist , encourage , or induce any state , group of states , or international organizations to manufacture or otherwise acquire any of the agents , toxins , weapons , equipment , or means of delivery specified in article i of the convention .

