congress has historically been very interested in the recruiting and retention of personnel in the nation's armed forces , as maintaining a fully manned and capable workforce is a key component of military readiness .

congress exercises a powerful influence on recruiting and retention goals through its establishment of personnel strength levels for each of the active and reserve components .

it influences the achievement of these goals primarily through setting military compensation levels ( which may include recruiting and retention bonuses , educational benefits , and separation incentives ) , establishing criteria that affect eligibility for enlistment and retention ( for example , age , cognitive , behavioral , and citizenship standards ) , and by authorizing and funding recruiting and retention programs ( for example , providing for dedicated recruiters and career counselors , military entrance processing stations , market research , and advertising ) .

through its oversight powers , congress also closely monitors the performance of the executive branch in managing the size and quality of the military workforce .

since 2001 , the united states has conducted major military operations that dramatically increased the operations tempo of the military services , required the large - scale mobilization of reservists , and resulted in significant battle casualties .

these factors were particularly applicable to the army , army reserve , army national guard , marine corps , and marine corps reserve , which shouldered the bulk of the manpower burden associated with operations in iraq and afghanistan .

many observers expressed concern that these factors would lead to lower recruiting and retention rates and jeopardize the vitality of today's all - volunteer military , particularly in the fy2005-fy2007 timeframe , when the army had difficulty meeting its recruit quantity goals and began accepting lower - quality recruits .

however , starting in 2008 these concerns were alleviated by the more favorable recruiting and retention environment brought about by comparatively high unemployment rates in the civilian economy , the improved security situation in iraq , and reduced recruiting goals for the army and marine corps as both of those services completed major expansions .

in recent year , cuts in active and reserve force structure have generated less demand for military manpower , thus allowing the services to set lower quantity goals for recruiting and retention .

lower quantity goals also allow the services to be more selective in whom they accept and retain , thereby enhancing quality levels .

however , the future recruiting and retention environment is less clear .

reductions in strength may be coming to an end , which would likely require the services to increase their recruiting and retention quantity goals in order to stabilize their forces at planned levels .

this could result in the services reducing quality somewhat to meet their quantity goals , or perhaps require the application of greater recruiting resources ( eg , advertising , recruiters , and enlistment bonuses ) to maintain quality .

a strengthening of economic growth could make civilian work comparatively more attractive than military work , thereby making recruiting and retention more challenging .

additionally , the historical experience of the post - cold war drawdown also raises some cautionary flags for the current post - drawdown situation: if a perception of limited career prospects or lower job satisfaction were to develop , it could have a negative effect on recruiting and retention .

recruiting has been called the life blood of the military .

without a robust ability to bring new members into the military , the services would lack sufficient manpower to carry out mission essential tasks in the near term and would lack a sufficient pool of entry - level personnel to develop into the mid - level and upper - level leaders of the future .

to protect against this , the active and reserve components set goals for new recruit "accessions" each fiscal year .

officer and enlisted goals are set separately .

there are both "quantity" and "quality" goals for the enlisted force .

the term retention refers to the rate at which military personnel voluntarily choose to stay in the military after their original obligated term of service has ended .

imbalances in the retention rate can cause problems within the military personnel system .

a common retention concern is that too few people will stay in , thereby creating a shortage of experienced leaders , decreasing military efficiency , and lowering job satisfaction .

this was a particular concern during the middle part of the last decade , as the stress of combat deployments raised concerns about the willingness of military personnel to continue serving .

the opposite concern — more salient today in light of reductions in force structure — is that too many people will stay in , thereby decreasing promotion opportunities and possibly requiring involuntarily separations in order to prevent the organization from becoming "top heavy" with middle and upper level leaders or to comply with end - strength limitations .

each of these outcomes can have a negative impact on recruiting by making the military a less attractive career option .

the nation's most recent experience with force structure cuts illustrates some of the potential impacts that such cuts can have on recruiting and retention .

in the aftermath of the cold war , all of the services embarked on major force reduction efforts .

needing fewer people , the services significantly reduced their recruiting and retention goals , which in turn made it easier for them to meet these goals .

as a result , the services all reported excellent recruiting and retention results in the early 1990s .

however , by the late 1990s , the army , navy , and air force began to experience some difficulties .

in fy1998 , the army and the navy failed to meet their quantity goals for enlisted recruits , as did the army and the air force in fy1999 .

retention shortfalls also surfaced in the army , navy , and air force .

there was a wide array of perceived causes for these recruiting and retention shortfalls , including competition with a robust civilian economy and a perceived "pay gap" between civilian and military compensation , competition with institutions of higher education , and demographic and attitudinal changes among younger americans .

other cited causes included limited recruiting resources and dissatisfaction with military life , due to the nature of military service and pace of operations ( eg , bosnia and kosovo ) and a lack of critical supplies and equipment .

in comparison to the cold war drawdown mentioned above , this current drawdown is smaller in scope for the army , about the same magnitude of reduction for the marine corps , and is focused mainly on these two services rather than all four services ; but a similar dynamic could occur .

in such a scenario , recruiting and retention would likely remain strong in the near term due to force reductions and sluggish competition from the civilian economy , but challenges would arise once these factors faded .

specifically , recruiting and retention requirements could increase as the drawdown neared completion in order to stabilize the force at its designated personnel strength level .

meeting these requirements might also be made more difficult due to increased competition from a more robust economy , fewer resources allocated to recruiting and retention , or the development of negative attitudes about military career prospects and job satisfaction .

if such a scenario were to occur , its impact on recruiting and retention would likely not be manifest until the latter half of this decade .

another cautionary flag raised by the post - cold war drawdown relates to managing force structure to hedge against future contingencies .

to paraphrase the comments of a former chief of staff of the army , you can reduce force structure quickly , but it takes time to re - grow quality soldiers and leaders .

congress exercises a powerful influence on recruiting and retention goals through its establishment of personnel strength levels for each of the active and reserve components .

as such , congress's response to the administration's force structure plans can have a major impact on each of the services' recruiting and retention goals .

if congress enacts into law manning levels significantly higher than what the administration proposes , then the services typically increase their recruiting and retention goals to meet the higher objective ; conversely , if congress enacts lower manning levels into law , the services can decrease their goals .

congress also influences the achievement of these goals through setting military compensation levels ( which may include recruiting and retention bonuses , educational benefits , and separation incentives ) , establishing criteria that affect eligibility for enlistment and retention ( for example , age , cognitive , behavioral , and citizenship standards ) , and by authorizing and funding recruiting and retention programs ( for example , providing for dedicated recruiters and career counselors , military entrance processing stations , market research , and advertising ) .

through its oversight powers , congress also closely monitors the performance of the executive branch in managing the size and quality of the military workforce .

the policy levers most commonly used by congress and dod to manage recruiting and retention in the near term include varying the number of recruiters , funding for advertising , and funding for enlistment and reenlistment bonuses .

when recruiting or retention shortfalls occur , or are anticipated , congress may elect to apply additional resources to these mechanisms , as it did during the last decade .

conversely , when recruiting or retention is expected to be strong , congress may elect to shift resources away from these areas , as it has done in recent years .

robust military compensation , force structure cuts , and weakness in the labor market have contributed to a favorable environment for recruiting and retention in recent years .

however , these favorable influences appear to be waning to a certain degree .

additionally , the experience of the post - cold war drawdown raises some cautionary flags .

if the drawdown undermines job satisfaction or creates a perception of limited career prospects , or if an improving economy makes civilian employment comparatively more attractive than military service , the services may face a more challenging recruiting and retention environment within a few years .

