in the past few years , u.s. policy toward the kingdom of cambodia has broadened from a human rights focus to a multi - faceted approach .

a key challenge for u.s. policy toward cambodia lies in combining and balancing efforts to improve relations and to promote human rights in the kingdom .

during the past decade , cambodia has made progress in some areas of u.s. interest and concern , including the development of civil society , improvements in the conduct of elections , labor rights , counterterrorism , hiv / aids prevention , and bringing khmer rouge leaders to justice .

however , government abuses of power and violations of human rights remain serious problems .

political violence and corruption also continue to mar democracy and governance in the kingdom .

the return to relative political stability in cambodia in 2006 after parliamentary crises during the 2003-05 period ushered in a movement toward deeper u.s. - cambodia ties .

this trend also has been driven by u.s. interests in cooperating with cambodia on counterterrorism efforts and responding to china's growing economic influence in the region and in burma , laos , and cambodia in particular .

the u.s. government opened a new embassy in the capital , phnom penh , in 2006 .

in 2007 , the u.s. government lifted a ten - year ban on direct bilateral aid to cambodia and two u.s. navy ships made port calls in the kingdom , the first naval visits in 30 years .

possible areas for greater u.s. involvement and assistance in cambodia include trade , infrastructure development , and environmental protection .

some u.s. lawmakers argue that economic support for cambodia should remain restricted until prime minister hun sen and the cambodian government have established a record of respect for political freedoms and civil liberties and have reduced corruption .

other policy experts argue that greater u.s. engagement with cambodia through foreign aid , enhanced trade , and diplomacy would better help to achieve u.s. goals and counter any adverse economic and political influence of china .

another policy option is to establish a dialogue with china and other major southeast asian countries on how to best promote development and security in cambodia and the region .

cambodia is the fourth largest recipient of u.s. foreign aid in southeast asia after indonesia , the philippines , and vietnam .

the united states is the largest overseas market for cambodian goods , mostly apparel items .

the cambodian government has urged the u.s. government to grant its garment exports preferential treatment so that it can better compete with larger economies such as china .

the cambodian government also has requested that a portion of payments on the $339 million debt owed to the united states , incurred during the 1970s , be used to pay for development programs in cambodia .

the kingdom of cambodia received its independence from france in 1953 under the leadership of the popular king , norodom sihanouk .

in 1955 , sihanouk abdicated in favor of his father , and assumed the post of prime minister and head of the ruling party .

when his father died in 1960 , sihanouk received the title of prince .

in 1965 , prince sihanouk broke off diplomatic relations with the united states in response to u.s. and south - vietnamese military incursions into the kingdom and growing u.s. influence in the cambodian armed forces .

diplomatic relations were restored in 1969 .

beginning in 1969 , the united states conducted a four - year , sustained , large scale bombing campaign in cambodia aimed at north vietnamese troops in the country .

according to some historians , the american bombing helped the cambodian communists to gain followers and recruit soldiers .

in march 1970 , the military forces of pro - american general lon nol overthrew the government of prince sihanouk in a coup .

the prince fled to beijing and reluctantly formed an alliance with the cambodian communists against the lon nol government .

a civil war followed , culminating in the defeat of lon nol in april 1975 by the communist party of kampuchea ( also known as the khmer rouge ) .

the prince returned to phnom penh from beijing only to be placed under house arrest .

during the khmer rouge's brutal three - year reign – which included forced depopulation of the cities and the establishment of rural communes – nearly two million out of a population of eight million cambodians died from execution , torture , overwork , starvation , and disease .

urban cambodians with wealth and education were particularly targeted .

in january 1979 , an invasion by vietnamese forces drove the khmer rouge from phnom penh .

sihanouk then sought refuge in china and north korea .

a 13-year civil war ensued , in which khmer rouge , cambodian nationalist ( kpnlf ) , and royalist ( ans ) insurgents fought the vietnamese - backed regime .

following the vietnamese withdrawal from cambodia in 1989 , a united nations ( u.n. ) - brokered peace settlement officially ended the war in october 1991 and led to elections for a 120-seat constituent assembly in may 1993 .

prince sihanouk returned to cambodia as king .

although the royalist funcinpec party ( national united front for an independent , neutral , peaceful , and cooperative cambodia ) won a 58-seat plurality , it agreed to form a coalition government with the cambodian people's party ( cpp ) , with 51 seats , after the cpp threatened that it would not accept the election .

the establishment of the coalition government with prince norodom ranariddh , head of funcinpec , and hun sen , head of the cpp , as co - prime ministers brought fragile political stability to cambodia .

the united states congress passed several measures supporting non - communist resistance forces and humanitarian assistance in cambodia and prohibiting assistance for the khmer rouge .

in 1997 , after rising tensions between the coalition partners , hun sen staged an armed takeover of the government .

an estimated 80-100 cambodians , including many funcinpec leaders , were killed , and prince ranariddh and other politicians fled cambodia .

in the face of considerable international pressure and the withholding of foreign aid , hun sen allowed prince ranariddh to return and held new parliamentary elections in july 1998 , which the cpp narrowly won .

despite charges of election irregularities and post - election violence , the two parties again agreed to form a coalition government , with hun sen as prime minister and prince ranariddh as president of the national assembly .

the 105 th congress terminated bilateral or government - to - government assistance , which was not fully restored until 2007 , and passed resolutions condemning a grenade attack in march 1997 on opposition leader sam rainsy and his supporters ( s.res .

69 ) and calling for free and fair elections in cambodia ( h.res .

361 ) .

in the past several years , voting institutions have strengthened while an active civil society and varied press have developed in cambodia with foreign support .

however , many problems related to political , civil , and property rights remain , including extrajudicial killings , government interference in the judiciary , defamation laws that restrict freedom of speech , and expropriation of land without proper compensation .

corruption pervades cambodian society and government .

transparency international's corruption perceptions index 2008 ( degree of corruption ) ranked cambodia 166 out of 180 countries .

although cambodia remains one of the poorest countries in asia , its economy has experienced steady growth during the past decade and a half , while government budgetary performance and foreign investment opportunities have improved .

however , continuing obstacles to faster and more balanced development and greater foreign investment include a limited human resource base , low government capacity , weak legal and financial institutions , poor infrastructure , and official corruption .

cambodia formally joined the world trade organization ( wto ) on october 13 , 2004 .

as a member of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) since 1999 , the kingdom is committed to participating in the asean free trade area ( afta ) in 2015 .

major export markets are the united states , germany , and the united kingdom ; chief import sources are thailand , singapore , and china .

malaysia , china , and taiwan have the largest cumulative foreign investments in the kingdom .

real gdp growth was estimated at 4.5% in 2008 and projected to decrease to 2.5% in 2009 .

textile manufacturing , tourism , and construction have fueled growth in recent years .

in 2008 , 2.5 million foreign tourists were expected to visit the kingdom , with the largest numbers coming from south korea , japan , china , and taiwan .

however , garment exports and tourism began to slow in the second half of 2008 due to effects of the global economic recession .

in 2005 , the u.s. oil company chevron announced the discovery of oil and gas reserves in the gulf of thailand off the coast of cambodia .

the prospects for oil have excited many cambodian government leaders and citizens hoping that oil revenues will help to lift the country out of poverty .

according to some estimates , revenues to the government could start at around $175 million annually and peak at $1.7 billion after drilling reaches full capacity in ten years .

however , it may take two years or more before oil is first extracted , and potential reserves are still uncertain .

petroleum companies from several countries , including the united states , japan , china , thailand , and south korea , have begun exploration and drilling offshore and at onshore sites such as the tonle sap basin , with chevron in the lead as the developer of the first oil field .

however , some analysts have noted potential obstacles , particularly official corruption , to the rapid or full realization of cambodia's dream of turning oil into economic development .

furthermore , cambodia and thailand have unresolved territorial disputes in the gulf of thailand where some of the largest oil and gas reserves are located .

foreign aid from a variety of sources is equal to over half of cambodia's government budget .

since 1996 , the consultative group ( cg ) for cambodia , a consortium of international financial organizations and donor countries under the auspices of the world bank , has met annually to set economic and political reform guidelines for the cambodian government and to extend ever - expanding aid packages .

major bilateral providers of official development assistance ( oda ) include japan , the united states , germany , france , and australia .

total cg assistance averaged approximately $600 million per year during the 2005-2008 period .

international donors pledged $950 million in aid for 2009 .

some human rights groups have criticized foreign aid donors for increasing assistance despite the cambodian government's lack of progress in fighting corruption .

china's foreign assistance , which consists largely of concessional loans , aid for infrastructure projects , and investments in natural resources in many developing countries , differs from that of major oda providers , which mostly provide grants for poverty - reduction programs , democratic governance efforts , and humanitarian aid .

furthermore , china provides aid that is mostly "unconditional" – without requirements related to political and economic reform or social and environmental safeguards .

by some calculations , china has become the largest or second largest foreign aid provider to cambodia .

for 2009 , china reportedly pledged the largest amount of aid ( $257 million ) , followed by the eu with $214 million and japan with $112 million .

according to another source , during the 2007-2009 period , out of a projected $2 billion in total oda to cambodia , beijing announced an estimated $236 million in unspecified funding compared to the eu's $215 million and japan's $337 million .

some analysts argue that the united states should attempt to find ways to cooperate with china to assist cambodia with infrastructure and energy development that provides for balanced and widespread development and protects human rights and the environment .

cambodia's foreign policy is oriented toward several major regional actors , including china , the united states , japan , western european countries , asean neighbors , and india .

cambodia's human rights record remains a constant source of friction between prime minister hun sen and major oda donors , such as japan , australia , germany , and france ; the kingdom's dependence on foreign aid has helped to keep pressure on the government to maintain or strengthen basic democratic norms and institutions .

the prime minister visited new delhi in 2007 where the two countries signed agreements on a $35 million indian loan to cambodia as well as cooperation and technical assistance related to oil exploration , defense cooperation , and other areas .

despite historical animosities and lingering border disputes , cambodia and neighboring countries ( thailand , vietnam , and laos ) maintain active diplomatic contacts and are becoming increasingly economically integrated .

cambodia and thailand , which once ruled parts cambodia , have a history of conflict , although they share cultural traits .

the two countries also have experienced outbreaks of tensions in recent years .

in 2008 , the long - simmering dispute over sovereignty of the land under the 11 th century khmer preah vihear temple along the thai - cambodia border reignited after the united nations ( unesco ) granted the site world heritage status .

border clashes between thai and cambodian troops in october 2008 and april 2009 left five thai and three cambodian soldiers dead .

claims about who started the exchanges of gunfire have been conflicting .

the two sides have held talks to defuse the situation .

in 2003 , cambodian protesters attacked the thai embassy in phnom penh after a thai actress allegedly stated that cambodia should return the angkor wat temples to thailand .

within the cpp , there reportedly are individuals and factions with pro - vietnam and pro - china leanings .

hun sen , who served as foreign minister in the vietnam - backed peoples republic of kampuchea during the 1980s , has maintained close diplomatic and military relations with vietnam while welcoming chinese economic assistance .

many cambodians regard vietnam with wariness stemming from vietnam's control over parts their country prior to the french colonial period and during the 1980s .

for the past decade , as beijing has reached out to the region , hun sen has cultivated ties with the people's republic of china ( prc ) .

china has become a significant economic force in southeast asia as a financer for infrastructure and other economic development projects , buyer of raw materials , and source of low - priced manufactured goods .

according to many experts , the prc is one of the top providers of foreign assistance to cambodia , mostly in the form of government buildings , large infrastructure projects , and economic investments but also including support for public health , de - mining efforts , elections , the restoration of angkor wat , and combating transnational crime .

since the late 1990s , china also has provided military assistance , including an army school and hospital , barracks , vehicles , five warships and nine patrol boats , as well as police and military training .

in 2008 , beijing reportedly pledged $1 billion for two major hydroelectric projects .

in return for china's economic assistance , phnom penh has supported the "one - china" principle , despite the country's significant economic relations with taiwan .

china has become a dominant investor and employer in the kingdom , with over 3,000 companies and the establishment of a special economic zone in sihanoukville for the production of goods to be exported duty free to china .

the prc also has become an important trading partner to cambodia , with bilateral trade totaling $1.1 billion in 2008 .

although less than half of cambodia - u.s. trade , this figure represented an increase of 21% over 2007 .

however , this rise in total trade disguised a 24% drop in cambodian exports to china .

unlike some larger countries in southeast asia , such as indonesia , malaysia , and the philippines , which have run trade surpluses or avoided large deficits with china , cambodia runs a huge trade deficit with the prc ( growing from $830 million in 2007 to $1 billion in 2008 ) .

according to one observer , about 60% of products in cambodian markets come from china .

on the one hand , some observers contend that chinese assistance has benefitted cambodian development , adding that many prc aid projects have faced difficult physical challenges and conditions that other major aid donors and organizations have avoided .

furthermore , they hold that china's involvement does not preclude or undermine the kingdom's relations with other nations such as the united states .

on the other hand , other experts argue that the lack of conditions on prc assistance and regulations on chinese investments exacerbates corruption and environmental problems , such as illegal logging , in the kingdom .

some u.s. officials have expressed worry that as prc economic support increases , the united states and other western countries may lose leverage in calling upon the cambodian government to engage in democratic practices and enforce the rule of law .

the ethnic chinese community in cambodia reportedly has regained its former economic clout and helped facilitate prc investment .

roughly 3% - 5% of the kingdom's population , or from 350,000 to 700,000 cambodians , are ethnic chinese , many of whom are descendants of settlers from southern china going back five centuries while others are part of a tide of recent immigration .

before 1975 , ethnic chinese in cambodia , mostly city - dwellers , dominated commerce and trade in the kingdom .

about half of the ethnic chinese population reportedly perished under the khmer rouge .

they faced discrimination under the vietnamese - backed government during the 1980s , but have prospered under hun sen .

some longtime cambodian chinese , however , wary of a cambodian backlash against growing chinese immigration and influence in the economy and mindful of the prc's past support of the khmer rouge , reportedly feel resentful towards china's rising influence .

the largest chinese language school in southeast asia reportedly is located in phnom penh .

asian languages , and in particular chinese , are catching up to english as the most sought after foreign languages for learning .

the most popular chinese courses are related to business .

according to u.s. officials , cambodia has made commendable counterterrorism efforts , although potential problems remain .

some experts warn that the country's increasing economic openness , porous borders , weak government capacity , and corruption increase the likelihood that regional terrorist groups such as jemaah islamiyah ( ji ) favor it as a safe haven .

for example , hambali , the indonesian accused of directing the october 2002 bombing in bali , reportedly took refuge in cambodia in 2002 and 2003 .

in 2003 , cambodian officials arrested four men — one cambodian muslim , two thai muslims , and an egyptian — for belonging to ji and plotting to carry out terrorist attacks in cambodia .

the three non - cambodians were teachers at a saudi - funded islamic school that cambodian authorities subsequently shut down .

in september 2006 , u.s .

ambassador joseph mussomeli stated that "cambodia has made great strides in securing its borders and rooting out terrorists that seek to use this country as a base of operations. .

in 2004 , the cambodian government , in cooperation with the united states , destroyed 233 soviet surface - to - air missiles to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists in southeast asia .

in 2006 , the cambodian government enacted a new counterterrorism law that was drafted with the help of australian and british experts .

in 2007 , a joint national counterterrorism committee was established .

in january 2008 , fbi director robert mueller visited cambodia to preside over the opening of a permanent legal attache office for cambodia and vietnam .

cambodia's muslims , mostly ethnic cham people who practice a tolerant , syncretic form of islam that incorporates buddhism and other belief systems , make up about 5% of the kingdom's population .

the cham , mostly poor farmers , fishermen , and traders , generally are not politically active .

their religious and educational institutions were destroyed by the khmer rouge .

since the early 1990s , however , assistance from the middle east , malaysia , and indonesia have helped to build new mosques and religious schools and brought conservative strains of islam in cambodia .

