this report is an overview of u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east .

it includes a brief historical review of foreign aid levels , a description of specific country programs , and an analysis of current foreign aid issues .

congress both authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance and conducts oversight on executive agencies' management of aid programs .

as the largest regional recipient of u.s. economic and military aid , the middle east is perennially a major focus of interest as congress exercises these responsibilities .

in the middle east , the united states has a number of strategic interests , ranging from support for the state of israel and israel's peaceful relations with its arab neighbors , to the protection of vital petroleum supplies and the fight against international terrorism .

u.s. assistance continues to support the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt and the continued stability of the kingdom of jordan , which signed its own peace treaty with israel in 1994 .

u.s. funding also has focused on strengthening palestinian governance and civil society , and aid officials have worked to ensure that u.s. aid to the west bank is not diverted to terrorist groups , such as hamas , which controls the gaza strip .

since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the united states has established region - wide aid programs that increase the focus on democracy promotion and encourage socio - economic reform in an attempt to undercut the forces of radicalism in some arab countries .

the following section provides funding details on the largest regular aid recipients in the middle east: israel , egypt , jordan , the palestinians , and lebanon .

each country section features a table with a more elaborate breakdown of aid by account over the last five fiscal years .

for information on u.s. assistance for iraqi reconstruction , see crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report rl31339 , iraq: post - saddam governance and security , by [author name scrubbed] .

even when adjusted for inflation , annual u.s. assistance to the middle east in the decades following world war ii was only a small fraction of current aid flows to the region .

under vastly different geopolitical circumstances , u.s. policy was geared toward supporting the development of oil - producing countries , maintaining a neutral stance in the arab - israeli conflict while supporting israel's security , and preventing soviet influence from gaining a foothold in iran and turkey .

u.s. policymakers used foreign aid in the 1950s and 1960s to support these objectives .

u.s. aid to israel was far less in the 1950s and 1960s than in later years .

although the united states provided moderate amounts of economic aid ( mostly loans ) to israel , at the time , israel's main patron was france , which supported israel by providing it with advanced military equipment and technology .

in 1962 , israel purchased its first advanced weapons system from the united states ( hawk antiaircraft missiles ) .

in 1968 , a year after israel's victory in the six day war , the johnson administration , with strong support from congress , approved the sale of phantom fighters to israel , establishing the precedent for u.s. support for israel's qualitative military edge over its neighbors .

between 1950 and 1967 , the united states courted egypt using foreign aid as a bargaining chip .

cold war competition for egypt was fierce during this time period , as egypt received a steady stream of surplus u.s. wheat shipments under the food for peace program ( p.l .

480 ) .

despite these measures , offers of additional economic aid failed to convince egypt to abandon a parallel relationship with the soviet union , as egypt pursued a strict arab nationalist and neutral policy that shunned close alliances with western powers and cooperation and peace with israel .

internationally , after 1955 , egypt obtained military aid mainly from the soviet union .

beginning in 1965 , foreign assistance levels to the region began to decline considerably , culminating in an almost 80% drop in economic aid to the middle east by 1970 .

a host of factors , most notably the june 1967 war and the rising cost of the war in vietnam , led congress to cut funding for a number of countries .

egypt , which had already seen its annual aid reduced , lost food aid entirely after it severed relations with the united states during the 1967 war .

jordan and other arab states also saw their aid reduced .

by 1970 , annual appropriations to iran were close to being phased out , as many policymakers considered iran to be a middle - income state that was economically self - sufficient .

the decade of the 1970s witnessed a dramatic increase in u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east .

after the u.s. withdrawal from south vietnam , the middle east as a whole began to receive more u.s. foreign aid than any other region of the world , a trend that has continued to today .

u.s. foreign aid programs became more comprehensive in nature driven by large assistance packages to israel and later to egypt and other arab governments .

large - scale u.s. assistance for israel increased considerably after a series of arab - israeli wars created a sense among many americans that israel was continually under siege .

consequently , congress , supported by broad u.s. public opinion , committed to strengthening israel's military and economy through large increases in foreign aid .

in 1971 , the united states provided israel with military loans of $545 million , up from $30 million in 1970 .

also in 1971 , congress first designated a specific amount of aid for israel ( an "earmark" ) .

economic assistance changed from project aid , such as support for agricultural development work , to the commodity import program ( cip ) for the purchase of u.s. goods .

in effect , the united states stepped in to fill the role that france had relinquished after french president charles de gaulle refused to supply israel with military hardware to protest its preemptive launch of the june 1967 war .

israel became the largest recipient of u.s. foreign assistance in 1976 .

from 1971 to the present , u.s. aid to israel has averaged over $2 billion per year , two - thirds of which has been military assistance .

just as israel's long - standing relationship with the united states was in its incipient stages , egypt , its economy in desperate need of investment and capital after two wars , began to look to the united states to help stimulate economic growth .

egypt's new leader , anwar sadat , who had been eager to rid egypt of excessive soviet influence and embark on a program of economic liberalization , improved u.s. - egyptian relations in the mid 1970s , leading to a resumption in economic aid in 1975 , and the signing of two disengagement agreements with israel concerning the sinai desert .

to a lesser extent , the united states significantly increased its economic and military aid to jordan after the 1970-1971 civil war , in which the jordanian armed forces expelled palestinian guerrillas from jordan where they had seriously threatened stability .

the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt ushered in the current era of u.s. financial support for peace between israel and her arab neighbors .

in exchange for a complete cessation of hostilities and israel's return of the sinai peninsula , the united states provided a total of $7.3 billion to both parties in 1979 .

the "special international security assistance act of 1979" ( p.l .

96-35 ) provided both military and economic grants to israel and egypt at a ratio of 3 to 2 , respectively .

from the egyptian standpoint , u.s. funds helped to subsidize its defense budget and upgrade its aging soviet hardware .

egypt became the second largest recipient of u.s. aid after 1979 .

since the camp david accords , u.s. assistance levels have remained relatively consistent , and the united states has continued to support the peace process and the strengthening of israel .

israel and egypt have been the top two regional recipients of u.s. aid for more than two decades , while jordan became a leading recipient in the 1990s .

notable events involving significant transfers of u.s. aid since the 1979 camp david accords include the following: in 1985 , congress approved a $2.25 billion supplemental funding package for israel , egypt , and jordan to help stabilize their deteriorating economies .

in 1991 , egyptian support for the u.s. - led international coalition against iraq's invasion of kuwait led congress to authorize the cancellation of egypt's $6.7 billion military debt .

congress also provided israel $650 million in emergency esf grants to pay for damage and other costs from the war .

in addition , israel was given patriot missiles during the persian gulf war .

aid to jordan was reduced significantly ( nearly a 75% overall decrease ) after the late king hussein was unwilling to join the allied coalition against iraq .

in october 1992 , congress approved $10 billion in loan guarantees for israel to help it absorb a massive influx of jews from the former soviet union .

the approval of the loan guarantees was delayed due to disagreements between the george h.w .

bush administration and israel over use of u.s. funds in the west bank and gaza strip .

of the $10 billion authorized , the united states deducted $774 million as a penalty for israeli settlement construction in the west bank and gaza strip , leaving $9.226 billion available to cover israeli loans .

in september 1993 , after israel and the palestinian liberation organization ( plo ) accorded mutual recognition of each other in a step intended to lead to a future peace agreement , the united states offered $500 million ( $125 million in loans or loan guarantees and $375 million in grants ) over five years for economic development of the palestinian entity .

in 1994 , in recognition of jordan's signing a peace treaty with israel , president clinton asked congress to pass legislation to forgive jordan's $702.3 million debt to the united states ( approximately 10% of jordan's worldwide debt ) .

congress appropriated a total of $401 million in subsidies , which under pertinent budgetary procedures were sufficient to forgive the entire $702.3 million owed to the united states at the time .

in november 1999 , congress approved $400 million in grants for the palestinians , $300 million for jordan , and $1.2 billion for the israelis in 2000 to fund the implementation of the wye river agreement .

