climate change is generally viewed as a global issue , but proposed responses generallyrequire action at the national level .

in 1992 , the united states ratified the united nations'framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) which called on industrialized countries totake the lead in reducing the six primary greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000 .

 ( 1 ) over the past decade , a varietyof voluntary and regulatory actions have been proposed or undertaken in the united states , includingmonitoring of power plant carbon dioxide emissions , improved appliance efficiency , and incentivesfor developing renewable energy sources .

but carbon dioxide emissions have continued to increase .

in 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol , which called for legallybinding commitments by developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions .

 ( 2 ) he also rejected the conceptof mandatory emissions reductions .

since then , the administration has focused u.s. climate changepolicy on voluntary initiatives to reduce the growth in greenhouse gas emissions .

this focus isparticularly evident in the administration's 2002 climate action report ( car ) submitted under theprovisions of the unfccc .

of the over 50 programs summarized in the 2002 car , only six aredescribed as "regulatory. .

 ( 3 ) these regulatory programs were generally implemented to achieve energy or environmental goalsother than the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , but produced a concomitant greenhouse gasemissions reduction .

in this sense , they could be considered the results of a "no regrets" ( 4 ) policy where climate changeeffects resulting from related air quality and energy policies are included in the decision - makingprocess on new or modified rules .

a number of congressional proposals to advance programs designed to reduce greenhousegases have been introduced in the 109th congress .

these have generally followed one of three tracks .

the first is to improve the monitoring of greenhouse gas emissions - - in order to provide a basis forresearch and development and for any potential future reduction scheme .

the second is to enact amarket - oriented greenhouse gas reduction program along the lines of the trading provisions of thecurrent acid rain reduction program established by the 1990 clean air act amendments .

the thirdis to enact energy and related programs that would also have the added effect of reducing greenhousegases ; an example would be a requirement that electricity producers generate a portion of theirelectricity from renewable resources ( a renewable portfolio standard ) .

this report focuses on thesecond category of bills , specifically comparing the major provisions of two proposals that receivedattention during the senate's debate on its version of h.r .

6 - - the energy policy actof 2005 .

in february 2005 , senators mccain and lieberman introduced s. 342 , theclimate stewardship act of 2005 .

 ( 5 ) the primary focus of the proposed legislation is to reduce u.s.emissions of greenhouse gases through the use of flexible , market - based mechanisms .

in may 2005,senators mccain and lieberman introduced s. 1151 , an expanded version of s.342 that includes a new title designed to encourage innovation and deployment of lesscarbon intensive technologies , sequester carbon emissions , or mitigate the effects of climate change.the bill's emission reduction provisions are very similar to s.amdt .

2028 ( to s. 139 ) of the 108th congress , which the senate debated in 2003 .

that amendment failedon a 43-55 vote .

during the debate on the energy policy act of 2005 , s. 1151 wasintroduced as s.amdt .

826 and defeated on a 38-60 vote .

as summarized in table 1 , s. 1151 would require mandatory andeconomy - wide emission reductions .

using a flexible , market - based implementation strategy , the billwould require economy - wide reductions , but permits participation in pre - certified internationaltrading systems and in carbon sequestration programs to achieve part of the reduction requirement .

the bill excludes residential and agricultural sources of greenhouse gases , along with entities thatdo not own a single facility that emits more than 10,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalentsannually .

 ( 6 ) a draft amendment , ( 7 ) announced by senator bingaman , is based on the report of thenational commission on energy policy ( ncep ) that called for a mandatory , economy - widetradeable permit program to begin limiting greenhouse gases .

 ( 8 ) the climate and economyinsurance act of 2005 ( hereafter referred to as the "draft amendment" ) would mandate an acceleratedreduction in the greenhouse gas intensity of the country's economy .

 ( 9 ) between 2010 and 2019 , thedraft amendment would require a 2.4% annual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions per dollar ofprojected gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

after 2019 , this reduction would increase to 2.8%annually .

implementation would be through a flexible , market - oriented allowance trading program .

the total number of allowances each year would be calculated based on the mandated decline ingreenhouse gas intensity , and projected gdp growth .

however , the draft amendment includes acost - limiting safety valve that allows covered entities to make a payment to doe in lieu of reducingemissions .

the initial price of such payments would be $7 a ton in 2010 .

 ( 10 ) thus , if a covered entitychooses , it may make payments to doe at a specific price rather than make any necessary emissionsreductions .

the most notable difference between the two proposals is their approach to controlling emissions of greenhouse gases .

both would cover the majority of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

however , while s. 1151 would place an absolute cap on emissions from coveredentities , the draft amendment aims to reduce greenhouse gas intensity .

under s. 1151,while emissions from covered entities would be capped , uncovered emissions would be expected tocontinue to rise: ultimately , overall u.s. emissions would be expected to grow .

under the draftamendment , if it is assumed that all u.s. emissions are covered , economic growth would determinewhether total u.s. emissions grow or decline: if economic growth outpaces the scheduled reductionsin emissions intensity , or the proposal's safety valve is invoked , emissions could continue togrow .

 ( 11 ) a second key difference is the establishment of a cost - limiting "safety valve" in the draftamendment .

under this proposal , covered entities in need of extra tradeable allowances maypurchase them on an open market , or they can make a payment to doe at a set price ( i.e. , the safetyvalve ) .

 ( 12 ) under s. 1151 , there is no provision to limit the price per allowance that a covered entitywould be required to pay .

in addition , the two proposals differ in other ways , as well , including which entities arecovered , which agency has primary responsibility for the program , how credits for early action andother activities can be generated , and how proceeds from the sale / auction of allowances will beutilized .

table 1 compares key topics covered by the two proposals .

table 1 .

comparison of key topics covered by s.1151 and the draft amendmen .

as discussed in the next section , emission reduction estimates under both options involveat least some uncertainty , particularly for the draft amendment .

thus the estimates provided in table2 should be considered "ballpark" in nature .

in 2004 , the energy information administration ( eia ) analyzed an earlier version of s. 1151 .

 ( 13 ) under eia's analysis , s. 1151 would achieve a 6.7% reduction in overall greenhouse gasemissions in 2010 compared with its projected business - as - usual scenario , but would not returngreenhouse gas emissions to their 2000 or 1990 levels .

this result contrasts with crs's estimate thatthe draft amendment would result in a 2.5% reduction in overall greenhouse gas emissions in 2010compared with eia's business - as - usual scenario .

 ( 14 ) crs did not estimate longer term reductions from either s. 1151 or the draftamendment because of the inherent uncertainty involved in such projections .

qualitatively , it canbe stated that emissions of greenhouse gases would likely continue to increase under both options,although somewhat more slowly than business - as - usual .

in the case of s. 1151 , thepercentage of greenhouse gases not covered by the bill would increase and would be uncontrolledby the reduction program .

thus , the initial reduction in emissions achieved in 2010 would be slowlyeaten up over time .

in the case of the draft amendment , covered emissions would continue to growto the extent that projected economic growth outstripped the 2.4% annual reduction in carbonintensity ( 2.8% beginning in 2020 ) , and to the extent that increased costs drove covered entities toinvoke the safety valve rather than further reduce emissions .

in the longer term , emissions couldpotentially rise faster under the draft amendment than under s. 1151 .

table 2 .

projected emissions under s. 1151 and draftamendment ( billions of metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents ) sources: 1990 and 2000 data: u.s. submission to the united nations framework convention onclimate change , 2010 projections .

for s.amdt .

2028: energy informationadministration , analysis of senate amendment 2028 , the climate stewardship act of 2003 ( may2004 ) .

s.amdt .

2028 is very similar to s. 1151 and is used as a surrogate here .

however , the number of covered entities may be more or less under s. 1151 then assumedhere , so the estimates may understate or overstate actual reductions that would be achieved unders .

1151 .

for the draft amendment , calculations by crs are based on projected gdp andcarbon intensity improvements by energy information administration , annual energy outlook 2005 ,doe / eia - 0383 ( 2005 ) , february 2005 .

see text for discussion of uncertainties surrounding the draftamendment's estimate .

estimates do not take into account the potential for carbon sequestration .

the two proposals - - s. 1151 and the draft amendment - - would establishmarket - based systems to limit emissions of greenhouse gases .

however , the proposals differ in howthose systems would work .

s. 1151 would establish an absolute cap on emissions fromcovered entities , and would allow entities to trade emissions under that cap .

the draft amendmentwould limit greenhouse gas emissions intensity and establish a cost - limiting safety valve to protectagainst high compliance costs .

under both proposals , short - term u.s. emissions would likely bebelow a business - as - usual scenario , although reductions under s. 1151 are likely to belarger and more certain .

in contrast , the cost of the draft amendment is likely to be less and morepredictable .

however , under both proposals , total u.s. emissions could be expected to continue theirupward trend , albeit at a slower rate than currently forecasted .

