rescission and reallocation package adopted .

thepresident signed the fy2006 department of defense appropriations bill into law , p.l .

109-148 , ondecember 30 , 2005 .

it contained a reallocation of $29 billion in hurricane katrina recovery funds,as well as a 1% across - the - board rescission for all domestic discretionary programs .

under the law,hud received $11.9 billion in supplemental katrina funds , $11.5 billion for the communitydevelopment block grant program , and $390 million for section 8 vouchers for previouslyhud - assisted families displaced by the storm .

the 1% cut resulted in a reduction of $380 millionin hud's fy2006 budget , as contained in p.l .

109-115 .

for more information , see crs report rs22239 , emergency supplemental appropriations for hurricane katrina relief , by [author name scrubbed] .

congress approves h.r .

3058 .

onnovember 18 , 2005 , both houses of congress approved h.r .

3058 , the fy2006treasury , transportation , judiciary , housing and urban development ( hud ) , district of columbia,and related agencies ( tthud ) funding bill .

it was signed into law on november 30 , 2005 , as p.l.109-115 .

it includes $34 billion for hud , which is less than the senate - passed level , but more thanthe house - passed or president - requested level .

for most accounts , the final agreement splits thedifference between the house - and senate - approved levels , and it rejects the administration'sstrengthening america's communities initiative ( saci ) , which would have eliminated thecommunity development block grant ( cdbg ) program and replaced it with a new program withinthe department of commerce .

rescission and reallocation package submitted .

onoctober 28 , 2005 , president bush submitted to congress a rescission and reallocation package tohelp fund reconstruction in the gulf coast after the recent hurricanes .

the proposal would rescindand reallocate funds from selected programs across the government and reallocate fema disasterrelief funds to other agencies , including hud .

the request includes a rescission of unobligatedbalances from the section 811 program of $100 million , from the hud brownfields redevelopmentprogram of $24 million , and from the section 108 loan guarantees program of $6 million .

theproposal would provide $2.2 billion in additional funding to hud programs to aid in disasterrecovery , including $1.5 billion for the cdbg program ; $50 million for the self helphomeownership ( shop ) program ; $70 million for the home investment partnerships program ; $390 million for the section 8 voucher program to serve displaced , previously hud - assisted,families ; and $200 million for an urban homesteading program , which has not been enacted .

senate approves h.r .

3058 .

on july 21,2005 , the senate appropriations committee approved a $34.8 billion fy2006 budget for hud .

onoctober 20 , 2005 , the full senate approved h.r .

3058 .

several floor amendments wereadopted , although they did not change the funding levels for any hud accounts .

like the houseversion , the senate bill rejected the president's saci proposal .

it included increases in fundingabove both the president's request and the house version for hope vi , cdbg - related programs ( including section 108 loan guarantees ) , native american housing block grants , and rural housingand economic development .

continuing resolution passed .

on september 30,2005 , president bush signed h.j.res .

68 into law .

the continuing resolution ( cr ) funded agencies through the earlier of november 18 , 2005 , or the enactment of the regularappropriations bills into law .

programs were funded at the lower of the fy2005 enacted , fy2006house - passed , or fy2006 senate - passed levels as of october 1 , 2005 .

since the fy2006 hudappropriations bill had not been passed by the full senate by october 1 , hud's programs werefunded at the lower of the fy2005 or house - passed level .

given the way funding is allocated in themajority of hud programs ( either on a calendar - year basis or through competitive grants ) , anyreductions in funding as a result of the cr should have had little , if any , impact .

house approves h.r .

3058 .

on june 21,2005 , the house appropriations committee approved , with minor changes , an fy2006 tthudfunding bill that was approved by the subcommittee on june 15 , 2005 .

h.r .

3058 provided an overall increase in funding for hud of more than $4 billion above the president'srequest .

on june 30 , 2005 , the house , by a vote of 405 to 18 , approved h.r .

3058 .

during floor consideration , several amendments were approved , increasing funding for section 8vouchers , hope vi , cdbg , brownfields , hopwa , lead - based paint hazard reduction , and fairhousing programs , above the committee - approved levels .

house and senate budget resolutions passed .

inmarch 2005 , the house and senate passed differing versions of a budget resolution for fy2006 ( h.con.res .

95 ) .

both expressed support for continuing the cdbg program at hud .

president's budget submitted .

the presidentsubmitted his fy2006 budget to the congress on february 7 , 2005 , requesting $29.1 billion forhud , a cut of $2.8 billion , or 9% , from fy2005 appropriations of $31.9 billion .

the mostcontroversial aspect of the budget was the proposed elimination of the cdbg and related programsat hud , and their replacement with a new program at the department of commerce .

most of the appropriations for the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) are designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or otherspecial housing needs .

these include programs of rental assistance for the poor , elderly or disabled,housing assistance for persons with aids , and shelter for those who are homeless .

the two largehud block grant programs , home and cdbg , also help communities finance a variety of activitiesto address the housing and community development needs of disadvantaged populations .

in recentyears , hud has focused more attention on efforts to increase the homeownership rates forlower - income and minority households .

 ( at the end of the fourth quarter of 2004 , the nationalhomeownership rate stood at 69.2 , while the rates for white , black and hispanic households stoodat 76.2% , 49.1% and 48.9% respectively. ) .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insuresmortgages made by lenders to lower income homebuyers , many with below - average credit records,and to developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

table 1 .

department of housing and urban developmentappropriations , fy2001 to fy2005 ( net budget authority in billions ) source: figures are from the house appropriations committee estimate tables .

fy2005 figuresare adjusted to reflect the 0.8% across - the - board rescission enacted in p.l .

108-447 .

final spendinglevels for any fiscal year include all supplemental appropriations or rescissions .

they do not reflectrevised estimates of offsetting receipts .

the president signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 on december 8 , 2004 ( p.l.108-447 ) providing hud with $31.9 billion , about 2% above the fy2004 enacted level .

theadministration had proposed a controversial initiative , the flexible voucher program ( fvp ) , thatwould have significantly revised the section 8 voucher program and cut its funding .

congress didnot adopt the fvp , but continued with dollar - based funding , a practice first adopted in fy2004 thatprovided some of the spending constraint that the administration sought .

nevertheless , the billsigned by the president approved $1.6 billion more for section 8 than the requested level .

to payfor this significant increase , most other hud programs were reduced below their fy2004appropriation levels .

while the administration proposed no funding for the hope vi public housingrevitalization program , p.l .

108-447 appropriated $144 million .

table 2 below details the president's fy2006 hud budget and tracks the congressionalresponse .

table 2 .

appropriations: housing and urban development,fy2005 to fy2006 ( budget authority in $ billions ) source: prepared by crs based on information provided by the house committee onappropriations , hud's congressional budget justifications , house and senate versions of h.r .

3058 , h.rept .

109-153 , s.rept .

109-109 , conf .

rept .

109-307 , and p.l .

109-148 .

fy2005 figures are adjusted to reflect the 0.8% across - the - board rescission enacted in p.l .

108-447 ; fy2006 figures are not adjusted to reflect the across - the - board rescission .

note: this table does not include two accounts whose costs are equal to their offsetting receipts:manufactured housing fees trust fund ( $12.9 million in fy2005 and $13 million in fy2006 ) andthe office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( $58.7 million in fy2005 and $60 million infy2006 ) .

a .

note that p.l .

109-148 , enacted after the hud fy2006 appropriations law , included anacross - the - board rescission of 1% to all domestic discretionary spending , which is notreflected in the totals in this table .

the rescission - adjusted fy2006 enacted figures will beavailable in fy2007 crs hud budget products .

b .

the administration has proposed that in fy2006 , congress provide no new funding and alsorescind the hope vi funding provided in fy2005 .

c. includes $58 million for indian community and economic development activities , which , infy2005 , received $68 million as a set - aside within the community development fund .

d. includes $45 million for indian community and economic development activities , which , infy2005 , received $68 million as a set - aside within the community development fund .

e. in fy2005 , $8.9 million was provided for this program ( hawaiian homelands homeownership ) as a set - aside within the community development fund .

the senate bill provides $8.8million for this program in the community development fund .

f. for fy2006 , the administration proposes to eliminate these programs and replace them with anew program funded in the commerce department .

g. the cdbg appropriation includes $180.8 million in cdbg supplemental funding for fy2005,including $30.8 million appropriated under section 424 of p.l .

108-447 and $150 millionappropriated under p.l .

108-324 .

h. two floor amendments to the house appropriations committee version of h.r .

3058 , adding funds to the cdf account , were approved .

h.amdt .

396 added$67.5 million to the cdf account to increase funding for cdbg formula grants and ensurefunds were available for youthbuild .

h.amdt .

404 added $24 million to thecdf account to be used for brownfields .

i .

in fy2005 , $24.8 million was provided for this program as a set - aside within the communitydevelopment fund .

the senate bill provides $15 million for this program in the communitydevelopment fund .

j .

the house bill would rename this account self - help and assisted homeownership and transferto it funding for several set - asides that were formerly funded under the communitydevelopment fund .

see table 14 for details .

k. the final bill adopts the new account proposed by the house , although it allocates the fundsdifferently .

see table 14 for details .

l. in fy2005 , $41.7 million was provided for this program as a component of home .

m. the house provides $41.7 million for housing counseling assistance as a set - aside within thehome program .

the senate bill proves $42 million for housing counseling assistance asa set - aside within the home program .

n. includes $29 million requested for university partnerships , which , in fy2005 , received a totalof $33 million as set - asides within the community development fund .

o .

this category includes section 108 ( $7 million in fy2005 , $0 in president's request and housebill , $7 million in senate bill , $3.75 million in the conference report ) , native hawaiianhousing ( $992,000 in fy2005 and $882,000 in president's request and house bill , $1 millionin senate bill , $900,000 in the conference report ) and indian housing loan guarantees ( $5million in fy2005 and $2.6 million in president's request and house bill , $5 million insenate bill , $4 million in the conference report ) .

for fy2006 , the administration proposedto replace section 108 loan guarantees with a new , larger program in the commercedepartment .

p. the bill rescinds $10 million from prior years' appropriations ; however , if sufficient funds are notavailable , they can be taken from current year appropriations .

q .

includes one - time rescissions of unobligated balances from the following accounts: publichousing drug elimination grants , title vi credit subsidy , urban development action grants,rental housing assistance and gi / sri credit subsidy .

section 8 tenant - based rental assistance .

thesection 8 program is really two programs: tenant - based rental assistance , commonly calledvouchers , and project - based rental assistance ( see below ) .

the two programs were previously fundedunder a joint account called the housing certificate fund , which was split into the two componentsby the fy2005 appropriations law .

 ( see crs report rl32284 , an overview of the section 8housing program , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

section 8 housing choice vouchers ( vouchers ) areportable federal subsidies that low - income families use to reduce their housing costs in the privatemarket .

hud currently funds over two million section 8 vouchers .

note that approximately $4.2billion of the funds shown in the table below are provided in the form of an advance appropriationfor the following year , and each year approximately $4.2 billion is available from the previous year .

this advance funding structure had been used to provide funds to the public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer the voucher program in the months between the beginning of their fiscalyears and the time the federal budget is enacted in final form , which , in recent years , has generallylagged the federal fiscal year and often lagged the calendar year .

the fy2004 appropriations billsynchronized pha fiscal year start dates ; however , this advanced funding structure has continued .

table 3 .

section 8 tenant - based rental assistance ( vouchers ) ,fy2005 to fy2006 ( in millions ) source: see table 2 .

a .

the house provides $15,631,400,000 for tenant - based rental assistance , but the amounts provided for the components of the account as listed in the bill and the report total to $15,631,356,000 .

the $44,000 discrepancy has not been clarified and may be due to rounding .

b .

the house would permit up to $45 million to be set aside in renewal funding for the secretaryto use to adjust the budgets of agencies that were adversely impacted by the fy2005 fundingformula due to portability vouchers .

c. the senate version of h.r .

3058 would permit the secretary to use up to $45 millionof renewal funds to be used to adjust the budgets of agencies who were adversely impactedby the fy2005 formula due to the three - month period of time used or due to portabilityvouchers .

d. the final version would permit the secretary to use up to $45 million of renewal funds to be usedto adjust the budgets of agencies that ( 1 ) apply for an adjustment because they had unusuallylow leasing levels during the may - july period that was the basis for fy2005 funding or ( 2 ) that the secretary determines to have a significant increase in renewal costs due tounforeseen circumstances or portability vouchers .

e. see table 17 .

voucher renewals .

the most contentious aspect ofthe tenant - based assistance account is the renewal of existing vouchers .

congress has authorized thecreation of more than 2 million vouchers over the history of the program and the funding for virtuallyall of them expires every year .

if a family is using a voucher to lease an apartment but funding is notsufficient to renew it , then the family will lose its assistance and likely lose its current housing .

priorto fy2004 , hud funded phas based on the number of vouchers they were using and the cost ofthose vouchers .

if costs went up or phas were able to use more of their vouchers , they receivedadditional funds to cover those costs .

in fy2005 , at congress's direction , hud funded phas basedon the number of vouchers they were using and the cost of those vouchers in may - july 2004 , plusinflation , reduced ( by 4% ) to fit within the amount appropriated .

this new formula was designedto contain the growing cost of the program .

many phas and low - income housing advocatesopposed the new formula , arguing that it left many agencies with inadequate funding to maintaintheir programs .

while it appears that few agencies were required to terminate assistance to familiesas a result of budget shortages , many agencies suspended the reissuance of vouchers when familiesleft the program and undertook other administrative measures to cut costs .

the president's fy2006 budget request included $14.1 billion to renew expiring vouchersubsidies , an increase of 5% from fy2005 .

it proposed distributing renewal funding to phas ona pro - rata basis , based on what they received last year plus an inflation adjustment , and prorated tofit within the amount appropriated .

in addition to renewal funding , the administration requested $45million for a central reserve fund to cover the cost of unforeseen exigencies experienced by phas,such as natural disasters or significant changes in the economic condition of a locality .

congressprovided hud with a central reserve account in fy2003 and fy2004 , but not in fy2005 .

h.r .

3058 , as it passed the house appropriations committee on june 21 , 2005,provided more than $300 million less for tenant - based assistance than the president requested , butfunded renewals at the president's requested level .

during floor proceedings on june 30 , 2005 , anamendment adding $100 million for tenant - based renewals was approved .

the increase was offsetby a decrease in funding for the working capital fund .

the bill proposed to distribute renewalfunding using the same formula proposed by the president .

it would have permitted the secretaryto set aside $45 million of renewal funding to adjust budgets that were adversely affected by thefy2005 funding formula due to a high number of portability vouchers .

the senate version of h.r .

3058 would have funded renewals at the president'srequested level .

unlike the house bill and the president's request , the senate bill would not havefunded agencies based on the funding they received in fy2005 plus inflation .

rather , agencieswould have received renewal funding based on their voucher costs and leasing over the past 12months , plus inflation , and pro - rated to fit within the amount appropriated .

low - income housingand pha groups advocated for this use of more recent data .

the senate bill would have providedthe secretary with the authority to use up to $45 million to adjust pha budgets if they wereadversely affected by the may - july formula either because those months were anomalous for theagency or because the agency faced a high number of portability vouchers .

the final version of h.r .

3058 funds renewals at the same level proposed bythe senate bill and the president's request , $100 million less than the house - passed level .

it adoptedthe renewal funding formula proposed by the president and included in the house bill .

for calendaryear 2006 , agencies will receive the amount of funds they were eligible to receive in 2005 , plusinflation , adjusted for tenant protection vouchers , hope vi vouchers , and project - basedreservations , and reduced to fit within the appropriated amount .

the bill permits the secretary toset aside up to $45 million to ( 1 ) adjust the budgets of phas that apply for an adjustment becauseof temporarily low leasing during may - july 2004 , and ( 2 ) adjust the budgets of phas thatexperienced a significant increase in renewal costs , as determined by the secretary , due to unforeseencircumstances or portability vouchers .

administrative fees .

prior to fy2003 , phas werepaid a fixed fee per voucher administered .

beginning in fy2003 , at congress's direction , hudchanged the way it distributed administrative fees , providing agencies with a pro - rata share of theamount appropriated for administrative fees , based on what they had received in the previous year .

the change was designed to contain the cost of administrative fees , which were estimated to havegrown to account for 10% of the cost of a voucher .

the president's fy2006 budget requested $1.3 billion for administrative fees , an 8% increaseover fy2005 , and would have distributed the funds on a pro - rata basis .

the house bill proposed$1.2 billion and also would have allocated the funds on a pro - rata basis , except for $25 million thatthe secretary could set aside to distribute to agencies in need of additional funds to administer theirprograms .

the bill also would have allowed the secretary to transfer up to $200 million from thetenant - based account to project - based rental assistance , which , if done , would have reduced theamount of administrative funds to well below the fy2005 level .

the senate bill would have fundedadministrative fees at the president's requested level and distributed them on a pro - rata basis .

the final version of h.r .

3058 provides $1.25 billion for administrative fees,splitting the difference between the house and senate levels .

of that amount , $10 million will beavailable for the secretary to allocate to agencies in need of extra money to run their programs , andthe remaining funds will be allocated on a pro - rata basis , based on last year's distribution .

the billdoes not include the $200 million transfer authority provided in the house bill .

tenant protection vouchers .

tenant protectionvouchers are provided to families in a variety of circumstances , including families who arethreatened with displacement because the contract on their assisted unit is ending ( project - basedsection 8 , for example ) ; families who are displaced from public housing ( due to demolition ordisposition ) ; families in the witness protection program ; and families in the child welfare system .

the president requested an increase in funding for tenant protection vouchers of almost 120%for fy2006 .

the proposed increase was attributed partly to the needs of the hope vi program andpartly to a new rule that hud stated would be published in 2005 that would permit the secretary ofhud to require the conversion of public housing to vouchers , a practice called mandatoryconversion .

the report accompanying the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 expressed doubt that the mandatory conversion rule would be implemented before the end offy2006 , and therefore proposed to fund tenant - protection vouchers at roughly the same level as lastyear ( an increase of about 3% ) .

the senate version expressed the same doubt about the mandatoryconversion rule and noted that , for many of the units that would be subject to the rule , hope viremains a viable option .

the senate recommended $192 million for tenant protection vouchers,more than the house but less than the president's request .

the final version of h.r .

3058 provided $180 million for tenant protectionvouchers , which is less than the president's request and falls between the house - andsenate - proposed levels .

rescission .

the president's fy2006 budget requestedthat congress rescind $2.5 billion in unobligated balances from the tenant - based rental assistanceaccount .

the request included a provision stating that , if sufficient funds were not available withinthe account , the secretary could use funds from other accounts to meet the rescission target .

low - income housing advocates stated concern that sufficient funds would not be available in thetenant - based rental assistance account and that other programs would be negatively affected by therescission .

when questioned about the source of funds to meet the requested rescission in hearingsbefore the senate appropriations committee on april 14 , 2005 , the secretary indicated that he wasnot sure where the funds would come from and could not guarantee that they would not come fromactive programs .

 ( 1 ) the house bill proposed a rescission level of $2.49 billion , about $6.4 million less than thepresident proposed , and included language permitting the secretary to use funds from other accounts,as necessary .

the senate bill proposed a notably lower rescission level and a provision stating that,if sufficient funds were not available within the section 8 tenant - based or project - based account , thesecretary would be required to first take up to 10% from the hud salaries and expenses account andup to 10% from the office of management and budget's appropriation , before taking funds fromother hud programs .

the final version of h.r .

3058 rescinds $2.1 billion in unobligated funds fromthe section 8 accounts .

the language permits the secretary to use funds from other accounts , ifnecessary , but does not include the language proposed by the senate requiring reductions first fromhud and omb's appropriations .

the accompanying conference report directs the secretary toreport to the appropriations committee 30days before taking funds from other accounts .

voucher reform legislation .

beyond funding levels,the fy2006 budget documents also stated that the president intends to introduce a new proposal toreform the tenant - based voucher program .

one purpose for this reform proposal is to contain , if notreduce , the cost of the program .

according to the president's budget summary: "section 8's programcosts are cannibalizing every hud program - - at the same time waiting lists of families seekinghousing continue to grow. .

the congressional budget justifications state that this new proposal willprovide additional flexibility to phas , which will enable them to run their programs more effectivelyand efficiently and better respond to the current budget - based funding structure in the program .

reform proposals were also submitted as a part of the fy2004 and fy2005 budgets , althoughcongressional action was not taken on either .

the state and local housing flexibility act of 2005was introduced in the senate on april 13 , 2005 ( s. 771 ) and in the house on april 28,2005 ( h.r .

1999 ) .

it would replace the current voucher program with a new program,called the flexible voucher program , which would have fewer rules and regulations than the currentprogram , would provide for greater discretion in administering the program for both the secretaryof hud and for phas , and , low - income housing advocates contend , would also provide fewerresources and protections for very poor families .

for more information , see crs report rl31930 , section 8 housing choice voucher program: funding and related issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

emergency supplemental hurricane funding .

inoctober 2005 , fema engaged hud in a mission assignment to provide rental assistance to familiesthat were unlikely to qualify for standard fema assistance - - specifically , families that werereceiving hud rental assistance or were homeless when the storm struck .

on december 30 , 2005,the president signed a supplemental appropriations bill , p.l.109-148 , which transferred $390 millionto hud from fema to provide this rental assistance directly .

hud has implemented the programas the disaster voucher program ( dvp ) , and it is largely governed by section 8 voucher programrules , although the secretary was given the authority to waive income eligibility and rentdetermination rules .

for more information on the role of the voucher program in response to the2005 hurricanes , see crs report rl33270 , the section 8 housing voucher program: reformproposals , by [author name scrubbed] .

section 8 project - based rental assistance .

thisaccount provides funding to renew existing contracts between hud and private landlords providingsubsidies to low - income families that allow them to live in private market rental units , but pay only30% of their incomes toward rent .

project - based section 8 differs from section 8 vouchers in thatthe subsidy is provided to a specific unit of housing in which a family can live , rather than to afamily to then use to pay for the housing of their choice .

no new contracts are entered into underthis program ; the funding provided is used only to renew existing contracts and pay administrativecosts .

this program was formerly funded with the section 8 tenant - based rental assistance accountin a merged account titled the housing certificate fund until the account was split in fy2004 .

table 4 .

section 8 project - based rentalassistance ( in millions ) source: see table 2 .

a .

see table 17 .

renewals .

the president requested a 5% decreasein renewal funding for project - based rental assistance contracts in fy2006 .

hud budget documentsexplained that the department planned to augment the renewal funding request with $622 millionin funds recaptured from previous years and savings from program improvements .

the additionalfunds would have raised the program level to $5.6 billion , an increase of 6% over the fy2005program level .

the house version of h.r .

3058 proposed $17 million more for renewals thanthe president requested .

the bill would have permitted the secretary to transfer , if necessary , up to$200 million from the tenant - based rental assistance account to the project - based account .

thesenate version of h.r .

3058 proposed funding project - based renewals at the president'srequested level , and did not include the transfer language included in the house version .

the senatecommittee report raised concern that hud was not doing enough to encourage landlords in theproject - based section 8 program to renew their contracts and thus preserve the properties as assistedhousing .

the senate bill proposed that the government accountability office ( gao ) assess hud'sefforts to preserve assisted housing .

the final version of h.r .

3058 adopts the house - passed funding level forproject - based renewals , but does not include the transfer authority proposed by the house .

the billdoes not include a request for the gao report proposed by the senate , but does direct thedepartment to study and report back on the living conditions of residents in two developments inillinois .

contract administrators .

the president's budgetrequested a 46% increase in funding for contract administrators and stated that $185 million inunobligated balances would be used to augment the funding , resulting in a program level increaseof 70% over fy2005 .

contract administrators are subcontracted by hud to manage the long - termsection 8 contracts between hud and private owners of subsidized multifamily units .

hudcontinues to manage a portion of the contracts ; however , the department intends to transfer most,if not all , contracts to contract administrators in the future .

the fy2006 budget request includes anincrease of $67 million to fund the transfer of additional contracts from hud to contractadministrators .

further , hud's budget justifications state that the department intends to begin usingcontract administrators to manage rental assistance contracts outside of the section 8 program , suchas those entered into under the section 202 housing for the elderly program .

the budget documentsnote that $30 million would be used to fund these transfers .

the house , senate , and final versions of h.r .

3058 funded contractadministrators at the president's requested level and permitted the expansion of contractadministrators to additional programs .

public housing programs .

public housingprovides publicly owned and subsidized rental units for very low - income families .

while no newpublic housing developments have been built for many years ( except through the hope vi program,which is discussed below ) , congress continues to provide funds to maintain the existing stock ofover 1.2 million units .

the operating fund provides funds to phas for the ongoing maintenanceand administration of public housing .

the capital fund provides funding to phas for large capitalprojects and modernization needs .

hope vi is a competitive grant program that provides funds tohelp demolish and / or redevelop severely distressed public housing developments , with a focus onbuilding mixed - income communities .

table 5 .

public housing , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in millions ) source: see table 2 .

a .

see table 17 .

b .

the president's fy2006 budget proposes no new funding for hope vi and requests thatcongress rescind the full amount provided to the program in fy2005 .

c. neither the house nor senate version of h.r .

3058 would rescind fy2005 hopevi funding .

operating fund .

operating funds are paid to phasto help make up the difference between the low rents paid by tenants living in public housing andthe cost of running the buildings .

the president's budget requested $3.4 billion for the operatingfund in fy2006 .

while this represents an increase over the fy2005 enacted level , it is a decreasein the program level .

in fy2005 , congress enacted an accounting change in the program thatprovided a one - time savings of $992 million .

the total amount available for operating subsides infy2005 ( minus the set - asides listed above ) was $16 million more than the amount requested forfy2006 .

despite the slight decrease , the fy2006 request would have been sufficient to fundagencies at a similar proration level as fy2005 .

according to hud's budget documents , in fy2005,agencies received approximately 90.5% of the amount that they qualified for under the operatingsubsidy formula ; in fy2006 they would receive approximately 89% at the president's requestedlevel .

on april 14 , hud issued a proposed rule to revise the current formula for distributionoperating subsidies .

the proposed rule differed from a version of the rule agreed to by hud and thestakeholders that participated in a congressionally - mandated negotiated rulemaking process .

hud'sdecision to publish an altered , and arguably less costly , form of the negotiated rule proved to becontroversial .

hud contended that the proposed rule better reflects the department's policy andbudgetary priorities .

nonetheless , on september 19 , 2005 , hud published a final rule that reinstatedmost of the provisions of the negotiated rule that had been eliminated in the proposed rule anddelayed implementation until 2007 .

the house version of the hud funding bill proposed almost $200 million more for theoperating fund than the president requested , resulting in more funding available in fy2006 than wasavailable in fy2005 .

it included language directing the secretary of hud to distribute fy2006operating funds using the formula agreed to by the negotiated rulemaking committee .

the bill alsoincluded $50 million to help agencies that faced losses of more than 5% under the new formulatransition to asset - based management .

the senate version of the hud funding bill proposed $150 million more than the presidentrequested for the operating fund .

while $50 million less than the house recommended level , thesenate bill proposed to set aside fewer funds , leaving more to be distributed through the operatingfund formula than the house bill .

while the senate bill would not mandate the use of the negotiatedrule , the accompanying report stated that the committee expected the final rule to "reflect thenegotiated agreement ... to the greatest extent possible. .

the final version of h.r .

3058 funds the operating fund at the house - passed level , which is higher than the president's request or senate - passed level , but will be a decrease fromthe fy2005 program level .

the bill does not include language specifying how the funds should bedistributed , noting the postponed implementation of the new rule .

the conference agreement directshud to include broad participation from affected agencies when developing the technical guidanceto implement the new rule .

capital fund .

the president's fy2006 budgetproposed a 10% decrease in capital funding for phas .

under the request , the amount available forcapital grants , after set - asides , would have been 7% lower than what was distributed in fy2005 .

hud budget justifications state that the decreased funding level would be sufficient to meet annualcapital repair needs .

however , there is a backlog of unmet modernization needs in public housingthat is estimated to be between $18-$20 billion , which this funding level would not address .

hudargues that reductions in the capital fund are necessary to ensure that tenant - based rental assistancereceives sufficient funding .

the request would have cut the resident neighborhood opportunitiesfor self sufficiency ( ross ) funding in half .

ross funds are used to provide supportive servicesfor residents of public housing , including job training , work supports and case management .

thepresident also proposed to eliminate funding for neighborhood networks , which are used to buildand update technology centers in public housing and to assist low - income households developcomputer skills .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 would have provided almost $250million more than the president requested for capital funding .

the bill would have adopted thepresident's requested funding levels for ross and neighborhood networks , so the full increasewould have gone to capital grants , providing a 4% increase above the amount available for capitalgrants in fy2005 and a 12% increase over the amount the president requested for capital grants infy2006 .

the senate - passed version of the hud funding bill would have adopted the president'srequested level for the capital fund , which is lower than the house - approved level .

it would haveincreased funding for set - asides above the president's requested level ( for example , almost doublingross funding over the president's request ) , leaving less available for capital grants than thepresident requested ( - 2% ) , the fy2005 level ( - 9% ) , and the house - approved level ( - 12% ) .

the final version of the hud funding bill splits the difference between the house and senatefunding levels for the capital fund , providing $2.46 billion , a decrease from the fy2005 level , buthigher than the president's request .

the bill also splits the difference between the house and senatelevels for ross and neighborhood networks , providing $38 million and $8 million , respectively .

hope vi .

for the third year , the president's budgetrequested no new funding for hope vi , claiming that the program has met its mandate , that programfunds are spent too slowly , and that per unit costs are too high .

despite the president's request , infy2004 and fy2005 , congress funded hope vi , but at a lower level than in fy2003 when over$570 million was provided to the program .

in addition to requesting no new funding for theprogram , the president's budget proposes that congress rescind the funds it provided to the programin fy2005 .

the version of h.r .

3058 that passed the house appropriations committee onjune 21 , 2005 , did not provide any new funding for the hope vi program in fy2006 , but did notrescind the fy2005 funding .

during floor debate on june 30 , 2005 , an amendment was approvedtransferring $60 million to the hope vi program for fy2006 from the general servicesadministration's federal buildings fund .

the senate - passed bill proposed $150 million for hope vi , a slight increase over thefy2005 level .

the committee , in its report , "urge[d] the department to reconsider the eliminationof the hope vi program , and consider a restructured hope vi program that is more efficient,cost - effective and still capable of leveraging other funds for rebuilding often distressedcommunities...." the enacted version of h.r .

3058 provides $100 million for the hope viprogram , an amount nearly halfway between the house and senate - passed levels .

although the finalbill funded the program , the accompanying conference agreement stated that "the conferees believeit is time to consider alternative approaches to the hope vi program...." for more information , see crs report rl32236 , hope vi public housing revitalizationprogram: background , funding , and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

native american block grants .

the nativeamerican block grants replaced several separate programs of assistance in 1996 .

it provides grantsto indian tribes and their tribally designated housing entities to meet housing and communitydevelopment needs in their areas .

table 6 .

native american block grants , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

note: the table does not include all set - asides .

the amount for formula grants is not specified inthe house , senate , or final bill .

the figures shown here are derived from subtracting all set - asidesfrom the total provided for the account .

a .

in fy2005 , $68.4 million was provided for this program as a set - aside in the communitydevelopment fund and the senate bill recommends $69 million for this program as aset - aside in the community development fund for fy2006 ( see table 9 ) .

the final versionappropriates $60 million as a set - aside in the community development fund .

b .

see table 17 .

the president's fy2006 budget proposed an appropriation of $583 million for the nativeamerican block grant program , a decrease of $39 million .

the total included $58 million for theindian community block grant activities .

in prior years these activities were funded as a set - asidewithin the community development block grant program .

effectively , this may be regarded as anadditional decrease in funding for the native american block grant program since $58 million,which would otherwise be used for other purposes , would have to be used for economic developmentactivities .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 increased funding for native americanblock grants above the president's requested level , but below the fy2005 enacted level .

thefunding for formula grants is 6% above the president's request , but 10% below the fy2005 enactedlevel .

the bill adopted the president's request that the indian economic block grant program , whichwas funded within the community development fund , be funded as a set - aside in this account ; h.r.3058 would set aside $45 million for this purpose , which is a 35% reduction in fundingfrom fy2005 and a 22% reduction in funding from the president's request .

the senate - passed version of the hud funding bill increased funding for the nativeamerican block grants account above the fy2005 level , the president's request , and the houselevel .

the amount available for formula grants would be slightly decreased from fy2005 , but wouldbe an increase of 10% over the house - passed level and 17% over the president's request .

the senatecommittee , in its report , noted concern about the significant unspent balances in the account as wellas revised eligibility definitions adopted for distribution of fy2004 formula funding .

thecommittee encouraged hud to work to facilitate the timely expenditure of funds and to reassess thenew eligibility definition .

p.l .

109-115 appropriates $630 million for native american housing black grants .

p.l.109-115 requires hud to make two calculations when determining the allocation to each tribe .

hud must determine the amount of the allocation based on single - race census data and onmulti - race census data , and allocate the greater of the two to the tribe .

an administrative provisionrequires that in fy2006 , hud allocate block grants to the same native alaskan organizations thatreceived block grants in fy2005 .

housing for persons with aids ( hopwa ) .

hopwa provides housing assistance and related supportive services for low - income persons withhiv / aids and their families .

funding is distributed both by formula allocation and competitivegrants to states , localities and nonprofit organizations .

table 7 .

hopwa , fy2005 to fy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

the administration's budget proposed to reduce hopwa program funding by 5% infy2006 .

this funding decrease , according to hud budget documents , would have reduced thenumber of households served in fy2006 from 70,400 to 67,000 .

the department stated that thisfunding decrease was necessary in order to meet the funding needs of the section 8 voucher program .

the house appropriations committee's version of the bill proposed funding the programabove the president's request , at $285 million .

during floor debate of the bill on june 30 , 2005 , anamendment was added to h.r .

3058 increasing hopwa funding by another $10million , to $295 million .

the senate - passed bill increased hopwa funding about $5 million abovethe fy2005 level and about $20 million above the president's requested level , although it providedless than the house by $18 million .

the final appropriation for hopwa funds the program at $289 million for fy2006 , anincrease of approximately 2.6% over fy2005 .

the final amount exceeds the administration'srequest by $21 million , the senate's version by $2 million , and is $6 million less than the houseproposal .

for more information on hopwa , see crs report rs20704 , housing opportunities forpersons with aids ( hopwa ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

rural housing and economic development .

thisprogram provides competitive grants to states and localities to fund capacity building and innovativehousing and economic development activities in rural areas .

table 8 .

rural housing and economic development , fy2005to fy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

in prior years , the administration has proposed zero funding for the rural housing andeconomic development program ( rhed ) , but congress has responded by funding the program atabout $25 million .

for fy2006 , the administration proposed to consolidate rhed into a newprogram within the department of commerce , called the "strengthening america's communitiesinitiative. .

 ( see discussion of community development fund / block grants below. ) .

neither the house nor senate bill would adopt the president's strengthening america'scommunities initiative , and both would continue to fund rural housing and economic developmentas a freestanding program at hud .

the house proposed $10 million , less than half of what wasprovided in fy2005 , while the senate committee proposed $24 million , which is slightly more thanwas approved in fy2005 .

p.l .

109-115 appropriates $17 million for the program .

empowerment zones ( ez ) and enterprise communities ( ec ) .

the ez / ec program awards tax incentives to eligible businesses located inez designated zones .

grant funds are also awarded to support ez / ec activities .

table 9 .

empowerment zones and enterprise communities,fy2005 to fy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

the bush administration's budget proposal called for eliminating funding for the ez / ecprogram along with 17 other community development , economic development , and communityservice programs , and replacing them with a new block grant called strengthening america'scommunities initiative .

 ( see discussion of community development fund / block grants , below. ) .

the house , senate , and conference versions of h.r .

3058 rejected thepresident's strengthening america's communities initiative proposal ; however , none of the versionsof h.r .

3058 included funding for ez / ecs in fy2006 .

community development fund / block grants .

the cdbg program is the largest source of federal assistance in support of housing , community andeconomic development activities of states and local governments .

the administration's fy2006budget would eliminate funding for the cdbg program and related set - asides .

the activities of thecdbg program along with 17 other community development , economic development , andcommunity services programs would have been carried out under a new block grant .

the new blockgrant proposal , called the "strengthening america's communities initiative," would have beenfunded at $3.7 billion .

this amount is $416 million less than the $4.116 allocated to the formulaportion of the cdbg and insular areas in fy2005 and $1.1 billion less than the $4.8 billionappropriated in fy2005 for the total community development fund , which includes the cdbgformula program and related set - asides and earmarks .

according to the administration , the new initiative would: reduce fragmentation in the delivery of federal community and economicdevelopment assistance by consolidating the activities of 18 programs that are presently administeredby five different federal agencies ; improve accountability by ensuring that communities focus on tangibleoutcomes ; and target assistance to areas with the greatest needs .

a number of organizations representing states and local governments voiced reservationsabout the administration's new initiative and expressed support for the cdbg program .

suchorganizations as the national league of cities , the u.s. conference of mayors , the nationalassociation of counties , and the national governors association noted that the administration waslate to include them in any discussions about its new initiative and provided few details about theinitiative .

a march 1 federal register notice announced the creation of an advisory panel to assistthe secretary of commerce develop the legislative proposal .

when support for the new proposal didnot materialize , the administration characterized the proposal as a work in progress .

on july 21,2005 , the commerce department announced the release of the saci advisory committee's reportwhich included a number of findings , guiding principles , and recommendations intended to assistthe secretary develop a specific legislative proposal .

the saci advisory committee's report isavailable from the council on competitiveness at http: / / www.compete.org / pdf / sacac_report.pdf .

for a discussion of the administration's proposal , see crs report rl32823 , an overview of the administration's strengthening america's communities initiative , by[author name scrubbed] , coordinator .

table 10 .

community development fund ( cdf ) : communitydevelopment block grants ( cdbg ) and related set - asides , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

note: the total amount shown in fy2005 for the cdf , cdbg account in this table is taken fromthe hud congressional budget justifications and is just under $1 million higher than the amountshown in the house appropriations committee's re - estimate of the president's budget table andshown in table 2 .

the source of this discrepancy is unclear , but seems to be attributable to the ediset - aside .

see table note "o" below for more details .

a .

the sum of the amount specified in the senate bill for formula grants and set - asides totals $2.6million less than the total appropriation level for the cdf specified in the bill .

it is unclearwhether the committee intends for the department to use these funds for formula grants orfor a set - aside .

b .

the amount specified in each appropriations bill for formula grants is split between grants toentitlement communities ( which receive 70% of grant funds ) and states ( which receive 30%of formula grant funds ) .

c. $57.8 million is requested for this program within the native american housing block grant .

 ( see tables 2 and 5 . ) .

d. the house version of h.r .

3058 includes $45 million for the indian cdbg programin the native american housing block grant account .

 ( see tables 2 and 5 . ) .

e. p.l .

108-324 , a supplemental appropriations bill , provided $150 million to the cdf account foremergency disaster assistance to communities affected by disasters designated by thepresident between august 31 , 2003 and october 1 , 2004. f. the house and conference versions of h.r .

3058 would create a new account calledthe self - help assisted homeownership account .

the house version of the account included$23.8 million for self - help homeownership ( shop ) ; $28 million for ncdi capacitybuilding grants to the local initiative support corporation , the enterprise foundation , andhabitat for humanity ; $1 million for special olympics ; $1 million for national americanindian housing council ; $3 million for the housing assistance council ; and $4 million inone - time funding for the housing partnerships network .

an additional $1.2 million isprovided in the native american housing block grant account to be awarded to the nationalamerican indian housing council for capacity building and technical assistance .

theconference version of the act included $20 million for shop , $30 million for ncdi / capacitybuilding , $3 million for housing assistance council , $1 million for national americanindian housing council , $4 million for the la raza hope fund , $2 million for the nationalhousing development corp. , and $1 million for special olympics .

g. the following amounts are requested within research and technology ( see table 2 ) : historically black colleges and universities - - $9.0 million ; hispanic - serving institutions - - $6.0 million ; community development work study - - $2.6 million ; alaskan native andnative hawaiian - serving institutions - - $3.0 million ; tribal colleges and universities - - $2.6million ; and community outreach partnerships - - $6.0 million .

h. the house version of h.r .

3058 would provide $29 million within the research andtechnology account ( see table 2 ) for assistance to university based programs previouslyfunded under the cdbg account .

funding for the following university - based program wouldshift from the office of planning and development to the office of policy development andresearch: historically black colleges and universities - - $8.967 million ; hispanic - servinginstitutions - - $5.979 million ; alaskan native and native hawaiian - serving institutions - - $2.989 million ; tribal colleges and universities - - $2.562 million ; and community outreachpartnerships - - $5.979 million ; community development work study - - $2.562 million .

i .

$8.8 million is requested for this activity within the native hawaiian block grant .

 ( see table2 . ) .

j .

the house version of h.r .

3058 would fund this program as a separate account infy2006 ( see table 2 ) at its requested level , $8.8 million .

k. see table 17 .

l. $30 million is requested for this program as a separate line item .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

m. $58.9 million is requested for this program within the department of labor .

n. a house floor amendment to h.r .

3058 added $67.5 million to the cdf account ; floor statements indicate that up to $50 million of the amount was available for youthbuild,unless the program is funded within the department of labor .

o .

in addition to the edis specified within the hud portion of the fy2005 omnibus appropriationsbill ( $262 million ) , p.l .

108-447 also appropriated $31 million to the communitydevelopment fund for a grant to the hudson river park trust ( division i , title iv , section424 ) .

this brings the total edis in fy2005 , pre - rescission , to $293 million , whichpost - rescission , would total $291.7 million .

however , hud's congressional budgetjustifications indicate that in fy2005 , edis were funded at $291.6 million post - rescission,which is equivalent to $294 million in edis pre - rescission .

the source of this additional $1million in edi funds is unclear and was not included in the house appropriationscommittee's re - estimate of the president's budget .

p. in fy2005 and prior , the brownfields program was funded in a separate account .

a house flooramendment to h.r .

3058 added $24 million to the cdf account and the sponsorspecified that the funds were to be used for brownfields .

the senate and conference billsfunds brownfields in a separate account .

q. s.amdt .

2183 added language to the bill that would set aside $5 million for capacitybuilding activities of habitat for humanities .

this amendment , which was approved byvoice vote , superseded s.amdt .

2114 , which would have set aside $4.5 millionfor habitat for humanities capacity building activities .

r. includes $4 million for emergencies that constitute an imminent threat to health and safety .

s. includes $4 million to establish youthbuild programs in underserved and rural areas , and $1million for capacity building activities of youthbuild usa .

t. the following amounts were provided within research and technology ( see table 2 ) : historically black colleges and universities - - $9.0 million ; hispanic - serving institutions - - $6.0 million ; alaskan native and native hawaiian - serving institutions - - $3.0 million ; andtribal colleges and universities - - $2.6 million .

on june 21 , the house appropriations committee passed a fy2006 hud funding bill thatincluded $4.15 billion for the community development fund within hud .

by recommendingfy2006 funding for the cdbg program , the measure rejected the administration's proposed"strengthening america's communities initiative ( saci ) . .

the proposed funding of $4.151 billionfor the community development fund included $3.860 billion for cdbg formula grants awardedto entitlement communities and states , which is $250 less than appropriated in fy2005 ; and $290million for edi grants for congressional earmarked projects , which is $30 million more than wasmade available in fy2005 .

under the bill , as reported by the committee , a number of cdbg set - asides and relatedprograms would not be funded in fy2006 including the youthbuild , empowerment zones,brownfields , and section 108 loan guarantees .

in addition , the bill proposed transferring fundingfor several cdbg - related asides to other accounts within hud .

a new self - help and assistedhomeownership account would provide , among others , $23 million for the self - helphomeownership program ( shop ) , $28 million for the national community development initiative,and $3 million for the housing assistance council .

it also recommended transferring to hud'soffice of policy development and research $29 million in funding for university programspreviously included as cdbg set - asides under section 107 - - including assistance to historic blackcolleges and universities , institutions serving hispanic populations , and a community developmentwork study program .

on june 30 , 2005 , the house , by a vote of 405 to 18 , approved h.r .

3058 , andforwarded the bill to the senate for its consideration .

before approving the bill , the houseconsidered and approved several amendments , two of which increased funding for the cdf accountto a total of $4.324 billion .

the house approved by voice vote an amendment ( h.amdt .

396 ) offered by representative knollenberg that would have provided an additional $67.5 millionto the cdf account .

floor debate indicated that $50 million of that amount was to be made availablefor the youthbuild program , unless the program was funded within the department of labor'sbudget .

the additional $17.5 million was to be allocated to cdbg formula grants .

as approved bythe house , the cdbg formula - based program would have received $3.9 billion in funding , whichis approximately $230 million below its fy2005 funding level .

during floor consideration of thebill , the chairman of the tthud appropriations subcommittee , representative knollenberg , statedhis intention to continue to seek a means of restoring the cdbg formula - based program to itsfy2005 funding level .

a second amendment , offered by representative gary miller and approvedby voice vote added another $24 million to the cdf account to be used for the hud brownfieldsredevelopment program .

in prior years , the program was funded within its own account , not as aset - aside within the cdf ( see below. ) .

representative gingrey offered , but later withdrew , an amendment that would haveprohibited the use of cdbg funds for economic development projects in instances where privatelyowned land was acquired through the use of eminent domain .

the amendment was offered inresponse to the june 23 , 2005 , supreme court decision in kelo v new london , connecticut , whichupheld the use of eminent domain to acquire privately held property and transfer it to another privateparty for government - supported economic development projects .

the supreme court held , in a 5to 4 decision , that such a transfer is permissible if it results in a public benefit such as job creationand increased tax revenues .

the house approved an amendment , h.amdt .

427 , offeredby representative scott garrett that would prohibit the use of funds in h.r .

3058 toenforce the supreme court's kelo decision .

the amendment , which was approved by a vote of 231-189 , would , if approved by both the house and senate , prohibit the use of any federalappropriations , including cdbg , transportation , and housing funds , included in h.r .

3058from being used to directly or indirectly support economic development projects involving the useof eminent domain .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs22189 , condemnation of privateproperty for economic development: kelo v. city of new london , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

on july 21 , 2005 , the senate appropriations committee approved its version of h.r .

3058 by a vote of 28-0 .

the senate version of the bill would have appropriated$4.324 billion for community development fund ( cdf ) activities , including $3.767 billion forcdbg formula grants , and $554 million for cdbg - related set asides and earmarks .

it would have also appropriated $72 million more for programs and set - asides funded under the cdf account thanrecommended by the house ( see discussion below ) , but would have allocated $110 million fewerdollars to cdbg formula grants .

on october 20 , 2005 , the full senate approved its version of h.r .

3058 by avote of 93-1 .

the senate version of the bill would have continued to fund a number of smallercdbg - related programs under the cdf account , unlike the house bill , which would provide nofunding , reduce funding , or would transfer the activity to another account within hud .

for instance,the senate bill included $69 million for the native american cdbg , while the house version wouldappropriate $45 million for the program .

the senate bill would have appropriated $32.4 million infunding for college and university programs and retain the programs under the cdf account , whilethe house bill called for transferring the activity to a new self help and assisted homeownershipaccount ; it would appropriate $40 million for the neighborhood initiative program , a program thatwas not included in the president's request or the house version of the bill ; and it would haveappropriated $30 million for capacity building grants under the national community developmentinitiative program , which is $2 million less than the amount recommended by the house .

like the house version of h.r .

3058 , the senate version also includedprovisions limiting the use of federal funds in economic development projects involving eminentdomain .

during the senate appropriations committee consideration of h.r .

3058,senator bond introduced and then withdrew a proposed amendment that would have prohibited theuse of federal funds in economic development projects involving the use of eminent domain .

theamendment would have allowed the use of federal funds if the project involved airports , seaports,mass transit , or was intended to revitalize a blighted area .

during senate floor consideration of thebill , senator bond again introduced an amendment ( s.amdt .

2113 ) to limit the use offederal dollars in support of economic development projects involving eminent domain .

the bondamendment , which was approved by voice vote , stated that no appropriated funds included in h.r.3058 could be used to support any federal , state , or local government - assisted projectsinvolving the use of eminent domain unless such projects or activities involve a public purpose .

theamendment would not include economic development "that primarily benefits private entities" asan eligible public purpose , but would include transportation and utility projects that benefit thegeneral public , as well as projects involving the removal of blighted areas or brownfields as publicuse activities .

such projects would be allowed the use of eminent domain without the loss of federalfunds .

the amendment would also direct the government accountability office ( gao ) and thenational academy for public administration , state and local government organizations , and propertyrights organizations to conduct a study - by - state study of the use of eminent domain .

the conference version of h.r .

3058 , which was approved by the house onnovember 18 and the senate on november 21 , 2005 , appropriates $4.220 billion for communitydevelopment fund activities , including $3.748 billion for the cdbg formula grant program .

thisis 9% less than appropriated for formula grants in fy2005 .

the act includes $471 million for variouscdf set - asides , and earmarks with the majority of such funds - - $310 million - - allocated among1126 edi earmarked projects .

of the remaining funds , $50 million is earmarked for neighborhoodinitiative 50 projects identified in the conference report ; another $50 million is to be awarded to localyouthbuild organizations .

the $310 million in edi earmarks represents a 7% increase in fundingfor such projects over the amount appropriated in fy2005 ( $290 million ) .

the conference version of the act shifts funding for a number of programs previously fundedunder this account to other hud accounts .

funding for the shop program , national communitydevelopment initiative , the housing assistance council , the national american indian housingcouncil , and the la raza hope fund are now funded under a new self - help assistedhomeownership account .

assistance for minority - serving universities and colleges previouslyfunded under section 107 ( special projects ) are now funded under the policy development andresearch account ( see footnotes f and t in table 10 for funding allocations ) .

section 726 of the general provisions of title vii of the tthud appropriations act forfy2006 , includes the language prohibiting federal , state , and local governments from using fundsappropriated under the act for projects involving the use of eminent domain , unless such projects oractivities involve a public purpose .

the provision excludes economic development "that primarilybenefits private entities" as an eligible public purpose , except in cases involving the removal ofblighted areas , brownfield redevelopment , mass transit , transportation , and utility projects thatbenefit the general public .

such projects would be allowed the use of eminent domain without theloss of federal funds .

the provision also directs gao and the national academy for publicadministration , state and local government organizations , and property rights organizations toconduct a study - by - state study of the use of eminent domain .

emergency supplemental hurricane funding .

congress included $11.5 billion in fy2006 supplemental appropriations for disaster - recoveryassistance under the community development block grant ( cdbg ) in p.l .

109-148 , to assist thefive states ( louisiana , mississippi , alabama , texas , and florida ) impacted by hurricanes katrina,rita , and wilma .

of this amount , $6.2 billion was allocated to louisiana .

among other provisions , ( 1 ) affected states were authorized to use up to 5% of their allocation for administrative costs ; ( 2 ) hud was authorized to grant waivers of program requirements ( except those relating to fair housing,nondiscrimination , labor standards , and the environment ) ; and ( 3 ) mississippi and louisiana wereauthorized to use up to $20 million for local initiative support corporation and enterprisefoundation - supported local community development corporations .

the hud income targetingrequirement for activities benefitting low - and moderate - income persons was decreased from 70%to 50% of the state's allocation .

cdbg section 108 loan guarantees .

thesection 108 loan guarantee program allows states and entitlement communities to leverage theirannual cdbg allocation in order to help finance brownfield redevelopment , large scale economicdevelopment , and housing projects .

cdbg entitlement communities and states are allowed toborrow up to five times their annual cdbg allocation for qualifying activities .

as security againstdefault states and entitlement communities must pledge their current and future cdbg allocation .

table 11 .

cdbg section 108 loanguarantees ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

the administration included the section 108 program in the list of programs whose activitieswould be consolidated under its strengthening america's communities initiative .

the houseversion of h.r .

3058 did not include funding for the program , but the senate versionof the bill would have provided a $6 million subsidy fund that would have supported a loancommitment ceiling of $275 million .

the conference version of the act included $3 million subsidyfund that will support a loan commitment ceiling of $137.5 million .

brownfields redevelopment .

the brownfieldsredevelopment program is a competitive grant program that provides funds to assist cities with theredevelopment of abandoned , idled and underused industrial and commercial facilities whereexpansion and redevelopment is burdened by real or potential environmental contamination .

table 12 .

brownfields redevelopment , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

a .

for fy2006 , the house funds the brownfields program at $24 million as a set - aside within thecommunity development fund .

the administration's fy2006 budget included brownfield economic development initiativegrants among the 18 programs that would be eliminated and whose activities would be consolidatedunder a new program - - strengthening america's communities initiative - - to be administered by thedepartment of commerce .

 ( see discussion above. ) .

h.r .

3058 , as reported by the appropriations committee , rejected thepresident's strengthening america's communities initiative proposal ; however , it did not includefunding for the brownfields redevelopment program in fy2006 .

during consideration of h.r.3058 , the full house approved by voice vote an amendment offered by representativegary miller that would have appropriated $24 million to the community development fund accountfor hud's brownfield program .

the senate version of the bill included $15 million for the program .

the conference version of the act appropriates $10 million for the brownfield redevelopmentactivities .

the home investment partnership program .

created in 1990 , the home investment partnerships program provides formula - based block grantfunding to states , units of local government , indian tribes and insular areaas to fund affordablehousing initiatives .

eligible activities include acquisition , rehabilitation and new construction ofaffordable housing as well as rental assistance for eligible families .

table 13 .

the home investment program , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in millions ) source: see table 2 .

a .

includes funding for insular areas , which received $3.6 million in fy2005 and for which thepresident requested $3.5 million in fy2006 .

b .

the budget proposed that housing counseling be funded at $39.7 million in a separate account .

c. see table 17 .

the fy2006 budget requested $1.94 billion for the home program , an increase of $41.3million over the level enacted in fy2005 .

this increase was attributable to an increase of $150million for the american dream downpayment initiative ( addi ) and a decrease for all the otherhome program set - asides .

a similar increase was requested in fy2005 and addi was fundedinstead at $50 million .

concern was raised that the program may be helping families who may notbe the best candidates for homeownership , and a government accountability office ( gao ) reviewof the program suggested that it was unlikely that hud would be able to obligate more than $40 to$50 million during the fiscal year .

as in prior years , the budget requested that housing counselingbe funded in a separate account within the housing programs budget .

both the house and senate - passed versions of the fy2006 hud bill would have provided$1.9 billion for the home program in fy2006 , less than the president requested , but slightly morethan was provided in fy2005 .

in the house bill , funding for formula grants would have beenincreased over both the fy2005 level and the president's requested level .

the senate bill wouldhave increased formula grants slightly above the house level .

in both bills , the american dreamdownpayment initiative would have been funded close to the fy2005 level , which is substantiallyless ( - 75% ) than the president's requested level .

neither bill would have provided separate fundingfor housing counseling , as requested by the president ; instead , the bills included a set - aside forhousing counseling within the home account .

the final version of h.r .

3058 cut funding for the home program by $125million from the president's request , house - passed , and senate - passed levels .

the american dreamdownpayment initiative is funded at half of the house and senate levels .

the home formula grantsface the largest decrease , a 5% cut from the fy2005 enacted level .

the final version of h.r.3058 continues to fund housing counseling assistance as a set - aside within the homeprogram .

self help and assisted homeownership .

the selfhelp homeownership program ( shop ) provides grants to non - profits , including habitat forhumanity , to fund self - help homeownership ( for example , sweat - equity ) programs .

in fy2005 andprior years , shop was funded as a set - aside within the cdf account .

as a part of the larger saciproposal , the president requested in his fy2006 budget that congress fund the self helphomeownership program as a separate line - item in the budget .

while saci was not adopted in h.r .

3058 , the house did choose to fund shopin a new account , with several other programs .

this new account , called self help and assistedhomeownership , would consolidate funding for several programs that were previously funded asset - asides within the community development fund account and provide funding for one programthat does not appear to have received funding in fy2005 .

h.rept .

109-153 notes that most of theprograms in the account are funded at a reduced level , consistent with reductions in many hudprograms necessary to meet rental assistance priorities .

the senate - passed version of the bill doesnot include this account .

p.l .

109-115 creates the new account and appropriates $61 million for it .

table 14 .

self help and assistedhomeownership ( in thousands of dollars ) source: see table 2 .

a .

in fy2005 and in the senate - passed version of the fy2006 hud funding bill , these programswere funded as set - asides in the community development fund ( see table 9 ) .

b .

these programs are proposed for elimination as a part of the president's strengthening america'scommunities initiative ( see discussion beginning on page 17 ) .

c. an additional $1.2 million is provided in the native american housing block grant account tobe awarded to the national american indian housing council for capacity building andtechnical assistance .

 ( see table 5 . ) .

homeless programs .

homeless assistance grantsis the blanket title given to the four homeless programs authorized by the mckinney - ventohomeless assistance act ( p.l .

100-77 ) and administered by hud .

three of the four programs arecompetitive grant programs: the supportive housing program ( shp ) , the shelter plus care program ( s+c ) and the single room occupancy program ( sro ) .

funding for the fourth hud program , theemergency shelter grants program ( esg ) , is distributed via a formula allocation to states and localcommunities .

table 15 .

hud homeless programs , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

a .

see table 17 .

the president's fy2006 budget request proposed to provide $200 million more forhomelessness programs than in fy2005 .

in addition , as in fy2004 and fy2005 , the administrationproposed to consolidate the three competitive components of the homeless assistance grantsaccount into a single competitive program .

consolidation legislation was not introduced in fy2004or fy2005 , although the fy2006 budget stated that legislation would be submitted to congress thissession .

the administration's budget included two additional initiatives .

the samaritan initiativeaccounted for the full $200 million increase over fy2005 appropriations .

it would fundservices - enriched supportive housing for chronically homeless individuals .

authorizing legislationfor the samaritan initiative was introduced in the 108th congress , but was not enacted , and no fundswere provided for the initiative in fy2005 .

in addition to the samaritan initiative , the president'sbudget proposed $25 million for a prisoner re - entry initiative , with funds transferred from hud tothe department of justice for use in helping individuals exiting prison successfully transition tocommunity life and employment .

the same proposal was included in the president's fy2005 budgetrequest , but was not enacted .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 provided $100 million less for thehomeless assistance grants account than the president requested , which is $100 million more thanthe account received in fy2005 .

the house bill did not designate any funding for the samaritanhousing initiative and did not authorize funding for the prisoner re - entry initiative .

the houseappropriations committee report ( h.rept .

109-153 ) noted that because authorizing legislation forthe prisoner re - entry initiative has not been enacted , funding for the program was not included inits version of h.r .

3058 .

the senate - passed version of the fy2006 hud appropriations bill increased funding abovethe fy2005 level by about $175 million , and above the house - approved level by about $75 million .

like the house bill , the senate bill did not designate any funding for the samaritan housinginitiative and did not authorize funding for the prisoner re - entry initiative .

the final spending bill adopted the house's proposed funding level and appropriates $1.34billion for the homeless assistance grants , $100 million below the president's request , and $100million more than fy2005 , an increase of just more than 8% .

the final version does not includefunding for the samaritan initiative or the prisoner reentry initiative .

the conference report ( h.rept .

109-307 ) reiterated the directive in the senate appropriations committee report ( s.rept.109-109 ) that hud continue to implement its homeless management information system to countand track the homeless , and report its progress to congress by march 10 , 2006 .

for moreinformation on hud's homeless assistance grants , see crs report rl30442 , homelessness:recent statistics , targeted federal programs , and recent legislation , by [author name scrubbed] , coordinator .

for more information on hmis , see crs report rs22328 , the homeless managment informationsystem , by [author name scrubbed] .

housing programs for the elderly and thedisabled .

formerly known together as housing for special populations , the section202 housing for the elderly and the section 811 housing for the disabled programs provide capitalgrants and ongoing rental assistance to developers of new subsidized housing for these populations .

table 16 .

sections 202 and 811 , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

note: "ns" indicates that a specfic amount is not specified .

a .

see table 17 .

while the president's fy2006 budget proposal for the section 202 program represented levelfunding , the president's request for section 811 represented a 50% cut in funding over fy2005 .

further , section 811 funding would not have been available for capital grants under the president'sproposal ; rather , the full amount would have been used to provide vouchers to persons withdisabilities .

hud budget documents do not provide a rationale for the reduction or restriction onuse for capital grants .

in testimony before the house appropriations subcommittee ontransportation , treasury , hud , the judiciary , and the district of columbia , the secretary of hudreferred to the need to make unpopular cuts in programs such as section 811 in order to maintainadequate funding for section 8 and programs for the homeless .

both the house and senate versions of h.r .

3058 proposed to fund the section202 program at about the president's requested level , and approximately the same level as fy2005spending .

a floor amendment in the senate ( s.amdt .

2140 ) made $10 million availablefor the section 202 legacy demonstration program ( p.l .

108-186 ) , which provides housing forlow - income elderly heads of households who care for children .

both house and senate versionsproposed to fund the section 811 program at about the fy2005 level , and , unlike the president'srequest , allowed funds to be used for capital grants .

the senate bill included language proposingto transfer the renewal of section 811 vouchers to the section 8 tenant - based rental assistanceaccount .

under the senate proposal , it appeared that the tenant - based account would be required toabsorb the cost of vouchers , thus leaving additional dollars in the section 811 account for capitalgrants .

the enacted appropriation for fy2006 funds section 202 at $742 million .

it also retains thesenate's proposal to set aside funding for the section 202 legacy demonstration program , butreduces the amount to $4 million from $10 million .

the final spending bill funds section 811 at$239 million , an increase of approximately $1 million over fy2005 , and twice as much as thepresident's request .

like the house and senate versions , the final version includes funds for capitalgrants , but does not transfer section 811 vouchers to the section 8 tenant - based rental account , asthe senate version proposed .

affordable housing and economic development technicalassistance board .

the senate version of h.r .

3058 would haveestablished a new program designed to provide technical assistance to local non - profit organizationsinvolved in managing hud programs and activities .

the affordable housing and economicdevelopment technical assistance board ( ahedtab ) would be comprised of three nationalorganizations ( the local initiative support corporation , the enterprise foundation , and the centrefor management and technology ) , and would be charged with developing uniform policies and bestpractices to assist local non - profit organizations to effectively develop and manage local housing andeconomic development programs .

the ahedtab would be assisted by an advisory boardcomposed of a number of groups which have participated in hud programs , including the housingassistance council , the corporation for supportive housing , the national alliance to endhomelessness , the national council of la raza , the national urban league , the national americanindian housing council , the national association for the mentally ill , and the american associationof homes and services for the aging .

the program would have been funded by transferring a total of $50 million from severalexisting hud programs , including section 8 tenant - based and project - based rental assistance , thecdbg program , the native american housing block grant program , the home program , section202 housing for the elderly , the homeless assistance program , and section 811 housing forpersons with disabilities program .

neither the president's budget request nor the house version of h.r .

3058 includes a similar provision .

the board was not created in the final versionof h.r .

3058 .

table 17 .

affordable housing and economic developmenttechnical assistance board ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

note: this account would not receive a direct appropriation , rather , the funds are transferred fromother accounts .

federal housing administration ( fha ) .

thefha administers a variety of mortgage insurance programs that insure lenders against loss from loandefaults by borrowers .

through fha insurance , lenders make loans that otherwise may not beavailable , and enable borrowers to obtain loans for home purchase and home improvement as wellas for the purchase , repair , or construction of apartments , hospitals , and nursing homes .

theprograms are administered through two program accounts - - the mutual mortgageinsurance / cooperative management housing insurance fund account ( mmi / cmhi ) and the generalinsurance / special risk insurance fund account ( gi / sri ) .

the mmi / cmhi fund provides insurancefor home mortgages .

the gi / sri fund provides insurance for more risky home mortgages , formultifamily rental housing , and for an assortment of special purpose loans such as hospitals andnursing homes .

table 18 .

federal housing administration , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

a .

note that the president's request numbers are taken from the appropriations committee'sre - estimate of the president's budget as shown in tables provided in h.rept .

109-153 and s.rept .

109-109 .

as shown in table 18 , fha has negative appropriations , which means that the income tothe program from insurance premiums exceeds the program expenses .

this suggests that , becauseof the surplus generated by fha , hud needed $1,724 million less in appropriations in fy2005 .

the negative appropriation has implications for two legislative initiatives that have been proposedby the administration .

one initiative would permit 100% fha financing for first - time buyers withstrong credit records .

under the other initiative , hud would amend its underwriting guidelines inorder to permit borrowers with blemished credit records to obtain fha - insured loans .

the fhainsurance premiums for these borrowers would be increased to cover the higher risks and costsinvolved in these initiatives .

the president's budget assumed that these initiatives would create $268million in additional negative appropriations in fy2006 .

the budget also assumed that the mmi andgi / sri programs would generate $1,956 million in offsetting receipts .

based on its assumptions ofincome , costs , and fees to the insurance funds , the administration estimated net fha appropriationsof $ - 1,489 million for fy2006 .

the appropriations committee , however , did not accept theadministration's assumptions .

the committee's re - estimate ( shown in table 18 as the fy2006request ) assumes zero savings from the proposed initiatives , and it assumes $347 million less inoffsetting receipts .

both house and senate versions of h.r .

3058 assume lower administrativeexpenses in the mmi account and lower offsetting receipts in the gi / sri account than presented inthe president's request .

as a result , the committees are able to realize greater savings than there - estimate of the president's budget would have allowed , although notably less than in thepresident's original budget and less than was available in fy2005 .

as shown in table 18 , thecommittees' assumptions result in an estimated appropriation of $ - 913 million .

the decrease in fhanet income implies a need for an additional $811 million in appropriations to support other hudprograms at the same level as fy2005 .

p.l .

109-115 funds fha as proposed by the house andsenate .

office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) .

ofheo is the office within hud which is responsible for regulatingfannie mae and freddie mac regarding the safety and soundness of their operations .

theappropriations for ofheo are completely offset by fees collected from fannie mae and freddiemac .

in recent years there has been criticism that ofheo has been ineffective in its role .

theadministration expects that the resources of ofheo will be transferred to a strengthened regulatorthat will be proposed .

h.r .

1461 , as passed by the house , would combine ofheo andhud's regulatory division into a new independent agency called the federal housing financeagency .

fair housing .

the office of fair housing andequal opportunity enforces the fair housing act and other civil rights laws that make it illegal todiscriminate in the sale , rental , or financing of housing based on race , color , religion , sex , nationalorigin , disability , or family status .

this is accomplished through the fair housing assistanceprogram ( fhap ) and the fair housing initiatives program ( fhip ) .

fhap provides grants to stateand local agencies to enforce laws that are substantially equivalent to the federal fair housing act .

it provides grants on a non - competitive basis .

fhip provides funds for public and private fairhousing groups , as well as state and local agencies , for activities that educate the public and housingindustry about the fair housing laws .

table 19 .

fair housing programs , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

the president's budget recommended decreases in funding for both fair housing programsin order to provide needed funding for the tenant - based section 8 voucher program .

fhap wouldbe reduced 14% from its fy2005 level and fhip would be reduced 19% .

h.r .

3058 ,as reported by the house appropriations committee , adopted the president's funding request .

anamendment by the full house increased funding for the program to a slight increase over the fy2005level .

the increase was offset by a reduction of $7.7 million from the information system budget ofthe irs .

the senate version of h.r .

3058 increased funding for fair housing activitiesabove the president's requested level , but provided less than was appropriated in fy2005 and whatwas recommended by the house .

for fy2006 , p.l .

109-115 funds the fair housing programs at $46 million , of which $26million is for fair housing assistance and $20 million is for fair housing initiatives .

anadministrative provision precludes the use of these funds to prosecute or investigate legal activitiesunder the fair housing act .

lead - based paint hazard reduction .

the officeof lead hazard control at hud administers both the lead - based paint hazard control grantprogram and the healthy homes initiative ( hhi ) , designed to reduce the hazards of lead - based paintin homes .

table 20 .

lead - based paint hazard control , fy2005 tofy2006 ( in thousands ) source: see table 2 .

for fy2006 , the administration proposed a funding level of $116 million for the healthyhomes and lead hazard control reduction program .

this $48 million ( 29% ) reduction from thefy2005 level is largely the result of proposing zero funding for the lead hazard demonstrationprogram , which was funded at $47 million in fy2005 .

the justification for this reduction is that thefunds are needed instead for the section 8 voucher program .

h.r .

3058 , as reported bythe house appropriations committee , adopted the president's funding request .

during full housedebate on the bill , a floor amendment was adopted that restored funding to the level enacted infy2005 .

the senate - passed bill proposed to fund the account slightly above the fy2005 level .

forfy2006 , p.l .

109-115 appropriates $152 million for the program .

