on december 8 , 2004 , the president signed into law the fy2005 consolidated appropriationsact ( p.l .

108-447 , h.r .

4818 ) , which combines nine annual appropriations bills intoone measure .

division a of p.l .

108-447 contains $85.3 billion in fy2005 funding for the u.s.department of agriculture and related agencies , including $16.9 billion in discretionary spending.the total appropriation does not reflect the effect of a provision that requires a 0.8% across - the - boardrescission in all discretionary spending in the measure .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out its widely varied responsibilitiesthrough approximately 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by some 100,000 employees .

usda is responsible for many activities outside of the agriculture budget function .

hence , spendingfor usda is not synonymous with spending for farm programs .

usda gross outlays for fy2003 ( the most recent fiscal year for which data are available ) were $81.53 billion , including regular and supplemental spending .

the mission area with the largestgross outlays ( $41.3 billion , or 50% of spending ) was for food and nutrition programs - - primarilythe food stamp program ( the costliest single usda program ) , various child nutrition programs , andthe supplemental nutrition program for women , infants and children ( wic ) .

the second largestmission area in terms of total spending is for farm and foreign agricultural services , which totaled$24.3 billion , or 30% of all usda spending in fy2003 .

within this area are the programs fundedthrough the commodity credit corporation ( eg , the farm commodity price and income supportprograms and certain mandatory conservation and trade programs ) , crop insurance , farm loans , andforeign food aid programs .

total usda spending in fy2003 also included $7.0 billion ( 9% ) for an array of natural resource and environment programs , approximately three - fourths of which was for the activities ofthe forest service , and the balance for a number of discretionary conservation programs for farmproducers .

 ( usda's forest service is funded through the interior appropriations bill ; it is the onlyusda agency not funded through the annual agriculture appropriations bill. ) .

usda programs forrural development ( $2.9 billion in gross outlays for fy2003 ) ; research and education ( $2.4 billion ) ; marketing and regulatory activities ( $2.3 billion ) ; meat and poultry inspection ( $735 million ) ; anddepartmental administrative offices and other activities ( $576 million ) accounted for the balance ofusda spending .

as the first step in the fy2005 budget and appropriations process , the bushadministration released its budget request on february 2 , 2004 for all federaldepartment , agencies , and programs .

the administration's budget contained anfy2005 appropriations request of $82.9 billion for the u.s. department ofagriculture and related agencies ( which includes all of usda except the forestservice , and also includes the food and drug administration and commodityfutures trading commission ) .

the fy2005 requested total was down $3.65 billionfrom the enacted fy2004 level of $86.6 billion , primarily because of an anticipated reduced need in fy2005 to reimburse the commodity credit corporation for itsrealized losses .

 ( 1 ) an estimated $66.3 billion , ornearly 80% , of this requestedspending is for mandatory programs administered by usda ( primarily the ccc,crop insurance , and most food and nutrition programs ) .

actual spending for theseprograms is highly variable and is driven by program participation rates andprevailing economic and weather conditions .

the balance of the fy2005 spendingrequest ( $16.6 billion ) was for discretionary programs , compared with an enactedfy2004 appropriated level of $16.8 billion .

it is this category of spending for whichappropriators have direct control over annual spending levels .

table 2 .

congressional action on fy2005 appropriations for the u.s. department of agriculture and relatedagencies * on nov. 20 , 2004 , the final version of the fy2005 agriculture appropriations bill was incorporatedinto the conference agreement on the consolidated appropriations bill ( h.r .

4818 ) forfy2005 .

** pending the agriculture subcommittee of the house appropriations committee completed markup of the fy2005 agriculture appropriations bill on june 14 , 2004,and a markup by the full house appropriations committee followed on june 23 .

thecommittee officially reported the bill ( h.r .

4766 , h.rept .

108-584 ) onjuly 7 , 2004 .

the full house approved the measure on july 13 , 2004 , after adoptingfourteen amendments .

senate subcommittee action on its version of the fy2005 bill was completed on september 8 , 2004 , and the full committee reported the bill ( s. 2803 ) on september 14 .

the only amendment adopted in the senate subcommittee was ageneral provision that would relax restrictions on travel to cuba to promote and sellu.s .

agricultural products .

this provision was subsequently deleted by conferees .

in full committee markup , an offered amendment to require mandatory country oforigin labeling for fresh meats and produce to begin on january 1 , 2005 , wasdefeated .

no floor action was taken on s. 2803 .

a conference agreement was reached on the differences between the house - passed bill ( h.r .

4818 ) and the senate - reported measure ( s. 2803 ) .

on november 20 , 2004 , the conference agreement wasfolded into an fy2005 consolidated appropriations bill ( h.r .

4818 , h.rept .

108-792 ) , along with eight other annual appropriations bills .

the presidentsigned the omnibus bill into law ( p.l .

108-447 ) on december 8 , 2004 .

the following sections of this report review the major provisions in the fy2005 conference agreement for usda and related agencies as finally enacted , and comparethe fy2005 funding levels with the house - passed and senate - reported measures , theadministration's fy2005 request , and the enacted fy2004 levels ( p.l .

108-199 ) .also , see the table at the end of the report for a tabular summary comparison .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) , an agency of the department ofhealth and human services ( dhhs ) , is responsible for regulating the safety offoods , drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices .

the agency is fundedby a combination of congressional appropriations and various user fee revenuesassessed primarily for the pre - market review of drug and medical device applications .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 , h.r .

4818 ) provides an appropriation of $1.462 billion , slightly below the house - passed ( h.r .

4766 ) and senate - reported ( s. 2803 ) levelsrecommended for fy2005 .

this appropriation is a 5.5% increase over the fy2004enacted appropriation of $1.386 billion , but 2.2% below the administration'sfy2005 budget request of $1.495 billion .

in addition to appropriated funds , the total amount of user fees to be collected each year is set in fda's annual appropriations act .

the conferees recommend thatfda be authorized to collect a total of $326.7 million in user fees during fy2005,slightly more than the president requested , and 14% higher than the $286.5 millionin authorized user fee collections for fy2004 .

p.l .

108-447 provides a total fy2005program level ( appropriations and user fees combined ) of $1.788 billion , a 7.4%increase from the $1.665 billion available in fy2004 , but a 1.8% decrease from the$1.821 billion in the president's request .

for the first time , the president's fy2005 budget request did not contain an amount for the maintenance of buildings and facilities .

both the house and senateand consequently the conferees concurred with this decision and no funding wasprovided for this category .

without funding , fda will absorb the costs ofmaintaining its facilities with its program funds .

in fy2004 , congress provided $7million for buildings and facilities .

counterterrorism .

the fy2005 conference report contains a total of $215 million for fda counterterrorism funding .

this is 12% less than the president's request of $245 million , but a 22% increaseover the $177.2 million appropriated in fy2004 .

 ( see table 3 below. ) .

this fundingis part of each program center's request and is included in the total appropriationapproved for fda .

most of the increase in counterterrorism funding is for food defense .

this $151 million is 16% below the requested amount of $181 million , but $34 million or 30%more than the fy2004 appropriation of $116 million .

these additional funds willbe used for the food emergency response network ( fern ) , a nationwidefda - fsis network of federal and state laboratories capable of testing thousands offood samples within days for certain biological , radiological , and chemical threatagents .

the increase will also fund research on food testing methods and relatedareas , about 97,000 food import field inspections ( up 60% from the number forfy2004 ) , and will increase crisis management capability by boosting fda's rapidand coordinated response to food threats and food - associated crises .

 ( for moreinformation , see crs report rl31853 , food safety issues in the 108th congress . ) .

a $5 million increase in funding for medical countermeasures will be spread over the various categories in table 3 .

some of these medical countermeasureactivities will also be funded under project bioshield , a program designed to helpensure that medical products for use in the event of war or catastrophic events arereviewed and approved quickly for safety and effectiveness .

the funding also willbe used to assist companies in developing new countermeasures .

it also will allowfda to implement regulations to provide for "emergency use authorization" whenthe countermeasure is still in a developmental stage .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs21507 , project bioshield . ) .

table 3 .

fda counterterrorism funding , fy2004-fy2005 ( $ thousand ) source: fda's office of budget and budget formulation .

december 1 , 2004 .

* does not reflect the 0.8% rescission .

food .

the conferees recommend that the foods program of the center for food safety and applied nutrition and thecenter's field activities have a budget of $439 million for fy2005 , the same amountrecommended by the senate , a 1.7% reduction from the house recommendation , buta 6.8% increase over the fy2004 appropriated level of $411 million .

in addition , theconference report provides an increase of $8.3 million ( or a total of $29.8 million ) for programs related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) or "mad cow"disease .

in report language , the conferees direct fda to expedite the publication offinal regulations to tighten bse safeguards for food , animal feed and cosmetics .

they also want the agency to establish an alternative mechanism to its priornotification and import facility registration requirements for imports of food productsthat are not intended for human consumption so they can continue to be imported forresearch and analytical testing .

the conference report includes $5.36 million for thefood center's adverse events reporting system ( caers ) of which $1.5 million isto be used for reports on dietary supplements .

the conferees accepted a house amendment affecting the recall of food products , requiring fda to announce the internet address of the food manufacturerthat markets the recalled product and to print a photograph of the food item on thefda website .

the agency also would be permitted to ask for a list of retailers thatcarry the recalled product .

the conference report also expects fda to finalize both the pre - market notification rule and related guidance documents for the labeling of geneticallymodified foods by giving them a high priority , and directs fda to educate foreigngovernments on u.s. products made with biotechnology .

the conferees included $3million for the national center for food safety and technology ( ncfst ) in illinoisfor an ongoing cooperative agreement to improve the safety of the nation's foodsupply .

the conferees also state that this $3 million "shall be exclusive of anyadditional initiative funds that fda may award to ncfst. .

the conferees alsodirect the fda to support the development of tests for fruits and vegetablecontamination at new mexico state university's laboratory and continue support forthe waste management education and research consortium verifying food safetytechnology .

the conference report wants the agency to continue funding at $250,000the research and educational activities on shellfish safety and vibrio vulnificus beingconducted by the interstate shellfish sanitation commission ( issc ) and to spend$200,000 on getting states to work through the issc program on this safety .

theconferees recommend that fda , with state testing programs , test farm - raised shrimpimports and inventories for the banned antibiotic chloramphenicol and other illegalantibiotic residues and , if tests are positive , destroy or export the shrimp .

the conferees expressed concern with mercury found in seafood and instructed fda to establish an educational program for physicians .

in addition , it urged betterenforcement of standards on artificially dyed farmed salmon .

better inspections arealso mentioned in the conference report when it urges the agency to continue alaskancontracts for inspections on seafood and urges the agency's haccp inspections ofseafood to be culturally sensitive in hawaii .

moreover , conferees let stand the senatedirection for two reports from fda: one on the collaborative relationship betweenfda , usda , and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) in theirsupport of the national antimicrobial resistance monitoring service ( narms ) ; andthe other on survey findings of perchlorate ( used in rocket fuel ) in food and bottledwater .

in addition , the conference report wants to ensure that standards of identity are enforced on milk protein concentrate imports , and are revised to include a drainedweight requirement for canned tuna .

it also encourages fda to request additionalfunding in its fy2006 budget request for the agency's office of nutritional products,labeling , and dietary supplements whose responsibilities have increased in the lastfew years , but whose appropriations have remained level .

prescription drugs and biologics .

conferees set fda's human drug program level at $498.6 million , slightly less thanthe president's request of $499.5 million , but 4.7% over the fy2004 level of $476.2million .

the fy2005 drug program would come from $293.8 million in budgetauthority and $204.8 million in user fees .

user fees , collected under the prescriptiondrug user fee act ( pdufa ) , would provide 41% of the total drug program'sfunding .

with this money , fda will add staff for the review of human drugs and payfor cost - of - living increases .

import monitoring and inspections have taken on a more prominent role as steadily increasing amounts of drug products are being imported under fda's"personal use" import policy .

the conference report leaves in both the house andsenate report language which contains a provision that prohibits fda from usingfunds to enforce the current statute that bans importation of prescription drugs byparties other than drug companies .

 ( for more on this issue , see crs report rl32511 , importing prescription drugs: objectives , options , and outlook. ) .

concerned about drug counterfeiting , the conference report directs fda to work withthe drug industry to use technologies like color - shifting inks on labels and packagesof drugs and report its progress to the committee by february 1 , 2005 .

the confereeschastise the agency for not producing a required report last year regarding thefeasibility and cost of a monograph system for prescription drugs ( i.e. , guidelinescovering acceptable ingredients , doses , formulations , labeling , and testing ) .

productsconforming to a monograph may be marketed without fda pre - approval while anyothers must go through the new drug application ( nda ) process .

the conferencereport leaves standing the senate language claiming that fda's policy toward olderdrugs ( which could go through a new monograph system and not need to go throughthe formal nda process ) may have raised prices to consumers and have become asubstantial cost on small businesses .

the report directs the agency to report , no laterthan 60 days after enactment , on viable alternative methods on how it will maintainaccess to affordable medicines and foster a cooperative regulatory regime for smallbusinesses .

the conferees direct that $14.4 million be available for grants and contracts under the orphan drug act to accelerate the development and approval of orphandrugs .

the point is to encourage development of diagnostic tests for rare diseasesand explore potential surrogate endpoints and to make drugs available for serious andlife - threatening orphan diseases through the fast - track approval process .

the conferees did not accept senate language about standards for compounded drugs .

rather , they directed the fda to assist involved organizations to form aprivate partnership with the united states pharmacopeia ( usp ) organization todevelop national standards for compounded drugs during fy2005 and asks that fdarequest funding in fy2006 to support this effort .

the agency is to report on theprogress towards these objectives on a regular basis .

the conference report included a general provision that would allow over - the - counter sales of the contraceptive "plan b. .

in may , fda had decided notto allow "plan b" to be sold without a prescription .

the conference report bars fdafrom using its fy2005 funding "to restrict to prescription use a contraceptive that isdetermined to be safe and effective for use without the supervision of a practitionerlicensed by law to administer prescription drugs. .

the conferees noted the public interest in the withdrawal of a widely prescribed painkiller ( vioxx ) and changes ordered in anti - depressant drug labels ( ssris ) .

noting fda's commissioning of an institute of medicine ( iom ) national academyof sciences' study into post - marketing safety issues , the conferees direct the agencyto advise regularly the committees about any changes that fda anticipates regardingdrug safety and to give them progress reports on the iom study .

the conferees fund the biologics program in fy2005 with $124.1 million in appropriations and authorize the collection of $40.4 million in pdufa user fees and$8.2 million in animal drug user fees for a total program level of $172.7 million .

the total includes $300,000 for additional activity relating to flu vaccines .

the conference report also included a general provision that bars fda from using its fy2005 funding "to close or relocate , or to plan to close or relocate , fda'sdivision of pharmaceutical analysis in st. louis , missouri , outside the city or countylimits of st. louis , missouri. .

medical devices .

the conference report provides an appropriation of $235.1 million , which includes $25.6 million forthe review of medical devices .

this amount meets one of the conditions of themedical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma ) of 2002 ( p.l.107-250 ) which requires that fda's appropriation for the medical deviceprogram meet a statutory minimum in order to implement the program .

this increasedoes that and will provide the resources needed to significantly reduce review timesfor medical devices by allowing fda to hire about 400 new reviewers .

in addition,the conferees did not change the senate report language that talks about long - termsafety studies of implanted medical devices and suggests fda create programs forpost - market surveillance , long - term phase 4 clinical trials , and registries of devices .

women's health .

the conferees provided the office of women's health in the office of the commissioner a total of$4 million , which includes a $325,000 increase over the administration's request,because they support the collection of data to study differences between diagnoses,treatment , and outcomes for given diseases for men and women .

the report furtherdirects the use of that increase with $250,000 for study of cardiovascular disease inwomen and $75,000 to continue and expand the hormone therapy education program .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is the independentregulatory agency charged with oversight of derivatives markets .

the cftc'sfunctions include oversight of trading on the futures exchanges , registration andsupervision of futures industry personnel , prevention of fraud and price manipulation,and investor protection .

although most futures trading is now related to financialvariables ( interest rates , currency prices , and stock indexes ) , congressional oversightis vested in the agricultural committees because of the market's historical originsas an adjunct to agricultural trade .

the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 , h.r .

4818 ) provides $94.3 million for the cftc , which is $1 million above thehouse - passed ( h.r .

4766 ) level and $3.4 million above the enactedfy2004 level , but $1 million below the senate - reported ( s. 2803 ) andadministration - requested levels .

cftc has been investigating whether certaincommodity traders may have had advance knowledge of the discovery of bovinespongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or mad - cow disease ) .

report language ( h.rept.108-584 ) accompanying the house - passed bill directs cftc to submit a report of itsfindings to the committee as soon as the investigation is concluded .

table 4 .

usda and related agenciesappropriations , fy2005 congressional action and administration request vs.fy2004 enacted ( budget authority , in millions of $ ) an item with a single asterisk ( * ) represents the total amount of direct and guaranteed loans that can be made given the requested or appropriated loan subsidy level .

only thesubsidy level is included in the total appropriation .

 ( 1 ) fy2004 enacted levels include amounts appropriated for usda and related agencies in the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) adjusted for the 0.59%across - the - board rescission to all non - defense , discretionary programs , as calculated bycrs .

the fy2005 enacted level does not include the effect of a mandated 0.8%rescission to all discretionary accounts funded by the fy2005 consolidatedappropriations act ( p.l .

108-447 ) .

 ( 2 ) under current law , the commodity credit corporation and the federal crop insurance fund each receive annually an indefinite appropriation ( "such sums , as may benecessary" ) .

the amounts shown are usda estimates of the necessary appropriations,which are subject to change .

 ( 3 ) the fy2005 administration request reflects a revised administration request submitted july 13 , 2004 , which added $300 million to the original wic request tocompensate for higher than originally anticipated food costs and participation in the wicprogram .

the fy2005 senate - reported level includes a $125 million emergencyappropriation for wic that is contingent on an emergency request for that amount fromthe administration .

 ( 4 ) scorekeeping adjustments reflect the savings or cost of provisions that affect mandatory programs ( as estimated by the congressional budget office ) , plus thepermanent annual appropriation made to usda's section 32 program .

for the fy2005administration request , scorekeeping adjustments are unofficial estimates based onadministration budget documents , and do not reflect an official cbo score , which ispending .

 ( 5 ) division h of the fy2004 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l.108-199 ) contained $225 million in supplemental funding for various usda assistance programs ( including$50 million for usda's forest service , which is funded under the interior appropriationsbill ) .

spending for this assistance was offset in the conference agreement by a mandatedrescission of $225 million from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the fy2005 senate - reported appropriations bill contains a $125 million emergencyappropriation for wic that is contingent on an emergency request for that amount fromthe administration .

