during the 2003 state of the union address , president bush announced that the federalgovernment was "deploying the nation's first early warning network of sensors to detect biologicalattack. .

 ( 1 ) the newlyformed department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is responsible for deploying this network , thebiowatch program , reportedly as part of the biological warning and incident characterizationsystem .

 ( 2 ) funded andoverseen by dhs , the program has three main elements each coordinated by different agencies,sampling , analysis , and response .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) maintains thesampling component , the sensors that collect airborne particles .

the centers for disease controland prevention ( cdc ) coordinates analysis , the laboratory testing of the samples , though testing isactually carried out in state and local public health laboratories .

local jurisdictions are responsiblefor the public health response to positive findings .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) isdesignated as the lead agency for the law enforcement response if a bioterrorism event is detected.the installation of the sensor network is ongoing , with over 30 cities chosen as locations for thesesensors .

 ( 3 ) the detection of a covert act of bioterrorism , unless detected by the biowatch program , islikely to occur through the diagnosis of ill victims .

detection is delayed from the time of the actualevent by the time required to develop symptoms and report them .

for many pathogens , earlytreatment , preferably before symptoms develop , is key to preventing casualties .

if early detectionis achieved , it is predicted that therapeutic agents could be provided in a timely manner to thoseexposed , reducing the effectiveness of such an attack and averting the potentially catastrophic natureof mass pathogen releases .

while pathogen detection systems are employed by the military , suchsystems were not previously deployed on such a scale in the civilian sector .

a fundamental question to be asked of the biowatch program is whether it is an appropriatefederal response to the threat of bioterrorism .

the historic cases of bioterrorism within the unitedstates have been small in scope , and likely would not be detected by the current system .

additionally , the central intelligence agency has reported that while al - qaeda maintains the goalof mass casualties , most attacks will be small scale .

 ( 4 ) the deployment of a bioterrorism detection system with a primarygoal of detecting large releases of pathogen may not be viewed as the optimum response to thecurrent threat .

the biowatch program garners public and congressional interest for a variety of reasons,including its cost , the future development and testing of similar systems , the effectiveness of thecurrently deployed system , the process by which this program was chosen and deployed , and theconsequence - management process envisioned in response to a biowatch warning .

these issues mayraise questions about the role that the department of homeland security plays with respect to thepublic health infrastructure , aspects of federal and state communication and coordination , and therole of the federal and state governments in protecting the populace against biological attack .

the function of the biowatch program is to detect the release of pathogens into the air,providing warning to the government and public health community of a potential bioterror event .

while there is limited federal government description of the biowatch program , there have beenmedia reports describing the functional concept .

 ( 5 ) according to these reports , aerosol samplers mounted onpreexisting epa air quality monitoring stations collect air , passing it through filters .

these filtersare manually collected at regular , reportedly 24-hour , intervals ( 6 ) and are analyzed for potentialbiological weapon pathogens using polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) techniques .

 ( 7 ) while filters from thebiowatch program were initially shipped to and tested at a federal laboratory in california , state andlocal public health laboratories now perform the analyses .

 ( 8 ) news reports suggest that the system tests for the pathogens thatcause anthrax , smallpox , plague , and tularemia ( a bacterial illness , sometimes called "rabbit fever" ) ,but the entire list of pathogens is not publicly available .

 ( 9 ) the biowatch equipment is fielded in select cities , reportedly including philadelphia , newyork city , washington , dc , san diego , boston , chicago , san francisco , st. louis , houston , andlos angeles .

 ( 10 ) thedepartment of homeland security has not confirmed the exact number of cities engaged in thebiowatch program , nor the number of pathogens that are detected using biowatch equipment .

 ( 11 ) it is reported that at least31 cities are included in the biowatch program , while according to the minutes of a centers fordisease control and prevention ( cdc ) information council meeting , the program may expand toas many as 120 cities .

 ( 12 ) while the exact cost of this program is unknown , the capital costs for installation in a single city areestimated at $1 million and the yearly budget for operation at $1 million per city .

 ( 13 ) the press has reported that the state and local public health labs conducting biowatch testingare all part of the national laboratory response network for bioterrorism ( lrn ) .

 ( 14 ) the lrn is a nationwidenetwork composed primarily of local , state , and federal government laboratories that provideconfirmatory testing of potential bioterrorism pathogens , using consensus protocols .

it wasdeveloped by centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the federal bureau ofinvestigation , and the association of public health laboratories prior to the anthrax mailings of2001 .

it provides confirmatory testing in all 50 state public health labs , and in additionallocations .

 ( 15 ) there arecurrently 118 member labs in the lrn .

biowatch equipment is heavily based on the biological aerosol sentry and informationsystem ( basis ) , a system developed within the chemical and biological national security programof the national nuclear security administration ( now part of the department of homeland security ) by scientists at lawrence livermore and los alamos national laboratories .

 ( 16 ) basis is comprised ofan air collector coupled to a series of filters .

airborne particles passing through the system arecaptured on a filter .

the filter mechanism is designed to roughly determine when an attack occurredby using sequential filters automatically rotated on an hourly basis .

filters are removed and testedusing pcr for the presence of select pathogens .

basis was deployed for both indoor and outdoor monitoring at the salt lake city olympicsin 2002 , and was also tested and characterized in urban settings .

 ( 17 ) some conclusions aboutinstrument performance based on these tests were released .

basis was characterized as having highspecificity , with fewer than 0.005% false positives per filter measurement , ( 18 ) and high sensitivity .

 ( 19 ) however , basis wasnoted to be labor intensive , requiring people to collect filters and perform pcr testing and analysis .

the first incident of a positive biowatch result was reported on october 9 , 2003 in houston,texas .

the houston department of health and human services reported detecting low levels of thebacterium that causes tularemia .

according to a press release , positive results were detected on threeconsecutive days , with negative results on subsequent days .

 ( 20 ) the response to thepositive result was a modest one with precautionary measures being taken by the local and statepublic health agencies , including increased surveillance for human illness ; additional environmentalsampling and testing ; and assessment of activities in the area that may have caused the sensors topick up the organism .

there are no indications that this signal was the result of an intentionalpathogen release , but investigation is ongoing with federal , state and local agency participation .

 ( 21 ) the director of thehouston department of health and human services stated , "we are investigating to determine if thebacteria was always present or newly present and if it represents a health threat to the community. .

these findings may likely reflect natural "background" levels of the organism in the environment,and authorities have chosen to enhance surveillance rather than distributing antibiotics in the affectedcommunity .

 ( 22 ) .

the biowatch program has received a mixed reaction from experts .

while acknowledgingthe program may address a noted homeland security vulnerability , commentators and analysts haveraised concerns in a number of areas .

this section presents some of these concerns , including overallstrategy , sensor siting , detector performance , and public health response .

several aspects of the biowatch program are undergoing further development .

as statedabove , the initial implementation of the system expanded to a reported 31 cities , ( 61 ) with potentially more areasunder surveillance in fy2004 .

 ( 62 ) this expansion may lead to efficiencies , and the alleviation ofsome current concerns , as experience is gained and problems are solved .

the department of homeland security , through the science and technology directorate , isalso requesting proposals for next - generation detection systems for biological countermeasures .

thehomeland security advanced research projects agency issued research announcement 03-01which requests submissions for systems able to continuously monitor urban areas for biologicalagents as well as new indoor monitoring systems .

 ( 63 ) additional work is being performed at department of energy national laboratories tocomplete commercialization of an automated pathogen detection and analysis capability .

thisproject , called the autonomous pathogen detection system , would result in a completely automatedsystem .

 ( 64 ) thedevelopers expect to have the ability to measure up to 100 different agents and controls per sample,with low false positive and false negative rates and a relatively low cost per assay .

 ( 65 ) research and development efforts on other detection systems continue .

for example , thedepartment of defense chemical and biological defense program continues to develop and deploytechnologies for instantaneous detection of biological and chemical weapons .

 ( 66 ) other prospectivetechnologies include the sensornet program , which reportedly is developing a capability to detectchemical , biological , and radiological dispersion , ( 67 ) the urban atmospheric observatory , ( 68 ) whichaims to determinethe atmospheric patterns in an urban environment , and dcnet , a program to map wind currents inthe washington , dc area .

 ( 69 ) such research may eventually develop the next generation ofbiological detection equipment and could provide valuable raw data for analysis of results arisingfrom the current biowatch monitors .

a better understanding of urban air flow may provide for amore exact determination of areas affected by an aerosol release .

 ( 70 ) .

many aspects of the biowatch program raise policy questions congress may consider in thecoming months .

one question addressed may be whether this program is an appropriate federalresponse to the threat of bioterrorism , both in scale and scope .

if it is deemed to be , congress maybe interested in how detection systems , such as biowatch and other prototype systems , are beingused by the department of homeland security to increase national security .

the biowatch programwas deployed rapidly , with little publicity , but lessons learned during this process may be applicableto other detection systems that the federal government develops .

congress may also wish to considerhow the performance of this system is measured and determine whether the funding level that thebiowatch program receives is appropriate for its performance or effectiveness .

future developmentof more advanced monitoring systems and further refinement of the biowatch monitors may alsobe areas of congressional interest .

another issue is how results from the biowatch monitors areintegrated into state and federal response plans , especially since biowatch is a locally operated,federally funded program .

with early detection and treatment of those exposed to biological weapons , illness andsubsequent fatalities may be minimized , and the presence of biowatch in urban areas may serve asan effective deterrent to potential bioterrorists .

some have questioned the effectiveness of such asystem .

with a limited number of monitors within a metropolitan area , these critics questionwhether potentially more likely smaller - scale events are detected .

others question whether such asystem will provide dependable results upon which sound decisions are made .

since much information on biowatch has not been released to the public , it is difficult toevaluate criticisms of the system .

many of the technical issues raised may have been or are beingaddressed by the department of homeland security .

agreements on coordination between state andfederal authorities may be developed but not released .

congress , in overseeing the use of limitedhomeland security resources , may wish to further assess and oversee the impacts of biowatch andits further development .

