the 12 th amendment to the u.s. constitution was proposed by congress in 1803 , following the constitutional crisis that marred the presidential election of 1801 .

state ratifications followed quickly , and the 12 th amendment was declared to be in effect on september 25 , 1804 .

the amendment's provisions , which remain in effect , are summarized as follows .

the electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president .

the votes are opened and counted in a joint session of congress presided over by the president of the senate ( the vice president or the president pro tempore ) .

the person having a majority of electoral votes for each office is elected .

if no candidate for president gains a majority , then the house votes "immediately , by ballot" for president ( contingent election ) , choosing from among the three candidates who received the most electoral votes .

a quorum of at least one representative from two - thirds of the states ( 34 at present ) is necessary for the purposes of contingent election .

the vote is taken by states , with each state casting a single vote .

the votes of a majority of states ( 26 at present ) are necessary to elect the president .

if the house is unable to elect prior to expiration of the presidential term ( january 20 since ratification of the 20 th amendment ) , then the vice president , assuming one has been elected , serves as acting president until a president is chosen .

if no candidate for vice president receives a majority of electoral votes , then the senate elects , choosing between the two candidates receiving the most electoral votes .

a quorum of two - thirds of the senate ( 67 members at present ) is necessary for the purposes of contingent election of the vice president each senator casts a single vote .

the votes of a majority of the whole senate ( 51 or more at present ) are necessary to elect the vice president .

as noted previously , the 12 th amendment established what has become known as contingent election as a "fall - back" procedure that takes place only when no candidate wins an electoral college majority .

contingent election could occur as a result of several series of events: ( 1 ) three or more candidates split the electoral vote so that no one receives a majority ; ( 2 ) a sufficient number of "faithless" electors cast blank ballots or vote for candidates other than those to whom they are pledged , thus denying a majority to any candidate ; or ( 3 ) the electoral college could tie at 269 votes each for two candidates .

contingent elections have been conducted only twice since ratification of the 12 th amendment: for the president in 1825 , following the election of 1824 ; and for the vice president in 1837 , following the election of 1836 .

the contingent election process was modified in the 20 th century by the 20 th amendment to the constitution , and the presidential succession act of 1947 ( 61 stat .

380 ; 3 u.s.c .

19 ) .

section 1 of the amendment set new expiration dates for congressional and presidential terms , changing the former to january 3 and the latter to january 20 .

previously , both terms had expired on march 4 .

the primary purpose of this change was to eliminate the historical anomaly of lame duck congressional sessions , while also shortening the period between election and inauguration of the president and vice president by six weeks .

a subsidiary purpose , as revealed by the amendment's legislative history , was to remove the responsibility for contingent election from a lame duck congress .

section 3 restates the 12 th amendment provision that the vice president ( assuming one has been chosen ) acts as president in the event the house is unable to elect a president in the contingent election process .

it also empowers congress to provide by law for situations in which neither a president nor a vice president "qualifies," ( i.e , neither has been elected ) .

the presidential succession act , among other effects , reinforces this safeguard by naming the speaker of the house of representatives to serve as acting president in such situations ( i.e. , neither a president nor vice president has qualified ) or , alternatively , the president pro tempore of the senate in the event the speaker is ineligible , or declines , or the speakership is vacant .

the speaker would be required to resign both as representative and as speaker to become acting president .

similarly , the president pro tempore would be required to resign both as a senator and as president pro tempore to assume the acting presidency .

if both the speaker and the president pro tempore decline the office , or fail to qualify for any reason , then the acting presidency would devolve upon the head of the most senior executive department ( department of state ) .

the other cabinet secretaries would be similarly eligible in the order of their department's seniority .

by taking the oath of office as acting president , they would automatically vacate their appointment as a cabinet officer , thus avoiding the prohibition against dual office holding .

both the succession act and the 20 th amendment specifically limit the service of an acting president in such circumstances: he holds office only until either a president or vice president has qualified .

although the 23 rd amendment empowers citizens of the district of columbia to vote in presidential elections , the nation's capital is not considered a state for the purposes of contingent election .

thus , the district would not participate in the election , despite the fact that its citizens cast both popular and electoral votes for president and vice president .

near the end of the 108 th congress , representative brad sherman introduced h.j.res .

113 , a proposed constitutional amendment , on november 18 , 2004 .

section 1 of his proposal would alter the formula for electing the president under contingent election .

instead of each state casting a single vote , the house of representatives would vote per capita in such situations , with each member casting a single vote .

the person receiving the greater number of votes would be elected , provided that this number constituted a majority of votes cast .

the amendment would also change the existing quorum , which requires that "a member or members from two - thirds of the states" be present .

section 2 would establish the quorum for contingent election as a majority of the house of representatives ; furthermore , a member or members representing at least two thirds of the states would need to be present .

representative sherman's proposal would eliminate state equality in the contingent election process for the president .

instead of each state casting a single vote , each representative would vote .

for instance , california would cast 53 votes , while wyoming , the least populous state as measured by the 2000 census , would cast one vote , as would other states represented in the house by a single member .

the argument here is that this process would be more democratic , reflecting the great disparities in population and the number of votes cast among the states .

arguments against the proposal could center on the assertion that amendment would weaken the federal nature of the existing contingent election process , in which each state casts a single vote .

moreover , it could be noted that the amendment does not alter existing vice - presidential election procedures in the senate , which would continue to incorporate the concept of state equality , given the fact that each senator casts a single vote .

h.j.res .

113 was referred to the house committee on the judiciary on november 18 , 2004 .

no further action was taken before the 108 th congress adjourned .

american presidential elections have generally been dominated by two major parties since the early 19 th century , with the major party candidates winning a majority of electoral votes in every election since 1836 .

a popular third party or independent candidacy has the potential of preventing an electoral vote majority—such candidacies have emerged in four recent presidential elections ( 1968 , 1980 , 1992 , and 1996 ) .

furthermore , a contest over election results in florida in the very closely contested presidential election of 2000 raised the possibility that florida's electoral votes might be excluded in the electoral vote count session , an action that could have resulted in neither presidential candidate receiving a majority of electoral votes , thus requiring a contingent election .

under either of the above mentioned scenarios , or in similar circumstances , the house and senate could be called on to elect the president and vice president in some future election .

barring any comprehensive reform of the presidential election system , such an election would be governed by the provisions of the 12 th amendment .

as noted previously in this report , while important elements of contingent election procedure in both chambers would be prescribed by the 12 th amendment , the members of the house and senate would be confronted with the same questions that faced their predecessors in 1800 , 1824 , and 1836 .

particularly in the case of the house of representatives , a body of precedent exists dating from its two previous experiences with contingent election .

these precedents would offer guidance , but would not be considered binding in any future contingent election .

with respect to proposals to change the constitutional arrangements that govern contingent election , such efforts would face the stringent requirements imposed on all proposed amendments , including passage by two - thirds vote in each chamber of congress , and approval by three - fourths of the states , generally within a seven - year time frame .

these constraints have meant that successful amendments are usually the products of broad national consensus , a sense that a certain reform is urgently required , or active support by congressional leadership .

in many cases , all the aforementioned factors contributed to the success of an amendment .

given the high hurdles—both constitutional and political—faced by any proposed amendment , it seems likely that contingent election procedures will remain in place unless or until their alleged failings become so compelling that large concurrent majorities in the public , the congress , and the states , are prepared to undertake their reform .

