the homeland security act of 2002 and other administration documents have assigned the department of homeland security specific duties associated with coordinating the nation's efforts to protect its critical infrastructure .

many of these duties were delegated to the information analysis and infrastructure protection directorate .

in particular , the directorate was charged with integrating threat assessments with vulnerability assessments in an effort to identify and manage the risk associated with possible terrorist attacks on the nation's critical infrastructure .

by doing so , the directorate is to help the nation set priorities and take cost - effective protective measures .

this report is meant to support congressional oversight by discussing , in more detail , what this task entails and issues that need to be addressed .

in particular , the report defines terms ( eg , threat , vulnerability , and risk ) , discusses how they fit together in a systematic analysis , describes processes and techniques that have been used to assess them , and discusses how the results of that analysis can inform resource allocation and policy .

while the directorate was given this task as one of its primary missions , similar activities are being undertaken by other agencies under other authorities and by the private sector and states and local governments .

therefore , this report also discusses to some extent the directorate's role in coordinating and / or integrating these activities .

while the statements and documents referenced above allude to many of the steps outlined in the first part of this report , many questions still remain regarding process , methodology , criteria , etc .

dhs and the directorate have been tasked with a very complex problem .

security oriented risk management is typically done at the site or facility level or at the corporate level .

the directorate is being asked to do this at the national level , assessing and comparing perhaps thousands of disparate sites and facilities it has judged as being nationally important .

the directorate is to consider not only economic impacts and loss of life , but also the possible impact on national morale and the ability of state and local governments to maintain order and deliver essential services .

none of these are easy to measure and all are difficult to trade off one against the other , should the analysis come down to that .

to determine the economic impact of the loss of an asset is more difficult than determining the effect on a company's bottom line .

the directorate has been instructed to determine economic impacts two to three levels through the supply chain .

it is not clear how the directorate can or intends to measure the impact on national morale associated with the loss of an asset , especially a cultural icon .

comparing the potential loss of life in one scenario with the potential loss of life in another scenario , while sensitive , presents a direct comparison .

however , comparing the importance of an asset whose loss may result in a relatively small loss of life with another asset the loss of which might result in a large economic impact is much harder .

the exercise will be less than perfect and probably less than objective .

the bush administration and congress are allocating resources in any event , so these choices are getting made implicitly .

if such processes were more transparent , congress could better oversee them and offer guidance if necessary .

the 9 / 11 commission , in discussing a need for a layered security system for public transportation systems , stated that the transportation security administration should be able to identify for congress the array of potential terrorist attacks , the layers of security in place , and the reliability provided by each layer .

expanding on this , the directorate should be able to tell congress what criteria it has used to select assets of national importance , the basic strategy it uses to determine which assets warrant additional protective measures , by how much these measures could reduce the risk to the nation , and how much these additional measures might cost .

it is not clear that the directorate has had a consistent systematic approach for identifying nationally critical assets , assessing the risks they pose , and using that information to inform cost - effective allocation of resources to protective action , especially in its early efforts .

the nipp appears to provide a framework for a written protocol that outlines specifically the steps taken in the risk assessment and risk management process and the assumptions , criteria , and tradeoffs that are made .

while the nipp lays out a clear process , it is not clear how transparent the implementation of the plan will be .

dhs has stated that section specific plans and their integration into a set of national priorities could be classified .

finally , congress may choose to offer its guidance to the directorate on some of these criteria or tradeoffs .

to do so with the same systematic approach that the directorate has been asked to do , the different committees with jurisdiction over different infrastructures may want to consider coordinating their advice .

carl roper , risk management for security professionals , butterworth - heinemann , 1999 .

u.s. coast guard , implementation of national maritime security initiatives , federal register , vol .

68 , no .

126 , july 1 , 2003 , pp 39240-39250 .

american petroleum institute and the national petrochemical & refiners association , security vulnerability assessment methodology for the petroleum and petrochemical industries , may 2003 .

u.s. department of energy , office of energy assurance , vulnerability assessment methodology , electric power infrastructure ( draft ) , september 30 , 2002 .

national communications systems , office of the manager , public switched network security assessment guidelines , september 2000 .

association of metropolitan sewerage agencies , protecting wastewater infrastructure assets: asset based vulnerability checklist for wastewater utilities , 2002 .

government accountability office , homeland security: key elements of a risk management approach , gao - 02-150t , october 12 , 2001 .

american chemistry council , the chlorine institute , and the synthetic organic chemical manufacturers association , in their site security guidelines for the u.s. chemistry industry .

argonne national laboratory , et al. , prepared for the office of energy assurance , u.s. department of energy , energy infrastructure vulnerability survey checklists , february 22 , 2002 .

department of homeland security .

national infrastructure protection plan .

june 2006 .

