the national security act of 1947 ( p.l .

80-253 ) established the statutory framework for themanagerial structure of the united states intelligence community , including the central intelligenceagency ( cia ) and the position of director of central intelligence ( dci ) .

a fundamental intent ofthis legislation was to coordinate , and to a certain extent centralize , the nascent intelligence effortsof the united states as an emergent superpower in the face of a hostile soviet union .

in addition,the act provided the cia with the ability to assume an operational role by charging it with: perform[ing] such other functions and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the national security council may from time to timedirect .

 ( 1 ) in 1947 , the foundation of the present - day intelligence community consisted only of therelatively small intelligence components in the armed services , the departments of state and thetreasury , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and the fledgling cia .

since 1947 , however,the intelligence community "has greatly expanded in size and acquired a much broader range ofresponsibilities in the collection , analysis , and dissemination of foreign intelligence. .

 ( 2 ) the u.s. intelligence community is defined in the national security act as amended .

it currently includes the following: central intelligence agency ; national security agency ; defense intelligence agency ; national geospatial - intelligence agency ; national reconnaissance office ; intelligence elements of the army , navy , air force , marine corps , the federalbureau of investigation , the department of the treasury , the department of energy , and the coastguard ; bureau of intelligence and research , department ofstate ; elements of the department of homeland security concerned with analysesof foreign intelligence information ; and coast guard .

 ( 3 ) beginning in january 1948 , numerous independent commissions , individual experts , and legislative initiatives have examined the growth and evolving mission of the intelligencecommunity .

proposals by these groups have sought to address perceived shortcomings in theintelligence community's structure , management , role , and mission .

these proposals have rangedin scope from basic organizational restructuring to the dissolution of the cia .

in 1948 and 1949 , two executive branch commissions examined the intelligence and operational missions of the cia , and identified fundamental administrative and organizational loopholes in p.l.80-253 .

by the 1950s , however , the physical growth and evolving mission of the intelligencecommunity led subsequent commissions to broaden the scope of their proposals to include theenhancement of the dci's community - wide authority , and the establishment of executive andlegislative branch intelligence oversight committees .

unlike the intelligence investigations of the1970s and 1980s , these early studies were primarily concerned with questions of efficiency andeffectiveness rather than with issues of legality and propriety .

following the vietnam war and "watergate," investigatory bodies became increasingly critical of the national intelligence effort .

beginning in the mid - 1970s , the impetus shifted to the legislativebranch where investigatory committees led by senator frank church and representative otis g. pikeissued a broad range of proposals , including the separation of the dci and cia director positions,dividing the cia's analytical and operational responsibilities into two separate agencies , and theestablishment of congressional oversight committees .

in 1976 and 1977 , respectively,recommendations by the these committees led to the establishment of the senate select committeeon intelligence ( ssci ) and the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) .

thesecommittees were heavily involved in the investigations into the iran - contra affair of the mid - 1980s .

with the end of the cold war , and in the wake of the aldrich ames espionage case , both the executive and legislative branches undertook studies to determine the future roles , capabilities,management , and structure of the intelligence community .

these studies include such issues as theneed to maintain the cia as a separate entity , the extent and competence of u.s. counterintelligence ( ci ) efforts , and the managerial structure of intelligence components in the armed services and thedepartment of defense ( dod ) .

a comprehensive examination of the dci's roles , responsibilities,authorities , and status was also undertaken .

in an era of budgetary constraints and shifting policyconcerns , these studies also examined personnel issues , allocation of resources , duplication ofservices , expanded use of open source intelligence ( oscint ) , and the need for maintaining a covertaction ( ca ) capability .

the results of this effort were reflected in organizational adjustments madeby the intelligence authorization act for fy1997 ( p.l .

104-293 ) , but some observers havesubsequently concluded that this legislation did not go far enough and that , in the light of the eventsof september 11 , 2001 and the iraq war , intelligence organization questions need to be reevaluated .

the history of these investigations has witnessed the gradual transformation of intelligence from a white house asset to one that is shared between the executive and legislative branches .

congressnot only has access to intelligence judgments but to most information that intelligence agenciesacquire as well as to the details of intelligence activities .

congress has accepted some responsibilityas a participant in the planning and conduct of covert actions .

in significant measure , this processhas been encouraged by these external intelligence investigations .

this report provides a chronological overview and examination of the major executive and legislative branch intelligence investigations made from january 1949 to date .

major proposals arelisted in chronological order with a brief discussion of their respective results .

proposals specificallyrelating to congressional oversight of the intelligence community are not included in this report .

the efforts of committees , commissions and individuals to encourage restructuring of the u.s.intelligence community have led to numerous changes through internal agency direction,presidential directives and executive orders , and new statutes .

the general trend has been towardsmore thorough oversight both by the executive branch and by congressional committees .

theposition of the dci has been considerably strengthened and dcis have been given greater staff andauthority to exert influence on all parts of the community .

they have not , however , been given"line" authority over agencies other than the cia , and the influence of the defense departmentremains pervasive .

some have argued that , in the light of the intelligence community's inability toprovide warning of the september 2001 attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon andinaccurate intelligence estimates about iraqi weapons of mass destruction , the need for reorganizingthe intelligence community has become self - evident .

others argue that many of the reforms thathave been proposed could make matters worse .

the issue appears to be moving higher on thecongressional agenda .

specific legislation to reorganize the nation's intelligence effort , including s. 2845 , is currently under consideration and the 9 / 11 commission's recommendationsare receiving widespread interest .

