the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr , or the refuge ) consists of 19 million acres in northeast alaska .

it is administered by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

its 1.5 million acre coastal plain on the north slope of the brooks range is viewed by industry as one of the more likely undeveloped u.s. onshore oil and gas prospects .

in its last economic assessment in 2005 , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) estimated that , at $55 / barrel ( bbl ) in 2003 dollars ( $72.26 in 2016 dollars ) , there is a 95% chance that 5.0 billion bbl or more could be economically recovered and a small ( 5% ) chance that 10.9 billion bbl or more could be recovered on the federal lands in the coastal plain ; the mean estimate was 7.3 billion bbl .

 ( for comparison , u.s. oil consumption from all sources was about 7.1 billion bbl in 2015. ) .

there is a small chance that , taken together , the fields on this federal land could hold as much economically recoverable oil as the giant field at prudhoe bay , found in 1967 on the coastal plain west of anwr .

that state - owned portion of the coastal plain is now estimated to have held 11 billion - 13 billion barrels of oil at the time .

the refuge , and especially its coastal plain , is home to a wide variety of plants and animals .

the presence of caribou , polar bears ( designated as threatened under the endangered species act ) , grizzly bears , wolves , migratory birds , and many other species in a nearly undisturbed state has led some to call the area "america's serengeti. .

the refuge and two neighboring parks in canada have been proposed for an international park , and several species found in the area ( including polar bears , caribou , migratory birds , and whales ) are protected by international treaties or agreements .

the analysis below covers the history of congressional actions on this issue , with a focus on the years since the 108 th congress .

see table 1 and table 2 for votes in the house and senate from the 96 th congress through the 114 th congress .

the conflict between potentially large oil deposits and nearly pristine nature creates a dilemma: should congress open the area for oil and gas development , or should the area's ecosystem be given permanent protection from development ? .

what factors should determine whether to open the area ? .

if it is opened , how can damages be avoided , minimized , or mitigated ? .

to what extent should congress legislate special management of the area ( if it is developed ) , and to what extent should federal agencies be allowed to manage the area under existing law ? .

if congress takes no action , the refuge remains closed to energy development , as provided in section 1003 of p.l .

96-487 .

basic information on the refuge can be found at the fws website , http: / / arctic.fws.gov / .

a presentation of some arguments in favor of development can be found at http: / / www.anwr.org , sponsored by arctic power , a nonprofit coalition of most groups supporting anwr energy development .

some opponents' arguments can be found at http: / / www.alaskawild.org / places - we - protect / arctic - refuge / , supported by the alaska wilderness league , or at http: / / www.protectthearctic.com / , supported by the national audubon society .

maps of the coastal plain showing existing oil development areas on state and federal land can be found at http: / / dog.dnr.alaska.gov / gis / maps.htm .

on - site research on any oil resources in the 1002 area has not been carried out since the mid - 1980s , in light of the fact that development and activities leading to development continue to be prohibited by section 1003 of anilca .

however , some additional modeling of older data , aided by results from exploration on nearby onshore or offshore tracts , has produced a few new interpretations from time to time .

in consequence , many older publications remain useful , and are included below .

crs report 98-814 , budget reconciliation legislation: development and consideration , by bill heniff jr. crs report rl30862 , the budget reconciliation process: the senate's "byrd rule" , by bill heniff jr. crs report 98-815 , budget resolution enforcement , by bill heniff jr. crs report rl31033 , energy efficiency and renewable energy fuel equivalents to potential oil production from the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) , by fred sissine .

crs report rl31115 , legal issues related to proposed drilling for oil and gas in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) , by pamela baldwin .

crs report rs22326 , legislative maps of anwr , by m. lynne corn .

crs report rl32108 , north slope infrastructure and the anwr debate , by m. lynne corn .

crs report rs22143 , oil and gas leasing in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : the 2,000-acre limit , by m. lynne corn and pamela baldwin .

crs report rs20368 , overview of the congressional budget process , by bill heniff jr. crs report rs20602 , presidential authority to create a national monument on the coastal plain of the arctic national wildlife refuge , and possible effects of designation , by pamela baldwin .

crs report rl31447 , wilderness: overview , management , and statistics , by katie hoover .

 ( see above comment on older reports. ) .

national academy of sciences , cumulative environmental effects of oil and gas activities on alaska's north slope , march 2003 , 452 pp. , at http: / / www.nas.edu / .

c. nelleman and r. d. cameron , "cumulative impacts of an evolving oil - field complex on the distribution of calving caribou," canadian journal of zoology , vol .

76 ( 1998 ) , p. 1425 .

u.s. department of the interior , bureau of land management , overview of the 1991 arctic national wildlife refuge recoverable petroleum resource update , april 8 , 1991 , 8 pp. , 2 maps .

u.s. department of the interior , fish and wildlife service , geological survey , and bureau of land management , arctic national wildlife refuge , alaska , coastal plain resource assessment , report and recommendation to the congress of the united states and final legislative environmental impact statement , 1987 , 208 pp .

u.s. department of the interior , geological survey , the oil and gas resource potential of the arctic national wildlife refuge 1002 area , alaska , usgs open file report 98-34 , 2-cd set , 1999 .

u.s. department of the interior , geological survey , arctic refuge coastal plain terrestrial wildlife research summaries , biological science report usgs / brd / bsr - 2002-0001 .

u.s. department of the interior , geological survey , "evaluation of additional potential development scenarios for the 1002 area of the arctic national wildlife refuge," memorandum from brad griffith , assistant leader , alaska cooperative fish and wildlife research unit , to charles d. groat , director , u.s. geological survey , april 4 , 2002 .

u.s. department of the interior , geological survey , economics of 1998 u.s. geological survey's 1002 area regional assessment: an economic update , usgs open file report 2005-1359 , 2005 .

u.s. general accounting office , arctic national wildlife refuge: an assessment of interior's estimate of an economically viable oil field , gao / rced - 93-130 , july 1993 , 31 pp .

