the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and key assets details a major part of the bush administration's overall homeland security strategy .

implementing this strategy requires government agencies and private sector partners to identify and prioritize assets most essential to the united states' economic and social well - being .

a key implementation requirement , therefore , is clear definition of what the administration considers to be critical infrastructures and key assets .

while the strategy provides the administration's definitions , along with its rationale for including specific infrastructures on the critical list , the meaning of "critical infrastructure" in the public policy context has been evolving for decades and is still open to debate .

this report reviews the concept and definition of "critical infrastructure" as it has appeared in federal reports , legislation and regulation since the early 1980s .

the report highlights the changes and expansion of that definition as the focus of public policy debates shifted from infrastructure adequacy to infrastructure protection .

finally the report summarizes current policy issues associated with critical infrastructure identification by federal agencies and the private sector .

the report is intentionally limited to definitional issues and categorization of infrastructure .

for a more general discussion of national policy regarding critical infrastructure protection , including its evolution , implementation , and continuing issues , see crs report rl30153 , critical infrastructures: background , policy , and implementa t ion , by [author name scrubbed] .

the growing threat of international terrorism in the mid - 1990s renewed federal government interest in infrastructure issues .

unlike the previous period , which was focused on infrastructure adequacy , federal agencies in the 1990s were increasingly concerned about infrastructure protection .

this concern , in turn , led policy makers to reconsider the definition of "infrastructure" in a security context .

on july 15 , 1996 , president clinton signed executive order 13010 establishing the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection ( pccip ) .

this executive order ( e.o. ) .

defined "infrastructure" as the framework of interdependent networks and systems comprising identifiable industries , institutions ( including people and procedures ) , and distribution capabilities that provide a reliable flow of products and services essential to the defense and economic security of the united states , the smooth functioning of government at all levels , and society as a whole .

this definition of "infrastructure" is consistent with the broad definitions from the 1980's .

e.o .

13010 went further , however , by prioritizing particular infrastructure sectors , and specific assets within those sectors , on the basis of national importance .

e.o.13010 stated that "certain national infrastructures are so vital that their incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on the defense or economic security of the united states. .

the commission's final report to the president echoed the e.o .

's definition of vital infrastructure .

the general concept of "vital" or "critical" infrastructure in e.o .

13010 was not entirely new , having appeared in some form in many of the policy debates in the 1980s .

the order did break new ground , however , in listing what it considered to be critical infrastructures .

according to e.o .

13010 , these critical infrastructures were: telecommunications ; electrical power systems ; gas and oil storage and transportation ; banking and finance ; transportation ; water supply systems ; emergency services ( including medical , police , fire , and rescue ) ; and , continuity of government .

the list of critical infrastructure sectors in e.o .

13010 was much broader than that reported by the national council on public works improvement .

in addition to transportation , water systems , and public services — sectors with "a tradition of public sector involvement" — e.o .

13010 included infrastructures predominantly owned by private companies: telecommunications , energy , and financial services .

the u.s. government's definition of "critical infrastructure" has evolved over the years , and at any given time has left considerable room for interpretation .

furthermore , since the 1980's , the number of sectors included under that definition has generally expanded from the most basic public works to a much broader set of economic , defense , government , social and institutional facilities , as illustrated in table 3 .

the list may continue to evolve and grow as economic changes or geopolitical developments influence homeland security policy .

should congress care if the overall list of critical infrastructures remains fluid ? .

one concern is that an unclear or unstable understanding of what constitutes a critical infrastructure ( or key resource ) could lead to inefficient security policies .

at the very least , a growing list of infrastructures in need of protection implies growing attention from the federal government and , implicitly , a need for more resources devoted to protect them .

under the homeland security act and other legislation , the federal government is required to interact with each critical infrastructure , to support and maintain a database of vulnerabilities , to integrate the database with threat analyses , to monitor incidents on each of the infrastructures , and to issue warnings as appropriate .

these activities call for time and resources .

the federal government also may choose to assist financially in effecting necessary protective measures , not only for infrastructure owned and operated at the state or local level , but also for privately owned and operated infrastructures .

allocating limited public resources across an excessively broad range of infrastructures may be an inefficient use of resources .

however , arbitrarily limiting the number of critical infrastructures a priori due to resource constraints might miss dangerous vulnerabilities .

unclear or shifting criteria for identifying individual critical assets and key assets may also lead to protection inefficiencies , especially where private companies are responsible for security spending .

these criteria may become particularly important if federal agencies intend to implement and enforce any potential future security regulations related to critical infrastructure .

various private sector representatives state that they need clear and stable definitions of asset criticality so they will know exactly what assets to protect , and how well to protect them .

otherwise , they risk protecting too many facilities , protecting the wrong facilities , or both .

either outcome would increase ultimate costs passed through to consumers without commensurate security benefits , and could potentially divert scarce private resources from better uses , such as public safety or environmental protection .

as oversight of the federal role in infrastructure security continues , questions may be raised concerning the ongoing efforts of dhs to define and prioritize critical and key assets .

in addition to this specific issue , however , congress may wish to assess how critical infrastructure identification fits in the nation's overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure .

for example , if asset criticality is not clearly defined , increasing resources for infrastructure security inspections by dhs officials could be of limited value .

likewise , diverting infrastructure resources away from safety to enhance security might further reduce terror risk , but not overall public risk , if safety programs become less effective as a result .

u.s. infrastructure security necessarily involves many groups: federal agencies , industry associations , large and small asset operators , and critical and non - critical asset owners .

reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals is an oversight challenge for congress .

