as directed by the house , the select committee on homeland security reported to the house rules committee september 30 , 2004 , its recommendations on "the operation and implementation of the rules of the house , including rule x , with respect to the issue of homeland security. .

the select committee recommended the creation of a permanent standing committee on homeland security , with specified jurisdiction .

a number of house committees currently have important roles in homeland security policymaking .

the appropriations committee's role related to discretionary spending is clear cut , and the committee reorganized its subcommittees at the start of the 108 th congress to create a homeland security subcommittee aligned with the component parts of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

legislative authority over policy areas and federal agencies included in dhs are principally within the jurisdiction of several standing house committees: agriculture , armed services , energy and commerce , financial services , government reform , international relations , judiciary , science , transportation and infrastructure , and ways and means , and the permanent select committee on intelligence .

some of these committees also have jurisdiction over federal agencies and components of federal programs included in the department that have non - homeland - security - related purposes .

in the 108 th congress , the select committee on homeland security also had jurisdiction over legislation affecting dhs .

in addition , some committees have key roles to play in overseeing homeland - security - related policy areas and federal agencies not incorporated in the department .

these committees are armed services , energy and commerce , financial services , international relations , and judiciary committees , and the permanent select committee on intelligence .

on july 22 , 2004 , the 9 / 11 commission became the latest of a number of commissions , think tanks , and other entities to weigh in on congressional oversight of the issue of homeland security .

some of these entities issued reports before the creation of dhs , some before the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and some more recently .

in addition , witnesses at house committee hearings in the 108 th congress held by subcommittees of the select committee on homeland security and the committee on rules provided additional ideas related to house oversight of homeland security .

these entities' and witnesses' recommendations varied , but their variety offers the house a wealth of perspectives to draw on related to congressional - executive relations , building knowledge of homeland security policy issues among members , and other aspects of congressional handling of the issue of homeland security .

a specific recommendation of the 9 / 11 commission and other entities was creation of a homeland security committee in each chamber .

in addition , a number of witnesses at the house subcommittee hearings recommended a homeland security committee in the house , and made recommendations related to jurisdiction , membership , and other factors .

it is a complex question , however , to take the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission and other entities and of witnesses at the house subcommittee hearings and determine the potential meaning and scope of homeland security in considering committee jurisdictions .

one difficulty lies in trying to narrow the term to focus solely on the homeland — within the united states — as reflected in this statement from the 9 / 11 commission report: america [in the post - cold war world] stood out as an object for admiration , envy , and blame .

this created a kind of cultural asymmetry .

to us afghanistan seemed very far away .

to members of al qaeda , america seemed very close .

in a sense , they were more globalized than we were .

homeland security begins with counterterrorism and other initiatives overseas , and it includes intelligence activities at home and abroad that can help prevent terrorist attacks .

in the 9 / 11 commission recommendations , those of other entities , and those of some hearings witnesses , homeland security is a continuum of international and domestic initiatives and activities , all of which are essential to reducing the likelihood and potential impact of terrorist attacks against the united states .

another difficulty lies is the connectedness of homeland security to other policy areas .

for transportation policy , agricultural policy , public health policy , trade policy , and so on , homeland security is one component of the policy area .

even if homeland security is now recognized as a critical component , some policymakers see the need for homeland security policy to mesh with the specific policy area and to be made within the context of the specific policy area .

this report presents and discusses the recommendations of the select committee on homeland security , the 9 / 11 commission , and five other entities relevant to house committee organization and the issue of homeland security .

 ( related text from the select committee's , the 9 / 11 commission's , and other entities' reports appear in the appendices. ) .

the report also synthesizes hearings testimony on house committee organization related to homeland security before the select committee and a subcommittee of the house rules committee .

finally , it analyzes the options and implications of this body of recommendations for house committee organization .

the report is intended to support the house in evaluating potential changes to its oversight of homeland security as it makes and implements decisions on committee organization in the 109 th congress .

when the select committee on homeland security organized , it created a subcommittee on rules under the chairmanship of representative lincoln diaz - balart to carry out the study of house rules .

the subcommittee conducted four hearings to support the select committee in fulfilling the house's mandate .

witnesses at three of the rules subcommittee hearings in 2003 unanimously endorsed the existence of a house committee with legislative and oversight jurisdiction over dhs and the policy area of homeland security , although there were variations in specific recommendations in these witnesses' testimony and responses to subcommittee members' questions .

these public witnesses — academic experts on congress , former speakers foley and gingrich , former members robert walker and lee hamilton , and former departments of defense and energy secretary james schlesinger — testified on the importance and uniqueness of homeland security in explaining their support for a separate legislative committee .

the then - house parliamentarian also testified on may 19 , 2003 , providing a context for previous house committee reorganizations and attempted reorganizations .

witnesses at the rules subcommittee's fourth hearing on march 24 , 2004 , and at a hearing held by another subcommittee , the subcommittee on technology and the house , on june 16-17 , 2004 , comprised almost exclusively chairs and ranking members of house committees .

the members made a variety of suggestions regarding creation of a house committee on homeland security with legislative and oversight jurisdiction , and raised a number of issues to be considered by the house in deciding whether to create a committee and what kind of committee to create , including the impact on existing committees .

the remainder of this section categorizes key considerations developed in the four rules subcommittee hearings , and synthesizes the testimony from witnesses at those hearings .

committee chairs and ranking members who testified at the hearing held by the subcommittee on technology and the house presented similar considerations .

cross references to the hearing of the subcommittee on technology and the house are provided in the footnotes in the balance of this section .

most quotations in this section are from oral testimony at the rules subcommittee hearings .

in those instances where an excerpt from a prepared statement is used , that is noted .

on september 30 , 2004 , the select committee on homeland security transmitted its recommendations to the rules committee .

it recommended that a standing and therefore permanent committee on homeland security be established , with the addition of a new clause 12 to house rule x .

key aspects of the select committee's recommendations included: a standing committee is to be created , composed of not more than 29 members and not more than 16 from one party ; the speaker and minority leader to serve ex officio , without voting privileges ; jurisdiction is to be granted over "homeland security generally" and over dhs , except , generally , for non - homeland security matters within the authority of the department ; "exclusive authorizing and primary oversight jurisdiction" is to be granted with respect to the department's authorities related to the "prevention of , preparation for , and response to acts of terrorism within the united states" ; authorizations for the department to prevent , prepare for , or respond to acts of terrorism must precede appropriations ; and referrals of legislation and other matters to the select committee on homeland security in the 108 th congress would not be considered precedent for referrals to the new committee .

in addition to jurisdiction over homeland security generally and the department ( numbered ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) in the proposed standing committee's jurisdiction ) , the select committee's recommendations enumerated eight other specific components of the proposed committee's jurisdiction: ( 3 ) the integration , analysis , and sharing of homeland security information related to the risk of terrorism within the united states .

 ( 4 ) the dissemination of terrorism threat warnings , advisories , and other homeland security - related communications to state and local governments , the private sector , and the public .

 ( 5 ) department of homeland security responsibility for research and development in support of homeland security , including technological applications of such research .

 ( 6 ) department of homeland security responsibility for security of united states borders and ports of entry , including the department's responsibilities related to visas and other forms of permission to enter the united states .

 ( 7 ) enforcement of federal immigration laws ( except for responsibilities of the department of justice ) .

 ( 8 ) security of united states air , land , and maritime transportation systems .

 ( 9 ) non - revenue aspects of customs enforcement .

 ( 10 ) department of homeland security responsibility for federal , state , and local level preparation to respond to acts of terrorism .

these statements provided specificity to discussion in the house of what might constitute homeland security jurisdiction .

the select committee observed in its report: "the homeland security act of 2002 offers a congressionally - created road map to jurisdictional reform that focuses on the structure , organization , capabilities , and mission of the department itself. .

in addition , the recommendations included proposed changes to the rule x jurisdictional statements of other committees to reduce or eliminate overlap of homeland security jurisdiction with the new committee .

the committees that would be affected by the proposed changes were: committee on energy and commerce , where there was an addition at the end of its jurisdictional statement: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

committee on financial services , where there was an addition at the end of its jurisdictional statement: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

committee on international relations , where there was an addition at the end of its jurisdictional statement: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

committee on the judiciary , where its jurisdiction over immigration and naturalization was amended to contain an exception — " ( except for department of homeland security responsibility for security of united states borders and ports of entry , including the department's responsibilities for visas and other forms of permission to enter the united states , and immigration enforcement ) " — and its jurisdiction over subversive activities was also amended to contain an exception — " ( except for responsibilities of the department of homeland security ) . .

committee on transportation and infrastructure , where its jurisdiction was amended at five points — the non - homeland security - related missions of the coast guard remained within the jurisdiction of the committee , federal management of natural disasters remained within the committee's jurisdiction , although federal management of "emergencies" was not listed , jurisdiction over related transportation regulatory agencies was amended to contain an exception — " ( except for responsibilities of the department of homeland security ) ," jurisdiction over various forms of transportation and related matters was amended to contain an exception — "in each case exclusive of the responsibilities of the department of homeland security," jurisdiction over civil aviation was removed from the list of various forms of transportation , listed separately in a new subparagraph , and stated as follows — "civil aviation , including safety and commercial impact of security measures. .

committee on ways and means , where the phrase "revenue from" was added at the beginning of the jurisdictional statement "customs , collection districts , and ports of entry and delivery. .

finally , the membership of the permanent select committee on intelligence was proposed to include at least one member of the new committee on homeland security ; the membership of the intelligence committee already includes members of other committees .

in a news release announcing the issuance of the select committee's recommendations , chairman cox stated: we must give the new committee meaningful jurisdiction to legislate and to conduct congressional oversight of the department of homeland security and related homeland security programs and activities .

i think all of us would agree that it would be better to have no committee than a committee with jurisdictionally clipped wings , condemned never to take flight .

in the same news release , the ranking member of the select committee's rules subcommittee , representative slaughter , stated: congress ordered the largest reorganization of government when it created the department of homeland security .

now , congress must act decisively and create a permanent standing committee to ensure that dhs becomes the agency that congress envisioned .

anything less than that , and congress will not be fulfilling its duty to the american people .

these comments echoed the explanation the select committee gave for its recommendation: the current diffused and unfocused congressional jurisdiction over the department of homeland security , and homeland security in general , not only imposes extraordinary burdens on the department , but makes it far more difficult for the congress to guide the department's activities in a consistent and focused way that promotes integration and eliminates programmatic redundancies , and advances implementation of a coherent national homeland security strategy .

as noted above , the select committee on homeland security stated in the report on its recommendations to the house: "the homeland security act of 2002 offers a congressionally - created road map to jurisdictional reform that focuses on the structure , organization , capabilities , and mission of the department itself. .

some of these directions are reflected in definitions of homeland security that appear in the homeland security act as well as in the president's national strategy , which served as a basis for the homeland security act .

in the national strategy for homeland security that president bush issued in june 2002 , the strategy contained the following: definition: homeland security is a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the united states , reduce america's vulnerability to terrorism , and minimize the damage and recover from attacks that do occur .

the homeland security act of 2002 , as enacted , contained three definitions of homeland security for three different purposes under the law .

first , in the mission of dhs , congress restated the definition from the president's national strategy: in general. — the primary mission of the department is to — ( a ) prevent terrorist attacks within the united states ; ( b ) reduce the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism ; ( c ) minimize the damage , and assist in the recovery , from terrorist attacks that do occur within the united states.... second , in establishing the homeland security advanced research projects agency , congress defined homeland security research to explain the purpose of such research: homeland security research. — the term "homeland security research" means research relevant to the detection of , prevention of , protection against , response to , attribution of , and recovery from homeland security threats , particularly acts of terrorism .

third , in directing the president to include in his annual budget submission an analysis of homeland security spending , congress provided the following definition for determining what activities and accounts to include in the analysis: in this paragraph , consistent with the office of management and budget's june 2002 'annual report to congress on combatting terrorism' , the term 'homeland security' refers to those activities that detect , deter , protect against , and respond to terrorist attacks occurring within the united states and its territories .

these definitions are explicit in stating that homeland refers to "within the united states. .

a substantial part of homeland security — american military , intelligence , and diplomatic activities — relate to actions that occur outside of the united states .

as noted at the beginning of this report , the 9 / 11 commission and other commissions and think tanks recommended a reorganization of congressional committees , specifically recommending the creation of a homeland security committee in each chamber .

these recommendations were not specific about key aspects of such committees , such as jurisdiction .

however , each entity set out one or more principles that might guide house and senate reorganization of its committees vis - à - vis the policy area of homeland security .

the commissions and think tanks made their recommendations on committee reorganization in the context of a larger set of recommendations for combating terrorism and securing the homeland .

this context is helpful in understanding how these entities defined homeland security and how they arrived at a recommendation for committee reorganization .

this section examines the reports of four commissions and two think tanks .

it analyzes the context for each entity's recommendations for committee reorganization and provides the specific recommendation .

citations to additional studies related to committee reorganization are provided in the footnotes of this section .

since world war ii , when confronted with an opportunity to create or reorganize its committees to correspond to new cabinet departments , the house has responded differently to the creation of various departments .

this section of this report chronicles the response of the house in its committee organization following creation of new departments , collecting this information in one place .

the house's creation of the armed services committee occurred by merger of the separate military affairs and naval affairs committees , pursuant to the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , and preceded by one congress the creation of the national military establishment , later redesignated the department of defense .

the armed services committee's jurisdiction was updated in 1953 to reflect the existence of the department .

when congress in 1953 approved president eisenhower's reorganization plan creating the department of health , education , and welfare , the house did not make changes in its committee organization to parallel the department .

the then - house committees on banking , public works , education and labor , and veterans' affairs were created or reorganized long before the creation of the departments of housing and urban development , transportation , education , and veterans affairs , respectively .

the reorganization of house committee jurisdictions to reflect the 1977 creation of the department of energy followed the department's organization by three years .

on march 25 , 1980 , the house agreed to h.res .

549 , to be effective with the next congress , redesignating the interstate and foreign commerce committee as the energy and commerce committee and giving it jurisdiction over national energy policy generally and over many components of energy policy .

still , the jurisdiction of the now - science committee over such related matters as energy research and development was expanded by h.res .

549 .

the ways and means committee continued to have jurisdiction over tax and trade laws , even as they affected energy policy .

the now - transportation committee had jurisdiction over oil and other pollution of navigable waters , and the now - resources committee had jurisdiction over mineral resources on public lands .

appropriations for the energy department were generally contained in an energy and water appropriations bill , which through 1978 had been called a public works appropriations bill , and in an interior appropriations bill .

other committees retained other energy - related jurisdiction .

this arrangement was in part due to the retention of energy programs in other departments after the creation of the department of energy .

the 9 / 11 commission and other commissions and think tanks define homeland security to be a continuum of international and domestic initiatives and activities , all of which have a role reducing the likelihood and potential impact of a terrorist attack against the united states .

the themes behind these initiatives and activities include: disabling terrorists overseas , winning friends in islamic and other countries , counterterrorism and homeland security as the principle and purpose of american diplomatic and military strategy , good intelligence abroad and at home , shared appropriately within the federal government and between the federal government and state and local governments and the private sector , commitment abroad and at home to freedom and civil liberties , maintaining a national strategy for homeland security , organizing the federal executive to carry out the strategy , defining the military's domestic role in homeland security , organizing congress to contribute to and oversee the strategy and its implementation , particularly the ongoing development of dhs to prevent attacks , reduce vulnerability , and respond to and recover from attacks , including state and local governments and the private sector in carrying out the strategy , federal funding of components of the strategy , and preparing the american citizenry for possible additional terrorist attacks .

the select committee on homeland security recommended the creation of a permanent homeland security committee that would have jurisdiction over domestic components of homeland security , reporting to the house rules committee on september 30 , 2004 , as required by h.res .

5 .

that jurisdiction in itself is wide ranging and requires expertise in a large number of policy areas , including intelligence analysis , public health , border control , transportation security , first responders , information technology , protection of critical infrastructure , and homeland security - related research , among other policy areas .

the recommended jurisdiction includes dhs and , presumably , the national strategy issued by the president in 2002 and any changes to that strategy .

among many policy areas , the select committee's recommendation would leave jurisdiction over the intelligence community principally in the jurisdiction of the permanent select committee on intelligence , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) in the jurisdiction of the judiciary committee , the armed forces in the jurisdiction of the armed services committee , relations with foreign nations in the jurisdiction of the international relations committee , and money laundering and other financial arrangements in the jurisdiction of the financial services committee .

in addition , the policy - area jurisdiction of the proposed committee could overlap with the policy - area jurisdictions of other committees ; so , for example , legislation dealing with information technology or public health might be within the jurisdiction of the homeland security committee , the energy and commerce committee , and possibly other committees .

overlaps in some areas , such as with the agriculture committee on border issues and with the science committee on research and development , were not addressed in the select committee's recommendations .

under the select committee's recommendations , activities within dhs that are not homeland - security - related would remain within the jurisdiction of standing committees already having jurisdiction .

for example , the non - homeland - security missions of the coast guard and natural disaster preparedness and response would remain under the jurisdiction of the transportation and infrastructure committee ; the revenue functions of the customs service would remain under the jurisdiction of the ways and means committee ; and immigration and naturalization policy that is not related to homeland security would remain under the jurisdiction of the judiciary committee .

the select committee's recommendations would also leave jurisdiction over appropriations in the appropriations committee .

as mentioned above , the appropriations committees in each chamber realigned their subcommittees to create one subcommittee that parallels the programs and entities of dhs , which leaves funding decisions for other homeland security - related programs and agencies in the jurisdiction of other appropriations subcommittees .

 ( however , discussion of subcommittee jurisdiction over intelligence appropriations could lead to further realignment. ) .

if the house were to create a permanent homeland security committee in the 109 th congress , the time after creation of the committee , in the 109 th congress and beyond , would provide an opportunity for adjustments within the house's committee structure .

would a homeland security committee better be able to guide development of the department of homeland security , hold its officials accountable , and keep it focused on its mission ? .

what could other committees contribute to the department's development , and how could they contribute ? .

would a new committee help make congress a stronger institutional player in setting homeland security policy ? .

experience will help generate answers to these questions and better inform the house whether a concentration of jurisdiction over the issue of homeland security is preferable to a more dispersed jurisdictional structure .

a particular challenge for a new committee , the existing standing committees , and the house leadership is the relationship of homeland security policy to non - homeland - security policy .

can homeland security concerns be addressed separately from the existing policies and programs related to sectors of the economy like air transportation , types of activities like trade , or agencies with large non - homeland - security responsibilities like the coast guard or fema ? .

would the existing standing committees work with a new committee , in parallel to it , or separately from it ? .

again , experience could help answer questions raised about what a homeland security committee could contribute to policymaking and how best to ensure that both homeland security and non - homeland - security missions and purposes are achieved .

finally , a homeland security committee has not been envisioned or proposed that would displace committees with jurisdiction over the intelligence community , foreign relations , the armed forces , or other activities and entities that are important to realizing homeland security .

how could the legislative committees reduce further the "fragmentation" that is expected to be reduced with the creation of a homeland security committee ? .

the period following the creation of a homeland security committee would provide an opportunity to try different coordinating mechanisms .

on january 4 , 2005 , the house created a standing committee on homeland security in agreeing to h.res .

5 , providing for the adoption of the house's rules for the 109 th congress .

new house rule x , cl .

1 ( i ) granted the jurisdiction of the new committee: ( 1 ) overall homeland security policy .

 ( 2 ) organization and administration of the department of homeland security .

 ( 3 ) functions of the department of homeland security relating to the following: ( a ) border and port security ( except immigration policy and non - border enforcement ) .

 ( b ) customs ( except customs revenue ) .

 ( c ) integration , analysis , and dissemination of homeland security information .

 ( d ) domestic preparedness for and collective response to terrorism .

 ( e ) research and development .

 ( f ) transportation security .

the new committee was also given "special oversight functions," like those of other committees , in new rule x , cl .

3 ( f ) , which stated: the committee on homeland security shall review and study on a continuing basis all government activities relating to homeland security , including the interaction of all departments and agencies with the department homeland security .

to differentiate the jurisdiction of the new committee from that of existing committees , the homeland - security - related jurisdiction of three standing committees was amended in h.res .

5 .

an addition was made to the judiciary committee's jurisdiction — "criminal law enforcement" — and the committee's jurisdiction over "immigration and naturalization" was amended to "immigration policy and non - border enforcement. .

the transportation and infrastructure's jurisdiction over "related transportation regulatory agencies" was amended to add an exception — "except the transportation security administration. .

the committee's general jurisdiction over transportation was amended to add an exception — "transportation security functions of the department of homeland security. .

this paragraph then read: transportation , including civil aviation , railroads , water transportation , transportation safety ( except automobile safety and transportation security functions of the department of homeland security ) , transportation infrastructure , transportation labor , and railroad retirement and unemployment ( except revenue measures related thereto ) .

the ways and means committee's jurisdiction over "customs" was amended to state "customs revenue. .

this paragraph then read: customs revenue , collection districts , and ports of entry and delivery .

legislative history .

rules committee chair david dreier inserted in the congressional record a "legislative history" concerning the changes to rule x .

the legislative history first explained that the new committee's legislative jurisdiction over "overall homeland security policy" was to be interpreted "on a government - wide or multi - agency basis similar to the committee on government reform's jurisdiction over 'overall economy , efficiency , and management of government operations and activities....'" the legislative history stated further: "surgical addresses of homeland security policy in sundry areas of jurisdiction occupied by other committees would not be referred to the committee on homeland security on the basis of 'overall' homeland security policy jurisdiction. .

second , the legislative history interpreted the new committee's legislative jurisdiction over dhs's "organization and administration" to be "confined to organizational and administrative efforts and would not apply to programmatic efforts within the department of homeland security within the jurisdiction of other committees. .

third , the legislative history explained the new committee's homeland security oversight jurisdiction .

the new committee would have oversight jurisdiction over the "homeland security community of the united states. .

however , as noted in the legislative history , this jurisdiction would not necessarily circumscribe the oversight jurisdiction of other committees: nothing in this clause shall be construed as prohibiting or otherwise restricting the authority of any other committee to study and review homeland security activities to the extent that such activity directly affects a matter otherwise within the jurisdiction of that committee .

fourth , the legislative history interpreted the "individual committee concerns" between the new committee on the one hand and nine standing committees and the permanent select committee on intelligence on the other .

this section of the legislative history detailed jurisdictional relationships covering a number of specific policy and programmatic areas .

in addition , in further explanation of the relationship between the new committee and the ways and means committee , the legislative history contained a copy of the "delegation from the secretary of the treasury to the secretary of homeland security of general authority overs customs revenue functions vested in the secretary of the treasury as set forth in the homeland security act of 2002. .

referral precedents .

in the "speaker's announcements" for the 109 th congress , the speaker included a statement about the referral of legislation to the new committee: the 109 th congress established the committee on homeland security .

the chair would announce that the speaker's referrals of measures to the select committee on homeland security of the 108 th congress will not constitute precedent for referrals to the new committee .

h.res .

5 summary .

chairman dreier also inserted a section - by - section summary of h.res .

5 in the congressional record , which included a summary of the jurisdiction granted to the homeland security committee .

in remarks to the house , chairman dreier commented on the creation of the new committee: ...this change in house rule x , which governs the committees and their legislative jurisdictions , is a delicately crafted architecture .

it creates a primary committee while recognizing the other legitimate oversight roles of existing committees .

we envision a system of purposeful redundancy .

by that , we mean more than one level of oversight and an atmosphere in which the competition of ideas is encouraged .

with this jurisdiction and the legislative history that i will be placing in the record , the department of homeland security will have more certainty as to which committee has the primary responsibility for homeland security .

at the same time , the american people will live with the assurance that we are working to prevent anything from falling through the cracks .

committee funding .

the house on january 4 , 2005 , also agreed to h.res .

10 , providing interim funding for the homeland security committee through march 31 , 2005 .

funding for the 109 th congress for the homeland security committee and other committees was contained in an omnibus committee funding resolution ( h.res .

224 ) .

committee assignments .

representative christopher cox was elected as committee chair and representative bennie g. thompson as ranking minority member in h.res .

32 and h.res .

33 , respectively , on january 6 , 2005 .

chairman cox had also chaired the select committee on homeland security in the 108 th congress .

representative thompson had served on the select committee in the 108 th congress , and was the ranking minority member on its subcommittee on emergency preparedness and response .

representative jim turner , who served as ranking minority member of the select committee , did not seek reelection to the 109 th congress .

freshman republican members charlie dent , bobby jindal , daniel e. lungren , michael t. mccaul , and david g. reichert were elected to the committee in h.res .

48 on january 26 , 2005 .

thirteen republican members and 14 democratic members were elected to the committee in h.res .

73 and h.res .

74 , respectively , on february 9 , 2005 .

on february 10 , chairman cox announced his appointment of representative curt weldon as the committee's vice chair .

there were 19 republican committee members and 15 democratic committee members .

two republican members chaired other committees: representative don young chaired the transportation and infrastructure committee and representative tom davis chaired the government reform committee .

one democratic member , representative jane harman , was the ranking member on the permanent select committee on intelligence .

the committee membership in order of seniority as of february 9 was as follows: committee organization .

the new committee met february 9 , 2005 , to organize .

it adopted its rules for the 109 th congress , which were printed in the congressional record .

the following subcommittees were created: economic security , infrastructure protection , and cybersecurity chair: daniel e. lungren ; ranking member: loretta sanchez emergency preparedness , science , and technology chair: peter t. king ; ranking member: bill pascrell jr. intelligence , information sharing , and terrorism risk assessment chair: rob simmons ; ranking member: zoe lofgren management , integration , and oversight chair: mike rogers ; ranking member: kendrick b. meek prevention of nuclear and biological attack chair: john linder ; ranking member: james r. langevin on march 3 , 2005 , the committee released its subcommittee rosters .

the committee's rules provided that the committee chair and ranking minority member were ex officio members of all subcommittees .

they were allowed to vote in subcommittee and to be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum .

at its organization meeting , the committee also adopted its oversight plan for the 109 th congress .

later in the 109 th congress , chairman cox was nominated by the president to become a member of the securities and exchange commission .

the senate confirmed his nomination july 29 , 2005 , and he resigned from the house august 2 .

on september 15 , 2005 , representative peter l. king was elected as the committee's new chair , and representative ginny brown - waite , fl , was elected to fill the republican vacancy on the committee ( h.res .

445 ) .

to fill the then - vacant chairmanship of the subcommittee on emergency preparedness , science and technology , committee chairman king on september 22 , 2005 , named representative david g. reichert .

in addition , as a consequence of hurricane katrina's devastation of the gulf coast and for other reasons , chairman king created a new subcommittee on investigations on october 7 .

representative michael t. mccaul was named chair and representative bob etheridge was named ranking minority member .

organization .

in the 2006 general election , democrats won a majority of the house and organized it and its committees in the 110 th congress .

the ratio of democrats to republicans on the homeland security committee was 20-to - 15 .

the members elected to the committee were: the committee on homeland security organized and adopted its oversight plan on january 23 , 2007 .

the six subcommittees created had been previously announced: border , maritime , and global counterterrorism chair: loretta sanchez ; ranking member: mark e. souder emergency communications , preparedness , and response chair: henry cuellar ; ranking member: charlie dent emerging threats , cybersecurity , and science and technology chair: james r langevin ; ranking member: michael t. mccaul intelligence , information sharing , and terrorism risk assessment chair: jane harman ; ranking member: david g. reichert management , investigations , and oversight chair: christopher p. carney ; ranking member: mike rogers transportation security and infrastructure protection chair: sheila jackson - lee ; ranking member: daniel e. lungren jurisdictional memorandum .

with the convening of the 110 th congress , rules committee chair louise mcintosh slaughter inserted in the congressional record a memorandum of understanding arrived at by the chairs of the homeland security committee and transportation and infrastructure committee , messrs. bennie g. thompson and james l. oberstar , respectively .

the memorandum of understanding began by acknowledging that the legislative history that had been inserted in the congressional record in the 109 th congress was the authoritative source of legislative history , and then stated that the memorandum's purpose was to provide "two clarifications. .

first , with regard to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the homeland security committee had jurisdiction over the homeland security department's "responsibilities with regard to emergency preparedness and collective response only as they relate to terrorism. .

referring then to the enactment of the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l .

109-295 ) and its title vi , the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 , the memorandum of understanding next stated that a bill to amend fema's "all - hazards emergency preparedness programs that necessarily addresses fema's terrorism preparedness programs" would be referred to the transportation and infrastructure committee and that , in addition , the homeland security committee would have a "jurisdictional interest" in the bill .

this part of the memorandum of understanding also stated that the memorandum did not affect the transportation and infrastructure committee's jurisdiction over the stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act or the federal fire prevention and control act .

second , with regard to port security , the memorandum of understanding stated that the homeland security committee had jurisdiction over port security , and that some responsibilities of the coast guard fell within the jurisdiction of both committees .

the memorandum next stated that a bill that addressed the "activities , programs , assets , and personnel of the coast guard as they relate to port security and non - port security missions" would be referred to the transportation and infrastructure committee and that , in addition , the homeland security committee would have a "jurisdictional interest" in the bill .

the memorandum of understanding concluded with a disclaimer that the memorandum clarified jurisdiction only with respect to these two specific issues and did not address other issues or the jurisdiction of other committees .

appendix a .

recommendations of the select committee on homeland security on changes to the rules of the house of representatives with respect to homeland security issues in this appendix , the reader will find the text of the report of the select committee on homeland security , which was directed by the house , as explained above , to "conduct a thorough and complete study of the operation and implementation of the rules of the house , including rule x , with respect to the issue of homeland security .

the select committee shall submit its recommendations regarding any changes in the rules of the house to the committee on rules not later than september 30 , 2004. .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

house select committee on homeland security , recommendations of the select committee on homeland security on changes to the rules of the house of representatives with respect to homeland security issues , 108 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , september 30 , 2004 .

 ( available online at http: / / hsc.house.gov / files / mini_report_sigs.pdf , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

"the need for a permanent standing committee on homeland security "the 9 / 11 terrorists exploited longstanding policy , structural , and programmatic gaps in america's homeland security caused by the separation of foreign from domestic intelligence , the division of 'national security' and 'law enforcement' information and activities , and the stove - piped and uncoordinated nature of our multi - agency border and transportation security systems .

since then , congress and the president have collaborated in a fundamental re - focusing of executive branch agencies to close those gaps , particularly by creating the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , but also through a wide variety of other initiatives , such as the terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) , the terrorist screening center ( tsc ) , and the proposed national intelligence director ( nid ) and national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) .

"despite this significant executive branch reorganization , congressional structures remain almost the same as they were before the 9 / 11 attacks .

scores of committees and subcommittees of the congress have some claim to jurisdiction over various elements of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , with six standing committees claiming some jurisdiction over critical border security functions of the department .

this creates chaos for the department .

since january 2004 , senior officials from the department have had to testify at more than 160 congressional hearings — an average of 20 each month .

"creating a permanent standing committee on homeland security , commencing in the 109 th congress , is necessary if the house of representatives is effectively to meet its legislative and oversight responsibilities with respect to homeland security programs and activities , particularly those of dhs .

the current diffused and unfocused congressional jurisdiction over the department of homeland security , and homeland security in general , not only imposes extraordinary burdens on the department , but makes it far more difficult for the congress to guide the department's activities in a consistent and focused way that promotes integration and eliminates programmatic redundancies , and advances implementation of a coherent national homeland security strategy .

current legislative "silos" foster — and , if left unchanged , will continue to foster — fragmentation within dhs as it struggles to build a new common culture focused squarely on the homeland security mission .

"for these reasons , not only the 9 / 11 commission , but virtually every other commission and outside expert has recognized that effective and efficient legislation and oversight with respect to homeland security requires congressional reorganization that vests in a single standing committee in each chamber jurisdiction that parallels the homeland security mission of preventing , preparing for , and responding to acts of terrorism in the united states .

a select committee , while appropriate in certain situations , would not be conducive to fostering the clear lines of accountability and responsibility that are necessary when dealing with the variety and cross - cutting nature of homeland security programs and activities situated largely in a single department .

"the success of this endeavor requires that the new standing committee have legislative and oversight jurisdiction broad enough to ensure that it can take a holistic approach toward homeland security issues , and that the unnecessarily heavy burden the department of homeland security now bears in interacting with a vast array of committees and subcommittees in both houses of the congress is drastically reduced .

"in carrying out this consolidation , it is important to craft the right balance between the jurisdiction of the new standing committee on homeland security and that of existing committees .

the homeland security act of 2002 offers a congressionally - created road map to jurisdictional reform that focuses on the structure , organization , capabilities , and mission of the department itself .

the house must reorganize the committee structure so that the new homeland security mission is provided sustained and consistent attention .

"recommendations on changes to rule x with respect to homeland security "pursuant to house resolution 5 , the select committee on homeland security makes the following recommendations for changes to rule x regarding the reorganization of jurisdiction within the house with respect to homeland security matters: "rule x " organization of committees "committees and their legislative jurisdictions "i .

there shall be in the house the following standing committees , each of which shall have the jurisdiction and related functions assigned by this clause and clauses 2 , 3 , and 4 .

all bills , resolutions , and other matters relating to subjects within the jurisdiction of the standing committees listed in this clause shall be referred to those committees , in accordance with clause 2 of rule xii , as follows: " ( a ) committee on agriculture .

... [no changes] " ( b ) committee on appropriations .

... [no changes] " ( c ) committee on armed services .

... [no changes] " ( d ) committee on the budget .

... [no changes] " ( e ) committee on education and the workforce .

... [no changes] " ( f ) committee on energy and commerce .

... add at end: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

" ( g ) committee on financial services .

... add at end: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

" ( h ) committee on government reform .

... [no changes] " ( i ) committee on house administration .

... [no changes] " ( j ) committee on international relations .

... add at end: "in the case of each of the foregoing , the committee's jurisdiction shall not include responsibilities of the department of homeland security. .

" ( k ) committee on the judiciary .

... " ( 8 ) immigration and naturalization ( except for department of homeland security responsibility for security of united states borders and ports of entry , including the department's responsibilities for visas and other forms of permission to enter the united states , and immigration enforcement ) .

" ( 18 ) subversive activities affecting the internal security of the united states ( except for responsibilities of the department of homeland security ) .

" ( l ) committee on resources .

... [no changes] " ( m ) committee on rules .

... [no changes] " ( n ) committee on science .

... [no changes] " ( o ) committee on small business .

... [no changes] " ( p ) committee on standards of official conduct .

... [no changes] " ( q ) committee on transportation and infrastructure .

" ( i ) non - homeland security missions of the coast guard , including lifesaving service , lighthouses , lightships , ocean derelicts , and the coast guard academy .

" ( 2 ) federal management of natural disasters .

" ( 18 ) related transportation regulatory agencies ( except for responsibilities of the department of homeland security ) .

" ( 20 ) transportation , including railroads , water transportation , transportation safety ( except automobile safety ) , transportation infrastructure , transportation labor , and railroad retirement and unemployment ( except revenue measures related thereto ) ; in each case exclusive of the responsibilities of the department of homeland security .

" ( 22 ) civil aviation , including safety and commercial impact of security measures .

" ( r ) committee on veterans ' affairs .

... [no changes] " ( s ) committee on ways and means .

... " ( i ) revenue from customs , collection districts and ports of entry and delivery .

... "general oversight responsibilities "[no changes] "special oversight functions... "[no changes] * * * * * "permanent select committee on intelligence "... " i i .

 ( a ) ( i ) there is established a permanent select committee on intelligence ( hereafter in this clause referred to as the "select committee" ) .

the select committee shall be composed of not more than 18 members , delegates , or the resident commissioner , of whom not more than 10 may be from the same party .

the select committee shall include at least one member , delegate , or the resident commissioner from each of the following committees: " ( a ) the committee on appropriations ; " ( b ) the committee on armed services ; " ( c ) the committee on homeland security ; " ( d ) the committee on international relations ; and " ( e ) the committee on the judiciary .

... * * * * * "committee on homeland security "12 .

 ( a ) ( i ) there is here by established a permanent standing committee on homeland security ( hereafter in this clause referred to as the "committee"' ) , which shall be composed of not more than 29 members , delegates , or the resident commissioner , of whom not more than 16 may be from the same party .

" ( 2 ) the speaker and the minority leader shall be ex officio members of the committee but shall have no vote in the committee and may not be counted for purposes of determining a quorum thereof .

" ( 3 ) the speaker and minority leader each may designate a member of his leadership staff to assist him in his capacity as ex officio member , with the same access to committee meetings , hearings , briefings , and materials as employees of the committee and subject to the same security clearance and confidentiality requirements as employees of the committee under applicable rules of the house .

" ( b ) there shall be referred to the committee proposed legislation , messages , petitions , memorials , and other matters related to — " ( i ) homeland security generally .

" ( 2 ) the department of homeland security ( except with respect to federal management of natural disasters , the non - homeland security missions of the coast guard , and immigration and naturalization matters unrelated to homeland security ) .

" ( 3 ) the integration , analysis , and sharing of homeland security information related to the risk of terrorism within the united states .

" ( 4 ) the dissemination of terrorism threat warnings , advisories , and other homeland security related communications to state and local governments , the private sector , and the public .

" ( 5 ) department of homeland security responsibility for research and development in support of homeland security , including technological applications of such research .

" ( 6 ) department of homeland security responsibility for security of united states borders and ports of entry ( unrelated to customs revenue functions ) , including the department ' s responsibilities related to visas and other forms of permission to enter the united states .

" ( 7 ) enforcement of federal immigration laws ( except for responsibilities of the department of justice ) .

" ( 8 ) security of united states air , land , and maritime transportation systems .

" ( 9 ) customs functions , other than customs revenue functions .

" ( 10 ) department of homeland security responsibility for federal , state , and local level preparation to respond to acts of terrorism .

" ( c ) in addition to the general oversight responsibilities described in clause 2 , the committee shall review , study , and coordinate on a continuing basis laws , programs , and government activities related to all aspects of homeland security .

" ( d ) the committee shall have exclusive authorizing and primary oversight jurisdiction with respect to the department of homeland security's responsibilities and activities related to the prevention of , preparation for , and response to acts of terrorism within the united states .

the committee also shall have jurisdiction over the other responsibilities and activities of the department of homeland security , except as specified in subsection ( b ) ( 2 ) .

" ( e ) subject to the rules of the house , funds may not be appropriated for a fiscal year , with the exception of a bill or joint resolution continuing appropriations , or an amendment thereto , or a conference report thereon , to , or for use of , the department of homeland security to prevent , prepare for , or respond to acts of terrorism in the united states , unless the funds shall previously have been authorized by a bill or joint resolution passed by the house during the same or preceding fiscal year to carry out such activity for such fiscal year .

" ( f ) no referrals of legislation , executive communication , or any other action taken in the 108 th congress with regard to the select committee on homeland security or any other committee of the house shall be considered to be a precedent for referrals of any homeland security - related measures in the current congress. .

appendix b .

recommendations on congressional organization made by the 9 / 11 commission in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the 9 / 11 commission .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

1 ) national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states , the 9 / 11 report: final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( washington: gpo , july 22 , 2004 ) , p. 416 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.gpoaccess.gov / 911 / index.html , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" recommendation: finally , to combat the secrecy and complexity we have described [in accomplishing unity of effort in the intelligence community] , the overall amounts of money being appropriated for national intelligence and to its component agencies should no longer be kept secret .

congress should pass a separate appropriations act for intelligence , defending the broad allocation of how these tens of billions of dollars have been assigned among the varieties of intelligence work .

"the specifics of the intelligence appropriation would remain classified , as they are today .

opponents of declassification argue that america's enemies could learn about intelligence capabilities by tracking the top - line appropriations figure .

yet the top - line figure by itself provides little insight into u.s. intelligence sources and methods .

the u.s. government readily provides copious information about spending on its military forces , including military intelligence the intelligence community should not be subject to that much disclosure .

but when even aggregate categorical numbers remain hidden , it is hard to judge priorities and foster accountability. .

↔↔↔ 2 ) the 9 / 11 report: final report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states , pp .

419-423 .

"13.4 unity of effort in the congress " strengthen congressional oversight of intelligence and homeland security "of all our recommendations , strengthening congressional oversight may be among the most difficult and important .

so long as oversight is governed by current congressional rules and resolutions , we believe the american people will not get the security they want and need .

the united states needs a strong , stable , and capable congressional committee structure to give america's national intelligence agencies oversight , support , and leadership .

"few things are more difficult to change in washington than congressional committee jurisdiction and prerogatives .

to a member , these assignments are almost as important as the map of his or her congressional district .

the american people may have to insist that these changes occur , or they may well not happen .

having interviewed numerous members of congress from both parties , as well as congressional staff members , we found that dissatisfaction with congressional oversight remains widespread .

"the future challenges of america's intelligence agencies are daunting .

they include the need to develop leading - edge technologies that give our policy - makers and warfighters a decisive edge in any conflict where the interests of the united states are vital .

not only does good intelligence win wars , but the best intelligence enables us to prevent them from happening altogether .

"under the terms of existing rules and resolutions the house and senate intelligence committees lack the power , influence , and sustained capability to meet this challenge .

while few members of congress have the broad knowledge of intelligence activities or the know - how about the technologies employed , all members need to feel assured that good oversight is happenings .

when their unfamiliarity with the subject is combined with the need to preserve security , a mandate emerges for substantial change .

"tinkering with the existing structure is not sufficient .

either congress should create a joint committee for intelligence , using the joint atomic energy committee as its model , or it should create house and senate committees with combined authorizing and appropriations powers .

"whichever of these two forms are chosen , the goal should be a structure — codified by resolution with powers expressly granted and carefully limited — allowing a relatively small group of members of congress , given time and reason to master the subject and the agencies , to conduct oversight of the intelligence establishment and be clearly accountable for their work .

the staff of this committee should be nonpartisan and work for the entire committee and not for individual members .

"the other reforms we have suggested — for a national counterterrorism center and a national intelligence director — will not work if congressional oversight does not change too .

unity of effort in executive management can be lost if it is fractured by divided congressional oversight. .

recommendation: congressional oversight for intelligence — and counterterrorism — is now dysfunctional .

congress should address this problem .

we have considered various alternatives: a joint committee on the old model of the joint committee on atomic energy is one .

a single committee in each house of congress , combining authorizing and appropriating authorities , is another .

"●the new committee or committees should conduct continuing studies of the activities of the intelligence agencies and report problems relating to the development and use of intelligence to all members of the house and senate .

"●we have already recommended that the total level of funding for intelligence be made public , and that the national intelligence program be appropriated to the national intelligence director , not to the secretary of defense .

"●we also recommend that the intelligence committee should have a subcommittee specifically dedicated to oversight , freed from the consuming responsibility of working on the budget .

"●the resolution creating the new intelligence committee structure should grant subpoena authority to the committee or committees .

the majority party's representation on this committee should never exceed the minority's representation by more than one .

"●four of the members appointed to this committee or committees should be a member who also serves on each of the following additional committees: armed services , judiciary , foreign affairs , and the defense appropriations subcommittee .

in this way the other major congressional interests can be brought together in the new committee's work .

"●members should serve indefinitely on the intelligence committees , without set terms , thereby letting them accumulate expertise .

"●the committees should be smaller — perhaps seven or nine members in each house — so that each member feels a greater sense of responsibility , and accountability , for the quality of the committee's work .

"the leaders of the department of homeland security now appear before 88 committees and subcommittees of congress .

one expert witness ( not a member of the administration ) told us that this is perhaps the single largest obstacle impeding the department's successful development .

the one attempt to consolidate such committee authority , the house select committee on homeland security , may be eliminated .

the senate does not have even this .

"congress needs to establish for the department of homeland security the kind of clear authority and responsibility that exist to enable the justice department to deal with crime and the defense department to deal with threats to national security .

through not more than one authorizing committee and one appropriating subcommittee in each house , congress should be able to ask the secretary of homeland security whether he or she has the resources to provide reasonable security against major terrorists acts within the united states and to hold the secretary accountable for the department's performance. .

recommendation: congress should create a single , principal point of oversight and review for homeland security .

congressional leaders are best able to judge what committee should have jurisdiction over this department and its duties .

but we believe that congress does not have the obligation to choose one in the house and one in the senate , and that this committee should be a permanent standing committee with a nonpartisan staff. .

improve the transitions between administrations "in chapter 6 , we described the transition of 2000-2001 .

beyond the policy issues we described , the new administration did not have deputy cabinet officers in place until the spring of 2001 , and the critical subcabinet officials were not confirmed until the summer — if then .

in other words , the new administration — like others before it — did not have its team on the job until at least six months after it took office. .

recommendation: since a catastrophic attack could occur with little or no notice , we should minimize as much as possible the disruption of national security policymaking during the change of administrations by accelerating the process for national security appointments .

we think the process could be improved significantly so transitions can work more effectively and allow new officials to assume their new responsibilities as quickly as possible .

"●before the election , candidates should submit the names of selected members of their prospective transition teams to the fbi so that , if necessary , those team members can obtain security clearances immediately after the election is over .

"●a president - elect should submit lists of possible candidates for national security positions to begin obtaining security clearances immediately after the election , so that their background investigations can be complete before january 20 .

"●a single federal agency should be responsible for providing and maintaining security clearances , ensuring uniform standards — including uniform security questionnaires and financial report requirements , and maintaining a single database .

this agency can also be responsible for administering polygraph tests on behalf of organizations that require them .

"●a president - elect should submit the nominations of the entire new national security team , through the level of under secretary of cabinet departments , not later than january 20 .

the senate , in return , should adopt special rules requiring hearings and votes to confirm or reject national security nominees within 30 days of their submission .

the senate should not require confirmation of such executive appointees below executive level 3 .

"●the outgoing administration should provide the president - elect , as soon as possible after election day , with a classified , compartmented list that catalogues specific , operational threats to national security ; major military or covert operations ; and pending decisions on the possible use of force .

such a document could provide both notice and a checklist , inviting a president - elect to inquire and learn more. .

appendix c. recommendations on congressional organization made by the bremer commission in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the bremer commission .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

national commission on terrorism , countering the changing threat of international terrorism , transmitted to the president and congress june 7 , 2000 , pp .

33 , 35-36 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.gpo.gov / nct , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" improve executive and legislative branch review of counterterrorism activities " congressional responsibility for reviewing the president ' s counterterrorism budget is divided among several committees and sub - committees , making coordinated review more difficult .

"one of the essential tasks for the national counterterrorism coordinator [on the president's staff] is to prepare a comprehensive counterterrorism plan and budget .

similarly , congress should develop mechanisms for coordinated review of the president's counterterrorism policy and budget , rather than having each of the many relevant committees moving in different directions without regard to the overall strategy .

"as a first step , the commission urges congress to consider holding joint hearings of two or more committees on counterterrorism matters .

in addition , to facilitate executive - legislative discussion of terrorism budget issues , the house and senate appropriations committees should each assign to senior staff responsibility for cross - appropriations review of counterterrorism programs .

"finally , the commission notes the importance of bipartisanship both in congress and in the executive branch when considering counterterrorism policy and funding issues. .

recommendations: "• congress should develop a mechanism for reviewing the president's counterterrorism policy and budget as a whole .

the executive branch should commit to full consultation with congress on counterterrorism issues .

"• house and senate appropriations committees should immediately direct full - committee staff to conduct a cross - subcommittee review of counterterrorism budgets. .

appendix d. recommendations on congressional organization made by the gilmore commission in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the gilmore commission .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

1 ) advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , i. assessing the threat , first annual report to the president and the congress , december 15 , 1999 , p. 57 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.rand.org / nsrd / terrpanel , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" congressional responsibilities "in much the same way that the complexity of the federal bureaucratic structure is an obstacle — from a state and local perspective — to the provision of effective and efficient federal assistance , it appears that the congress has made most of its decisions for authority and funding to address domestic preparedness and response issues with little or no coordination .

the various committees of the congress continue to provide authority and money within the confines of each committee's jurisdiction over one or a limited number of federal agencies and programs .

the panel recommends , therefore , that the congress consider forming an ad hoc joint special or select committee , composed of representatives of the various committees with oversight and funding responsibilities for these issues , and give such an entity the authority to make determinations that will result in more coherent efforts at the federal level. .

↔↔↔ 2 ) advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , ii .

toward a national strategy for combating terrorism , second annual report to the president and the congress , december 15 , 2000 , pp .

16-18 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.rand.org / nsrd / terrpanel , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" improving coordination in the congress "in our first report , we were critical of the congress for its propensity to make 'decisions for authority and funding to address domestic preparedness and response issues with little or no coordination. .

we noted that the 'various committees of the congress continue to provide authority and money within the confines of each committee's jurisdiction over one or a limited number of federal agencies and programs. .

those observations still pertain .

"the congress has been active in proposing legislative "fixes" to the problem of interagency coordination .

two recent examples are the unanimous passage by the house of representatives of a bill to create the 'office of terrorism preparedness" in the executive office of the president , and of a provision to create a new 'deputy attorney general for combating domestic terrorism. .

numerous congressional panels on both sides of capitol hill have held hearings on the subject of terrorism .

the congress has also commissioned various studies and reports on combating terrorism by the general accounting office ( gao ) .

one act noted that members 'continue to be concerned about the threat of domestic terrorism , particularly involving the use of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and the ability of the federal government to counter this threat. .

as a consequence the congress directed a comprehensive report from the gao: "'the conferees agree to a provision that would require the comptroller general to provide an updated report to congress , not later than 180 days after the enactment of this act , on federal strategy , policy and programs to combat domestic terrorism .

the conferees direct the comptroller general to include in the report on combating domestic terrorism a discussion of the following issues: lead agency responsibility for crisis and consequence management ; adequacy of exiting plans formulated by the various federal agencies ; threat and risk assessments ; command and control structures ; exercises , including a thorough assessment of the recent top official exercise 2000 ; cyberterrorism ; and research and development efforts of new technologies. .

"the congress continues to direct the creation and funding of specific programs with little coordination among the various committees .

some programs are funded with little apparent consideration for the impact of those decisions on a comprehensive national effort .

"moreover , appropriations committees , through their various agency appropriations bills , occasionally create and fund programs that were not subject to the normal authorization processes .

the result of such action is often lack of detail and clarity in the structure and execution of programs , as well as a lack of continuity and sustainability , as most such programs are only funded year by year .

examples of major programs created and funded in appropriations bills , which have no parallel authorizing language , include most of the programs for combating terrorism administered by the office of state and local domestic preparedness support in the department of justice: equipment grant programs totaling $75 million ; and training programs , including grants to the national training consortium and the center for domestic preparedness totaling $37 million ; and earmarks to two institutes totaling $30 million .

"the congress may , however , be foundering on the issue in large measure because of the absence of a comprehensive 'national strategy' for combating terrorism .

we do not suggest that congress has or should have the responsibility for creating such a national strategy .

that is , in our view , clearly the responsibility for the executive branch .

 ( footnote citations to previous commission report , congressional bills and reports , gao , and programs are not included. ) .

" special committee for combating terrorism " we recommend the establishment of a special committee for combating terrorism — either a joint committee between the houses or separate committees in each house — to address authority and funding , and to provide congressional oversight , for federal programs and authority for combating terrorism .

"we do not make this proposal lightly , and do so with the full recognition that such change may be difficult but is no less meritorious. .

committee functions and structure "the joint or separate committee of each house should consist of bipartisan representation from members of all relevant authorization , oversight , budget , and appropriations committees and subcommittees that currently have cognizance over federal programs and activities to combat terrorism .

it should have a full - time staff either detailed from those relevant committees and subcommittees or new employees who have the requisite experience and expertise .

"the joint or separate panel should perform several critical functions .

first , it would constitute a forum for reviewing all aspects of a national strategy and supporting implementation plans for combating terrorism , developed and submitted by the national office for combating terrorism .

[the office is proposed earlier in the second annual report. .

as part of that process , the joint or each separate committee should develop a consolidated legislative plan , including authorizing language and corresponding budget and appropriations 'benchmarks' in response to the national strategy to combat terrorism and accompanying program and budget proposals. .

second , it would serve as the 'clearinghouse' for all legislative proposals for combating terrorism .

for separate bills ( unrelated to the omnibus package related to the strategy ) , the committee should have first referral of such legislation , prior to the referral to the appropriate standing committee .

"such a structure , with the direct testimony from executive branch representatives , state and local officials , private industry , and terrorism experts , could help to eliminate duplication in programs and funding , and to promote an effective national program .

↔↔↔ 3 ) advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , iv .

implementing the national strategy , fourth annual report to the president and the congress , december 15 , 2002 , pp .

44-45 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.rand.org / nsrd / terrpanel , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

"in addition [to the proposed creation of a national counter terrorism center ( nctc ) that would replace the fbi in collecting intelligence and other information on international terrorist activities inside the united states] , there could be more focused and effective congressional oversight of the domestic collection and analysis functions .

currently , the oversight of the fbi's fisa [foreign intelligence surveillance act] and other domestic intelligence activities is split between the judiciary and intelligence committees of each house of congress .

creation of the nctc would clearly place the primary responsibility for oversight of that agency under the senate select committee on intelligence and the house permanent select committee on intelligence .

such a structure and improved oversight would likely provide an even better mechanism for protecting civil liberties than do current structure and processes .

for that reasons , the panel makes the following , related " recommendation: that the congress ensure that oversight of the nctc be concentrated in the intelligence committees of each house. .

↔↔↔ 4 ) iv .

implementing the national strategy , fourth annual report to the president and the congress , p. 50. .

the congress "the congress is still not well organized to address issues involving homeland security in a cohesive way .

the house recently took the bold , necessary , but unfortunately only temporary step of creating a special committee just to consider the proposal to create the department of homeland security .

structures of that nature are required on a longer - term basis .

jurisdiction for various aspects of this issue continues to be scattered over dozens of committees and subcommittees .

we therefore restate our prior recommendation with a modification. .

recommendation: that each house of the congress establish a separate authorizing committee and related appropriation subcommittee with jurisdiction over federal programs and authority for combating terrorism / homeland security. .

↔↔↔ 5 ) advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , v. forging america ' s new normalcy: securing our homeland , preserving our liberty , fifth annual report to the president and the congress , december 15 , 2003 , p. 16 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.rand.org / nsrd / terrpanel , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

[as an achievement of the strategic vision — ] "executive branch and congressional oversight mechanisms have proven highly effective in preventing any abuses [by the terrorist threat integration center that the commission recommended be created and charged with certain domestic intelligence collection responsibilities]. .

↔↔↔ 6 ) in appendix k , "status of previous advisory panel recommendations," of the fifth annual report , the following information , in a similar format , is provided on recommendations related to congressional organization: appendix e. recommendations on congressional organization made by the hart - rudman commission in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the hart - rudman commission .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

1 ) united states commission on national security / 21 st century , road map for national security: imperative for change , the phase iii report of the united states commission on national security / 21 st century , february 15 , 2001 , pp .

26-28 .

 ( available online at http: / / govinfo.library.unt.edu / nssg / index.html , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" c. executive - legislative cooperation "solving the homeland security challenge is not just an executive branch problem .

congress should be an active participant in the development of homeland security programs as well .

its hearings can help develop the best ideas and solutions .

individual members should develop expertise in homeland security policy and its implementation so that they can fill in policy gaps and provide needed oversight and advice in times of crisis .

most important , using its power of the purse , congress should ensure that government agencies have sufficient resources and that their programs are coordinated , efficient , and effective .

"congress has already taken important steps .

a bipartisan congressional initiative produced the u.s. effort to deal with the possibility that weapons of mass destruction could 'leak' out of a disintegration soviet union .

it was also a congressional initiative that established the domestic preparedness program and launched a 120-city program to enhance the capability of federal , state , and local first responders to react effectively in a wmd emergency .

members of congress from both parties have pushed the executive branch to identify and manage the problem more effectively .

congress has also proposed and funded studies and commissions on various aspects of the homeland security problem .

but it must do more .

"a sound homeland security strategy requires the overhaul of much of the legislative framework for preparedness , response , and national defense programs .

congress designed many of the authorities that support national security and emergency preparedness programs principally for a cold war environment .

the new threat environment — from biological and terrorist attacks to cyber attacks on critical systems — poses vastly different challenges .

we therefore recommend that congress refurbish the legal foundation for homeland security in response to the new threat environment .

"in particular , congress should amend , as necessary , key legislative authorities such as the defense production act of 1950 and the communications act of 1934 , which facilitate homeland security functions and activities .

congress should also encourage the sharing of threat , vulnerability , and incident data between the public and private sectors — including federal agencies , state governments , first responders , and industry .

in addition , congress should monitor and support current efforts to update the international legal framework for communications security issues .

 ( footnote citations to laws and other reports are not included. ) .

"beyond that , congress has some organizational work of its own to do .

as things stand today , so many federal agencies are involved with homeland security that it is exceedingly difficult to present federal programs and their resource requirements to the congress in a coherent way .

it is largely because the budget is broken up into so many pieces , for example , that counterterrorism and information security issues involve nearly two dozen congressional committees and subcommittees .

the creation of the national security homeland agency will redress this problem to some extent , but because of its growing urgency and complexity , homeland security will still require a stronger working relationship between the executive and legislative branches .

congress should therefore find ways to address homeland security issues that bridge current jurisdictional boundaries and that create more innovative oversight mechanisms .

"there are several ways of achieving this .

the senate's arms control observer group and its more recent nato enlargement group were two successful examples of more informal executive - legislative cooperation on key multi - dimensional issues .

specifically , in the near term , this commission recommends the following: "this body should develop a comprehensive understanding of the problem of homeland security , exchange information and viewpoints with the executive branch on effective policies and plans , and work with standing committees to develop integrated legislative responses and guidance .

meetings would often be held in closed session so that members could have access to interagency deliberations and diverging viewpoints , as well as to classified assessments .

such a body would have neither a legislative nor an oversight mandate , and it would not eclipse the authority of any standing committee .

"at the same time , congress needs to systematically review and restructure its committee system , as will be proposed in recommendation 48 .

a single , select committee in each house of congress should be given authorization , appropriations , and oversight responsibility for all homeland security activities .

when established , these committees would replace the function of the oversight body described in recommendation 7. .

↔↔↔ 2 ) road map for national security: imperative for change , the phase iii report of the united states commission on national security / 21 st century , pp .

58-59 .

"it follows from a reform that integrates many of the nation's foreign policy activities under the secretary of state that a similar logic should be applied to the state department budget .

we therefore recommend the following: "the state department's international affairs ( function 150 ) budget request would no longer be divided into separate appropriations by the foreign operations subcommittee on the one hand , and by a subcommittee on the commerce , state , and justice departments on the other .

the congressional leadership would need to alter the current jurisdictional lines of the appropriation subcommittees so that the foreign operations subcommittee would handle the entire state department budget .

such a reform would give the administration the opportunity to: " — allocate all the state department's resources in a way to carry out the president's overall strategic goals ; " — ensure that the various assistance programs are integrated , rather than simply a collection of administrations' political commitments and congressional earmarks ; and " — replace the existing budget categories with purposeful goals. .

 ( footnote citation to function 150 budget categories is not included. ) .

↔↔↔ 3 ) road map for national security: imperative for change , the phase iii report of the united states commission on national security / 21 st century , pp .

72-73 .

"program turbulence , often stemming from lack of funds or from budgetary instability , is the primary cause of inefficiencies and cost overruns in dod programs .

this budgetary instability has several sources .

one is the current reality of the resource allocation process itself within dod , which unfortunately often takes all resources into account during budget reductions — including acquisition programs .

this normally results in a known and deliberate underfunding of previously approved programs .

another problem is the acquisition system itself , which suffers from cost overruns and program extensions .

lastly , the congress often uses small "takes" from large programs to reallocate funds to other priorities without realizing or understanding the problems this creates in having to reprogram funds , write new contracts , and establish new schedules .

"we realize that many commissions , and ever more studies , over the past several years have recommended two - year budgeting and multiyear procurement as a way of limiting program turbulence .

if these forms of budgeting were introduced , the disincentive to disrupt acquisition programs would appropriately be very high .

we also know that congress had doggedly refused to take such proposals seriously .

congress lacks confidence in dod's ability to execute such a budget given past weapons cost overruns .

furthermore , appropriating funds on a yearly basis gives congress a greater ability to influence the defense department's policies and programs .

"therefore , rather than propose two - year budgeting across the entire department of defense , we focus on the single area where two - year budgeting makes the most sense and stands to do the most good .

we recommend the following: "such steps would markedly increase the stability of weapons development programs and result in budgetary savings in the billions of dollars .

for this to happen , however , the secretary of defense must impose discipline in the decision - making process .

it is already difficult to start new engineering development programs .

it should be made even more demanding , ensuring that the military requirements are understood and enduring , and that the technology , concepts , and funding are all well in hand .

once a program is approved , it should be equally difficult to change it .

the commission also notes that it is sometimes better to eliminate some programs early than to absorb the costs of constantly extending programs and procuring limited numbers of weapons at high costs .

to accomplish this , congress will need to let decisions to kill programs stand as well as support dod budgeting and procurement reforms .

"if the government will not take the measures to improve program stability by introducing two - year budgeting in modernization and r&d accounts , and more broadly adopt multiyear funding , it cannot expect private industry to obligate itself to suppliers , or to assume risks on its own investments with little prospect of long - term returns. .

↔↔↔ 4 ) road map for national security: imperative for change , the phase iii report of the united states commission on national security / 21 st century , pp .

110-115. .

v. the role of congress "this commission has recommended substantial change in executive branch institutions , change that is needed if america is to retain its ability to lead the world and to assure the nation's safety .

a number of prominent leaders have exhausted themselves and frustrated their careers by too aggressively seeking to reform the house and senate .

the legislative branch , however , must change as well .

"it is one thing to appeal to congress to reform the state department or the defense department , quite another to call on congress to reform itself .

over the years since world war ii , the legislative branch has been reformed and modernized much less than the executive branch .

indeed , the very nature of power in congress makes it difficult for legislators to reform their collective institution .

yet american national security in the 21 st century , and the prominent role of daily global involvement that is the nature of american life in our generation , mandates a serious reappraisal of both the individual and collective efforts of congress and its members .

"such a reappraisal must begin with a shared understanding of the legislative branch's role in the development and assessment of post - cold war foreign policy .

divided constitutional responsibilities require the executive and legislature to work together in order for u.s. foreign policy to have coherence .

yet the executive branch has at times informed rather than consulted congress .

it has often treated congress as an obstacle rather than as a partner , seeking congressional input mostly in times of crisis rather than in an ongoing way that would yield support when crises occur .

for its part , congress has not always taken full responsibility for educating its members on foreign policy issues .

it is not often receptive to consultation with the executive branch , as well , and has sustained a structure that undermines rather than strengthens its ability to fulfill its constitutional obligations in the foreign policy arena .

"several measures are needed to address these shortcomings and they are described below .

but as an immediate first step we recommend that: "the speaker of the house , the majority and minority leaders of the house , and the majority and minority leaders of the senate should form a bipartisan , bicameral working group with select staff and outside advisory panels to review the totality of executive - legislative relations in the real - time global information age we are entering .

only by having the five most powerful members of the congress directly involved is there any hope of real reform .

they should work methodically for one year and , by the beginning of the second session of the congress , they should report on proposed reforms to be implemented by the next congress .

the president , the vice president , the national security advisor , and senior cabinet officers should work directly with this unique panel to rethink the structure of executive - legislative relations in the national security and foreign policy domains .

"with that as a basis , reforms can and must be undertaken in three crucial areas: improving the foreign policy and national security expertise of individual members of congress ; undertaking organizational and process changes within the legislative branch ; and achieving a sustained and effective executive - legislative dialogue on national security issues .

"despite the range of foreign policy challenges facing the united states , many current members of congress are poorly informed in this area .

their main electoral priorities are generally within domestic policy ; foreign policy concerns are often limited to issues of concern to special interests or to prominent ethnic groups in their districts .

once in office , attention to foreign policy issues generally focuses on pending votes and looming crisis .

to build a broad base of informed and involved members on foreign policy issues , we recommend the following: "in particular , this means that: "●the congressional leadership should educate its members on foreign policy and national security matters beyond the freshman orientation provided for new members .

such education should emphasize congress' foreign policy roles and responsibilities .

we must reinforce the principal of minimal partisanship on foreign policy issues: that politics stops at the water's edge .

effective education of members will ensure a more knowledgeable debate and better partnership with the executive branch on foreign policy issues .

it also will allow members to become more effective educators of their constituencies about the importance of national security concerns .

"●members should be encouraged to travel overseas for serious purposes and each member should get letters from the president or from the head of their body formally asking them to undertake trips in the national interest .

a concerted effort should be made to distinguish between junkets ( pleasure trips at taxpayer expenses ) and the serious work that members need to undertake to learn about the world .

a major effort should be made to ensure that every new member of congress undertakes at least one serious trip in his or her first term , and is involved in one or more trips each year from the second term on .

"●legislature - to - legislature exchanges and visits should be encouraged and expanded .

more funding and staffing should be provided to both accommodate foreign legislators visiting the united states and to encourage american legislators and their spouses to visit foreign legislatures .

much is to be gained by strengthening the institutions of democracy and by improving understanding among elected officials .

this should get a much greater emphasis and much more institutional support than it currently does .

"●the wargaming center at the national defense university should be expanded so that virtually every member of congress can participate in one or more war games per two - year cycle .

by role - modeling key decision - makers ( american and foreign ) , members of congress will acquire a better understanding of the limits of american power , and of the reality that any action the united states taken invariably has multiple permutations abroad .

giving members of congress a reason to learn about a region , about the procedures and systems of executive branch decision - making , and about crisis interactions will lead eventually to a more sophisticated legislative branch .

on occasion , particularly useful or insightful games should lead to a meeting between the participating congressmen and senators and key executive branch officials .

"member's increased fluency in national security issues is a positive steps but one that must be accompanied by structural reforms that address how congress organizes itself and conducts its business .

several recommendations concerning congressional structure have already been made in this report: to create a special congressional body to deal with homeland security issues ( recommendation 7 ) ; to consider all of the state department's appropriations within the foreign operations subcommittee ( recommendation 22 ) ; and to move to a two - year budget cycle for defense modernization programs ( recommendation 31 ) .

to meet the challenges of the next quarter century , we recommend congress take additional steps .

"our discussion of homeland security highlights the complexity and overlaps of the current committee structure .

the congressional leadership must review its structure systematically in light of likely 21 st century security challenges and of u.s. national security priorities .

this is to ensure both that important issues receive sufficient attention and oversight and the unnecessary duplication of effort by multiple committees is minimized .

"such an effort would benefit the executive branch , as well , which currently bears a significant burden in terms of testimony .

the number of times that key executive branch officials are required to appear on the same topics in front of different panels is a minor disgrace .

at a minimum , we recommend that a public record should be kept of these briefings and published annually .

if that were done , it would become obvious to all observers that a great deal of testimony could be given in front of joint panels and , in some cases , bicameral joint panels .

while we emphasize the need for strong consultation with the legislative branch , we need a better sense of what constitutes a reasonable amount of time that any senior executive branch official should spend publicly educating congress .

"specifically , in terms of committee structure , we believe action must be taken to streamline the budgeting and appropriations processes .

in 1974 , congress developed its present budget process as a way of establishing overall priorities for the various authorizations and appropriations committees .

over time , however , the budget process has become a huge bureaucratic undertaking and the authorization process has expanded to cover all spending areas .

in light of this , there is no longer a compelling rationale for separate authorization and appropriations bills .

"this is why we believe that the appropriations subcommittees should be merged with their respective authorizing committees .

the aggregate committee ( for example , the senate armed services committee ) should both authorize and appropriate within the same bill .

this will require realigning appropriations subcommittees .

for example , appropriations relating to defense are currently dealt with in three subcommittees ( defense , military construction , and energy and water ) ; under this proposal , all appropriations would be made within the senate armed services committee .

"this approach has at least two important merits .

first , it furthers the aim of rationalizing committee jurisdiction because all appropriating and authorizing elements relating to a specific topic are brought within one committee .

second , it brings greater authority to those charged with oversight as well as appropriations .

in the current system , power has shifted from the authorizing committees to the appropriating committees with a much - narrower budgetary focus .

by combining the two functions , more effort may be paid to examining how foreign policy laws have been implemented , what their results have been , and how policy objectives can be better achieved .

finally , this new structure may facilitate adoption of two - year budgeting if efforts such as those proposed for defense modernization programs prove successful .

the merged committee could authorize , in less detail , for the two - fiscal - year period while appropriating , in greater detail , for the first fiscal year .

"if this important reform were undertaken , then the budget committees in each house of congress would consist of the chairman and ranking member of each new combined committee .

as part of the budget function , these two committees would distribute the macro - allocations contained in the budget resolution .

"once congress has gotten its own house in order , it still remains to ensure that there is ongoing executive - legislative consultation and coordination .

efforts to do so are beneficial not only so that both branches can fulfill their constitutional obligations but also because effective consultation can improve the quality of u.s. policy .

we have acknowledged this , for example , in our defense department planning recommendation , which defers detailed program and budget decisions until congress has marked up the previous year's submission .

because congress is the most representative branch of government , executive branch policy that considers a range of congressional views is more likely to gain public support .

the objections raised by differing congressional opinions can refine policy by forcing the administration to respond to previously unconsidered concerns .

finally , congress can force the president and his top aides to articulate and explain administration policy — so the american people and the world can better understand it .

"given these benefits , efforts must be undertaken to improve the consultative process .

indeed , a coherent and effective foreign policy requires easy and honest consultation between the branches .

the bicameral , bipartisan panel put forward in recommendation 46 is a good first step in this process , but additional processes must be established to ensure that such efforts are ongoing .

therefore , we recommend the following: "a sustained effort at consultation must be based on mutual trust , respect , and partnership and on a shared understanding of each branch's role .

the executive branch must recognize congress' role in policy formulation and congress must grant the executive branch flexibility in the day - to - day implementation of that policy .

congress must also ensure that if it is consulted and its criticisms are taken seriously , it will act with restraint and allow the executive branch to lead .

for his part , the president must convey to administration officials the importance of ongoing , bipartisan consultation and dialogue .

efforts must not be limited to periods of crisis .

further , administration officials should take into consideration the differences in knowledge and perspective among members .

"beyond these general principles , specific mechanisms can facilitate better consultation: "●congress should create a permanent consultative group composed of the congressional leadership and the chairmen and ranking member of the main congressional committees involved in foreign policy .

other members with special interest or expertise could join the group's work on certain issues .

the group would meet regularly — in informal and private sessions — with representatives of the executive branch .

while these may regularly be cabinet officials , they may often be at the under secretary level .

this will make possible a regular dialogue with knowledgeable administration officials , allowing the congressional group not only to respond to crises but to be part of the development of preventive strategies .

the agenda for these meetings would not be strictly limited , allowing members to raise issues they are concerned about .

the group would also meet on any emergency basis whenever the president considers military action abroad or deals with a foreign policy crisis .

"●beyond this interaction between the leadership of both branches , the administration must reach out to consult with a broader congressional group .

this will involve increasing the number of administration representatives working to consult with congress and assigning high - quality people to that task .

the executive must send mid - level , as well as high - level , officials to capitol hill and keep closer track of the foreign policy views and concerns of every member of congress .

only through such concerted efforts , combined with the aforementioned education initiatives , will there be a critical mass of members knowledgeable of and engaged in foreign policy issues .

"●finally , in order for congress to be most effective in partnering with the executive branch , it must undertake its own consultation with a broad group of leaders in science , international economics , defense , intelligence , and in the high - technology , venture - capital arena .

congress is fare more accessible to this expertise than the executive branch and should work to bring these insights into consultations .

to do this , however , members of congress need regular and direct dialogue with experts without the screen of their staffs .

the best experts in these fields are vastly more knowledgeable than any congressional staff member , and there needs to be a routine system for bringing members of congress in touch with experts in the areas in which they will be making decisions .

all four parts of the national academies of science should play key roles in bringing the most knowledgeable scientists and engineers in contact with members of the legislative branch .

policy institutions with deep reservoirs of expertise on defense and foreign policy , too , can help build congressional fluency with these issues with a measure of detachment and independent perspective .

similar institutions need to be engaged in other areas .

 ( footnote citations other parts of the report and to additional reading are not included. ) .

"an effective national security policy for the 21 st century will require the combined resources of the executive and legislative branches .

while much of this report has rightly focused on the needs for reform within executive branch structures and processes , corresponding efforts must be undertaken for congress .

we believe that a tripartite effort focused on the foreign policy education of members , the restructuring of the congressional committee system , and stronger executive - legislative consultative efforts will go a long way to ensuring that the united states can meet any future challenges. .

appendix f. recommendations on congressional organization made by the brookings institution in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the brookings institution .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

1 ) michael e. o'hanlon , ivo h. daalder , david l. gunter , robert e. litan , peter r. orszag , i.m .

destler , james m. lindsay , and james b. steinberg , protecting the american homeland: one year on ( washington: brookings institution press , 2002 ) , p. xxviii - xxx .

 ( available online at http: / / brookings.edu / dybdocroot / fp / projects / homeland / newhomeland.pdf , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

" reforming congress ' s role "much of the benefit of consolidating the homeland security mission within the executive branch will be lost if our national legislature fails to reflect that reorganization in its own structure .

congressional oversight of homeland security activities has traditionally been scattered across capitol hill .

by the administration's count , thirteen full committees in each house , and a total of 88 committees and subcommittees overall , shared responsibility for overseeing the homeland security mission in 2002 .

the house appropriations committee alone had eight subcommittees overseeing the agencies and programs merged into dhs .

with authority so badly fragmented , coordination problems were rife , and no one was responsible for trying to bring coherence to the decisions made by individual committees .

"the department of homeland security act expresses "the sense of congress that each house of congress should review its committee structure in light of the reorganization of responsibilities within the executive branch. .

to its credit , congress has taken some important steps to meet this call .

the house and senate appropriations committees agreed at the start of 2003 to realign their subcommittee jurisdictions to create new homeland security subcommittees .

this restructuring both institutionalizes the responsibility for appropriations oversight of the executive branch — increasing the changes that budgetary supervision will occur even if events shift political appeal to other topics — and reduce fragmentation — increasing the chances that congress can identify major gaps and sensible tradeoffs in homeland security spending .

"congress has not moved as aggressively to consolidate the badly fragmented authorization process .

the senate plans no changes to its committee structure .

the government affairs committee had responsibility for overseeing the creation of dhs , while other authorizing committees have responsibility for overseeing individual programs and agencies within dhs .

the house has gone somewhat further .

it has created a select homeland security committee , composed on the republican side largely of the chairmen of the committees with a stake in homeland security .

the goal is to establish a permanent homeland security committee at the start of the 109 th congress ( 2005-07 ) .

the question of what jurisdictions a permanent committee would take from other panels has yet to be answered .

in the interim , the leadership of the select committee sees its task as coordinating the homeland security actions of other committees and reconciling any disagreements rather than establishing a claim to primary authorization oversight of homeland security .

"although the house's approach is preferable to the senate's , neither is sufficient to ensure effective congressional oversight .

maintaining a fragmented authorization process increases the odds that congress will drag its feet in considering executive branch proposals , bicker internally over the direction of homeland security , and issue conflicting directives to dhs .

a streamlined appropriations process cannot eliminate these problems , even though appropriators normally follow the authorizers in the legislative process and can in theory reconcile any conflicting authorization mandates .

appropriators approach oversight largely through budgetary and management lenses .

their instinct is to ask how much is being spend and whether it can be spent efficiently .

they devote less time to the related but distinct policy issues that the authorization committees specialize in .

as a result , the chances remain that broader policy issues either will be the object of turf wars or fall through the cracks of the authorization process .

bringing committee heads together as the house proposes can mitigate these problems in the short term .

it is debatable , however , that a select committee will provide adequate oversight in the long term .

committee chairs have numerous competing demands on their time , many of which are more politically salient than homeland security .

moreover , the select committee approach by its nature focuses oversight attention on where committees disagree rather than on the equally pressing question of whether the sum total of committee decisions makes sense .

"congress would be wise then to take to heart its message in the department of homeland security act and reorganize its jurisdictions to create authorizing committees for homeland security .

such a reorganization would not produce a unified decisionmaking process .

some fragmentation would remain as a result of bicameralism and the twin - track authorization and appropriations process .

the task of coordinating the authorizers and appropriators on homeland security with those responsible for related activities by the intelligence agencies , the fbi , and the pentagon ( to name just a few ) would also remain .

but establishing dedicated homeland security committees to complement the homeland security appropriations subcommittees would likely maximize the efficacy of congressional oversight. .

↔↔↔ 2 ) protecting the american homeland: one year on , 2002 , pp .

122-123. .

congress "however the executive branch conducts its work , many issues will inevitably engage the legislative branch .

the president's ability to make homeland security his top priority will be helped , or hindered , according to whether and how much congress can revamp its structure and process to the same end .

two reforms would be especially useful: establishment of house and senate appropriations subcommittees for homeland security , and creation of a joint committee to oversee the national effort .

the congressional role and focus would be further strengthened , moreover , if the homeland security council were made a statutory entity , and its director subject to senate confirmation — as recommended above .

"one of tom ridge's signal achievements has been the submission of a unified homeland security budget .

but once on capital hill , it now must be disaggregated and its components distributed among multiple appropriations subcommittees .

there they will be weighed not in relation to overall homeland security needs , but within such jurisdictions as commerce , justice , and state ; defense ; and labor , health and human services , and education .

what the executive branch has laboriously pulled together , congress must quickly pull apart .

the obvious remedy , difficult though it may be to implement , is to establish new appropriations subcommittees on homeland security in both branches .

if that proves too large a reform to swallow , a second - best alternative would be for the appropriations committees as a whole to take up and pass the homeland security budget .

"ideally , there would also be established authorizing committees with the same jurisdiction .

in the near term , however , this would likely prove even harder to accomplish than appropriations reform .

a useful "second - best" option , therefore , would be to enhance congressional capacity for analysis and oversight by creating a new body on the model of the joint economic committee .

this would limit the threat to existing jurisdictions , as a joint committee for homeland security would have no legislative authority .

this would also limit its impact , of course , but such a committee could be a useful focal point , holding hearings , issuing reports , calling executive officials to task. .

appendix g. recommendations on congressional organization made by the center for strategic and international studies in this appendix , the reader will find excerpts from the report of the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) .

the excerpts are the verbatim recommendations related to congressional organization that are contained in this report .

different type styles and formats reflect those used in the original text .

center for strategic and international studies , meeting the challenges of establishing a new department of homeland security: a csis white paper , 2002 , pp .

19-21 .

 ( available online at http: / / www.csis.org / features / hamrefinalpaper.pdf , visited december 10 , 2004. ) .

revamp congressional oversight of homeland security create a select committee of oversight in the house , and a similar committee in the senate .

congressional leadership should create new select committees in order to streamline the report process , eliminate fragmentation of authority , and ensure efficient and effective oversight of the new homeland security department .

relinquish responsibility in committees that exercise overly broad and , in most cases , duplicative oversight of the agencies that will be folded into the department of homeland defense .

today , far too many congressional committees and subcommittees have been given , or have taken , oversight responsibility for various aspects of homeland security .

to ensure effective oversight of homeland security , congress must rein in the number of committees and subcommittees that exercise authority over the new department .

specifically , the scope of jurisdiction of the house government reform committee should be narrowed and its functions redefined to eliminate duplicate oversight over the many defense and homeland security functions already under the jurisdiction of other committees .

the senate government affairs committee should revise its charter and divest itself of the international security and proliferation function of the subcommittee on international security , proliferation and federal services .

this oversight role is adequately exercised in other standing senate committees .

membership of each respective select committee should be made up of chairpersons and ranking members from the committees ( house and senate ) and subcommittees ( house ) that now exercise oversight over the various agencies that will be consolidated in the new department of homeland security .

this criteria for membership will ensure cross - jurisdictional involvement by members , further providing comprehensive oversight .

the relevant senate committees include: agriculture ; appropriations ; armed services ; banking , housing and urban affairs ; commerce , science and transportation ; energy and natural resources ; judiciary ; and intelligence .

the relevant house committees ( and attendant subcommittees ) include: agriculture ( specialty crops and foreign agriculture ) ; appropriations ( agriculture ; commerce , justice , state ; defense ; energy and water ; transportation ; treasury , postal service and general government ) ; armed services ( military readiness ; military research and development ) ; energy and commerce ( environment and hazardous materials ; health ; telecommunications and the internet ) ; financial services ( financial institutions and consumer credit ) ; judiciary ( courts , the internet ad intellectual property ; crime ; immigration and claims ) ; science ( energy ; research ) ; transportation ( aviation ; coast guard and maritime transportation ; highways ; railroads ) ; and intelligence ( human intelligence , analysis and counterintelligence ; intelligence policy and national security ; terrorism and homeland security ) .

terms of membership on each select committee should be governed by the same criteria that govern chairmanship or ranking member status on other committees .

term limits on membership ensure fresh perspectives , while maintaining more than adequate understanding of the issue because of members' other committee assignments .

each new select committee should have its own separate staff , not affiliated with any other committee or subcommittee .

separate staff will ensure independence and limit cross - jurisdictional turf battles .

further , a separate staff provides focused and expert insight to members of each select committee .

within each appropriations committee , create new subcommittees of oversight .

in conjunction with those new subcommittees , dissolve oversight responsibilities now resident in standing subcommittees .

"unless separate new subcommittees are created , and oversight within current subcommittees is dissolved , the new department will be whipsawed by competing demands and lines of authority within the appropriations committees. .

