on september 15 , 2008 , robert mugabe , president of zimbabwe for more than two decades , and opposition leader morgan tsvangirai signed a power - sharing arrangement to resolve a political standoff stemming from flawed elections earlier in the year .

the global political agreement ( gpa ) laid the foundations for a transitional government and outlined a time frame for the drafting and adoption of a new constitution .

as part of the deal , which was not implemented until february 2009 under pressure from regional powers and the international community , tsvangirai became prime minister of a new coalition government .

cabinet positions have been divided among the parties .

many observers remain skeptical that the parties will be able to work together to implement the remaining political reforms deemed necessary by international donors .

the coalition government has faced considerable challenges in prioritizing development needs , attracting donor funding , and making the reforms necessary for the country's economic recovery .

for further discussion of the coalition government and other current events , please see crs report rl34509 , zimbabwe: the transitional government and implications for u.s. policy , by lauren ploch .

after years of economic sanctions by the international community and a decades - long civil war that resulted in more than 30,000 dead , the white minority rule government of southern rhodesia concluded a series of agreements with the black majority in 1979 that resulted in the establishment of the government of the republic of zimbabwe .

among the greatest challenges facing the new government was the demand by the majority for greater equity in land distribution .

at independence , the white minority , who composed less than 5% of the population , owned the vast majority of arable land .

many observers at that time considered the country's white - owned commercial farms crucial to the country's economy , although there was a general recognition that land reform was necessary .

britain initially funded a "willing buyer , willing seller" program to redistribute commercial farmland , offering to compensate amenable white farmers .

dissatisfaction with the pace of land reform grew and led in the 1990s to spontaneous and often violent farm invasions .

at the same time , the country's labor movement and a segment of its urban middle class were becoming increasingly critical of the government's economic performance .

facing rising political and economic challenges , the government of zimbabwe began to implement aggressive land expropriation policies , leading britain and other donors to begin withdrawing financial support for resettlement .

in 2000 , the government held a referendum to approve changes to the constitution that would allow land seizures without compensation , a responsibility that in its view lay with britain .

the referendum was rejected by 55% of voters and was seen as a victory for a new opposition party , the movement for democratic change ( mdc ) .

within days of the vote war veterans and ruling party supporters moved onto an estimated 1,000 white - owned farms , and , months later , the president invoked emergency powers to take land without compensation .

during this time there were numerous attacks against white farmers and their employees , as well as against supporters of the mdc ; more than 30 people were killed .

from 2000 onward , the country's problems deepened .

substantial political violence and human rights violations have accompanied elections .

the broad scale of such abuses in the wake of the 2008 elections brought international condemnation , but little consensus on how best to stop the violence .

reports of government - orchestrated human rights abuses continued for months afterward .

zimbabwe's political difficulties were accompanied by a sharp decline in living standards , with more than 80% of the population living on less than $1 per day by 2009 .

once touted as a potential "breadbasket of africa," a significant portion of zimbabwe's population became periodically dependent on food aid .

an estimated 13.7% of adults are infected by the hiv / aids virus , and life expectancy fell from an estimated 56 years in 1990 to 44 in 2008 .

foreign policy magazine ranked zimbabwe second in its index of failed states , behind somalia , in 2009 .

its ranking "improved" to that of fourth in the 2010 index and sixth in 2011 , but the classification suggests considerable room for progress .

observers are concerned that the difficulties confronting zimbabwe have affected neighboring countries and deterred investors from the country and the wider region .

zimbabwe has been ruled since independence by the zimbabwe african national union - patriotic front ( zanu - pf ) , which has come under increasing scrutiny from human rights activists , both at home and abroad , in the past decade .

although zanu - pf now technically shares power in the coalition government , the party still controls the presidency and key security ministries .

critics have cited high levels of corruption , political violence , and strictly enforced laws restricting basic freedoms .

the party contends that its detractors have engaged in a "propaganda war" backed by britain and the united states , using democracy and human rights as a cover to push for regime change .

many domestic and international observers have judged elections since 2000 to be "far from free and fair. .

the country's main opposition party , the mdc , split over tactical issues in 2005 ; morgan tsvangirai's faction remains dominant .

zanu - pf has also suffered internal competition , and some observers suggest that opposition to president mugabe's continued rule has grown within the party .

the turmoil in zimbabwe in the past decade led to a severe economic contraction , a sharp drop in living standards for the rural and urban poor , and a massive exodus of zimbabweans in search of work .

according to the solidarity peace trust , founded by clergy from zimbabwe and south africa , well over three million zimbabweans were living outside the country by 2004 .

the trust calculated that this amounted to 25% - 30% of the total population , or 60% - 70% of productive adults .

many more are believed to have fled zimbabwe since then .

some who left the country because of economic hardship have faced difficult conditions in their new host countries .

many in zimbabwe still reportedly rely on remittances from family abroad .

the international community has been divided on how to respond to zimbabwe's economic and political crises .

in general , western nations and institutions have expressed opposition to robert mugabe's methods of rule , and have pursued policies intended to pressure the zimbabwe government for reforms .

mugabe has enjoyed greater support in africa , where he has been viewed as an elder statesman and a leader of the anti - colonial struggle , and among the non - aligned nations generally .

this has changed to an extent in recent years , however , with some african leaders concluding that the zimbabwe situation has been damaging to regional interests and that political and economic reforms are needed .

nevertheless , african countries supported zimbabwe in its successful bid to chair the united nations commission on sustainable development in 2007 , allegedly to show african solidarity against western opposition .

au member states were unable to come to a conclusion on how to address zimbabwe's political situation at the 2008 au summit in egypt , despite election observer reports from the au , sadc , and the pan - african parliament finding that the june runoff was not free or fair .

the african union subsequently deferred to sadc's mediation role on zimbabwe .

the international donor community has generally expressed support for the new coalition government , but has predicated significant assistance on improvement in the following areas: the release of all political prisoners ; the end of farm disruptions ; the cessation of politically motivated violence ; the establishment of a credible and transparent reserve bank team ; an end to harassment and intimidation of the media ; and a commitment of all stakeholders to holding credible elections in a timely manner .

despite hopes that the transitional government would bring change to zimbabwe , life for many of the country's people remains a daily struggle .

the rate of unemployment and the cost of living remain high , and salaries for those with jobs are far below regional standards .

the controversial issues of property rights and land reform have yet to be seriously addressed by the government .

prospects for zimbabwe's youngest generation remain poor. .

many teachers have returned to work since 2008 , but salaries remain low and enticing the thousands who have left the country to return will be a major challenge .

many families still struggle to afford basic food items , not to mention medicines or doctors .

analysts have cited a number of reasons for zimbabwe's economic problems in the past decade , including recurrent drought , difficulties encountered in implementing economic reforms , and industrial competition from comparatively cheap south african imports .

at the same time , analysts place considerable responsibility for zimbabwe's problems on the policies adopted and actions taken by the government since 1997 .

zimbabwe is at a critical juncture .

prior to the power sharing agreement , the government took some fiscal measures to reverse the economic downturn , but hyperinflation continued , and the measures were largely ineffective .

the mdc controls the ministry of finance under the transitional government , but zimbabwe is in debt distress and it remains unclear how effective the mdc's economic policies will be without major donor financing for its recovery plans , estimated to require up to $8 billion .

many donor governments and institutions have been reluctant to release significant funds until they can determine whether the transitional government's establishment will result in changes to the policies that brought about sanctions in the first place .

the mdc and zanu - pf , long - standing political foes , must now demonstrate their willingness to work together to put the country's economy on the path toward recovery .

