on december 8 , 2004 , the president signed h.r .

4818 , the consolidatedappropriations act , 2005 ( p.l .

108-447 ) .

congress approved the conference committee report on h.r .

4818 ( h.rept .

108-792 ) , which incorporated the transportation , treasury , andindependent agencies fy2005 appropriations bill and eight other appropriations bills , on november20 , 2004 , but the bill was held for a correcting resolution ( h.con.res .

528 , passeddecember 6 , 2004 ) before being sent to the president .

 table 6 .

title ii: department of the treasuryappropriations ( millions of dollars ) source: figures are from a budget authority table provided by the house committeeon appropriations .

because of differing treatment of offsets , the totals will notalways match the administration's totals .

the figures within this table may differslightly from those in the text due to supplemental appropriations , rescissions , andother funding actions .

columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smallerprogram line - items .

*fy2004 figures reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.59% .

**fy2005 figures do not reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.80% .

 table 7 .

title iii: executive office of thepresident ( eop ) and funds appropriated to the presidentappropriations ( millions of dollars ) source: figures are from a budget authority table provided by the house committeeon appropriations .

because of differing treatment of offsets , the totals will notalways match the administration's totals .

the figures within this table may differslightly from those in the text due to supplemental appropriations , rescissions , andother funding actions .

columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smallerprogram line - items .

*fy2004 figures reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.59% .

**fy2005 figures do not reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.80% .

the transportation , treasury , and independent agencies appropriations act funds all but three offices in the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

of thethree exceptions , the council on environmental quality and office of environmentalquality , and the office of science and technology policy are funded under theveterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agenciesappropriations ; and the office of the united states trade representative is fundedunder the commerce , justice , state , the judiciary and related agenciesappropriations .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed to consolidate and financially realign several annual eop salaries and expenses appropriations that directly support thepresident into a single annual appropriation , called "the white house. .

thisconsolidated appropriation would total $181.0 million in fy2005 , a decrease of 3.3%from the $187.2 million appropriated in fy2004 , after the 0.59% rescission , ( 17 ) for theaccounts proposed to be consolidated .

the accounts included in the consolidatedappropriation would be as follows: compensation of the president white house office ( including the homeland securitycouncil ) executive residence at the white house white house repair and restoration office of policy development office of administration council of economic advisers national security council according to the fy2005 budget , the consolidation "initiative provides enhanced flexibility in allocating resources and staff in support of the president and vicepresident , and permits more rapid response to changing needs and priorities. .

 ( 18 ) the administration proposed similar consolidations in the fy2002 , fy2003 , and fy2004 budgets , but the conference committees for the treasury and generalgovernment appropriations act , 2002 ( p.l .

107-67 ) and 2003 ( p.l .

108-7 , divisionj ) , and the transportation , treasury , and independent agencies appropriations act,2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , division f ) , decided to continue with separate appropriationsfor the eop accounts .

the administration reportedly sought to eliminate the"needless complexity [of different accounts] that adds expense , that adds burdens,that adds administrative hurdles that they must go through to accomplish anything. .

 ( 19 ) congressional concern about this proposed consolidation has centered on congress's"legitimate needs and desires to have oversight over spending of public funds. .

 ( 20 ) proposed in the fy2005 budget request for consolidation was a title vi general provision ( a similar provision was proposed in fy2004 ) that would provide authorityfor the eop to transfer 10% of the appropriated funds among the following accounts: the white house ( compensation of the president , white house office ( including the homeland security council ) , executive residence at thewhite house , white house repair and restoration , office of policy development,office of administration , council of economic advisers , national securitycouncil ) office of management and budget ( omb ) office of national drug control policy special assistance to the president and official residence ofthe vice president ( transfers would be subject to the approval of the vicepresident ) council on environmental quality and office of environmentalquality office of science and technology policy office of the united states traderepresentative ( 21 ) according to the eop budget submission , the transfer authority would "allow the president to address , in a limited way , emerging priorities and shifting demands"and would "provide the president with flexibility , improve the efficiency of the eop,and reduce administrative burdens. .

 ( 22 ) in the first session of the 108th congress , the conference agreement accompanying the fy2004 consolidated appropriations act provided that separateappropriations for the eop accounts be continued and that the transfer authorityproposal not be accepted .

for the fy2005 appropriations for the eop , the housecommittee on appropriations recommended , the house passed , and the senatecommittee on appropriations recommended the same .

according to the committeereport accompanying the senate bill: the committee recommends funding for the offices that directly support the president according to the existing structureof accounts .

this arrangement has served the committee's and the public's need fortransparency in the funding and operation of these important functions while alsoproviding the executive branch with the flexibility it needs to reprogram funds withinaccounts to address unforseen budget needs .

as noted in discussions withadministration officials in past years , at no time has the committee rejected anadministration's request to reprogram existing funds within theseaccounts .

the conference agreement and the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 authorizes the transfers , but continues separate appropriations for the eop accounts.with regard to the transfers , section 533 of title v of division h of the consolidatedappropriations act provides that up to 10% of the appropriated funds among theaccounts for the white house office ( including the homeland security council ) , executive residence at the white house , white house repair andrestoration , office of policy development , office of administration , council ofeconomic advisers , national security council office of management and budget office of national drug control policy special assistance to the president and official residence ofthe vice president ( transfers would be subject to the approval of the vicepresident ) could be transferred to any other such appropriation , "to be merged with and available for the same time and for the same purposes as the appropriation to whichtransferred" by the omb director ( or such other officer as the president maydesignate in writing ) .

the house and senate committees on appropriations mustreceive 15 days notice of the transfer from the omb director .

the amount of anappropriation cannot be increased by more than 50% by such transfers .

 table 8 .

title iv: independent agenciesappropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures are from a budget authority table provided by the house committeeon appropriations .

because of differing treatment of offsets , the totals will notalways match the administration's totals .

the figures within this table may differslightly from those in the text due to supplemental appropriations , rescissions , andother funding actions .

columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smallerprogram line - items .

note: a newly created independent agency which began operation in fy2004 , theelection assistance commission , received an appropriation of $1 billion for electionreform grants in a separate division of the fy2004 consolidated appropriations bill .

*fy2004 figures reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.59% .

**fy2005 figures do not reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.80% .

federal election commission ( fec ) .

the fec administers federal campaign finance law,including overseeing disclosure requirements , limits on contributions andexpenditures , and the presidential election public funding system ; the agency retainscivil enforcement authority for the law .

the office of election administration,which serves as a clearinghouse for information on voting laws and procedures forstate and local election officers , is another part of the fec .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $52.2 million for the fec , an increase of $919,000 above the fiscal 2004 appropriation of $51.2million ; the increase reflects adjustments for inflation and salary and benefitincreases .

the fec endorsed the administration proposal , with its estimated 391full - time employees .

of the total amount , no less than $4.7 million is to bedesignated for automated data processing systems .

in addition , $800,000 isdesignated for use by the office of election administration , which is slated to bemoved to the newly created election assistance commission , along with any fundsleft over at the time of the move .

the house appropriations committee recommended , the house passed , and the senate committee on appropriations recommended the $52.2 million requested inthe president's budget .

the house added a requirement that the fec accept noreports and filings from house and senate members and candidates in other thanelectronic form .

the senate committee also added two legislative provisions: oneto enable ( excess ) federal campaign funds to be donated to state and local candidatesand to be used for other lawful purposes , and the other to clarify that principalcampaign committees of federal candidates are limited to contributions of $2,000 toany authorized committee of another federal candidate .

the omnibus appropriationsmeasure enacted by congress authorized $52.2 million for the fec and included thetwo legislative provisions recommended by the senate committee ( the houseprovision was dropped ) .

federal labor relations authority ( flra ) .

the flra serves as a neutral party in the settlement ofdisputes that arise between unions , employees , and federal agencies on mattersoutlined in the federal service labor management relations statute ; decides majorpolicy issues ; prescribes regulations ; and disseminates information appropriate to theneeds of agencies , labor organizations , and the public .

the flra also engages incase - related interventions and training and facilitates labor - managementrelationships .

it has three components: the authority which adjudicateslabor - management disputes ; the office of the general counsel which , among otherduties , investigates all allegations of unfair labor practices filed and processes allrepresentation petitions received ; and the federal service impasses panel whichresolves impasses which occur during labor negotiations between federal agenciesand labor organizations .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $29.7 million for the flra .

the fy2004 appropriation was $29.6 million but after the 0.59%rescission was $29.4 million .

the requested amount is 0.81% more than the fy2004funding after the rescission .

the house committee on appropriations recommendedand the house passed the same appropriation as the president requested .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $25.7 million , $4 million less thanthe president's request .

three million dollars is rescinded from prior yearappropriations which were unobligated .

after the 0.80% rescission , the fy2005funding is $25.5 million , a reduction of $4.2 million from the president's request .

the committee report accompanying the senate bill states that the recommendation"reflects the decline in caseload and the reduction of the fte level from 215 to 210 .

"a rescission of $3 million of prior appropriations is recommended for salaries andexpenses because "significant amounts of annual appropriations have lapsed at theend of fy2002 and 2003 which reflect salary and benefit surpluses related to thedecline in caseload and actual fte usage over the same period. .

 ( 90 ) general services administration ( gsa ) .

the general services administration administers federalcivilian procurement policies pertaining to the construction and management offederal buildings , disposal of real and personal property , and management of federalproperty and records .

it is also responsible for managing the funding and facilitiesfor former presidents and presidential transitions .

as agreed to in the conference report ( h.rept .

108-792 ) on h.r .

4818 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 , the house and senaterecommended an appropriation of $62.1 million for government - wide policy and$92.2 million for operating expenses ; $42.4 million for the office of inspectorgeneral ; $3.1 million for allowances and office staff for former presidents ; and $3.0million for the electronic government fund .

due to the outcome of the 2004presidential election , no funds are needed for a presidential transition in fy2005 .

the conferees did not provide additional funds for activities associated with thepresident's second term of office .

they stated that the resources for these activitiesshould be funded out of the agencies and departments as necessary .

s. 2806 recommended an appropriation of $62.1 million for government - wide policy and $85.2 million for operating expenses ; $42.4 million forthe office of inspector general ; $3.1 million for allowances and office staff forformer presidents ; and $3.0 million to remain available until expended for theelectronic government fund .

a total of $7.7 million was also recommended for theexpenses associated in the event of a presidential transition .

the senate committeeon appropriations ( s.rept .

108-342 ) denied the request to amend the presidentialtransition act to allow $1.0 million for training and briefings for incomingappointees associated with the second term of an incumbent president .

thecommittee stated that it had no objection to funding such training , but believed that"it should be properly budgeted for and requested by the appropriate agencies. .

as passed in the house , h.r .

5025 recommended an appropriation of $62.1 million for government - wide policy and $82.2 million for operatingexpenses ; $42.4 million for the office of inspector general ; $3.5 million forallowances and office staff for former presidents ; and $5.0 million to remainavailable until expended for the electronic government fund .

a total of $7.7 millionwas also recommended for the expenses associated with a presidential transition .

the house committee on appropriations ( h.rept .

108-671 ) stated that itrecommended the provision in the president's budget request to allow $1.0 millionof the total $7.7 million appropriation to remain available for the training andbriefings of incoming appointees associated with the second term of an incumbentpresident .

the remaining $6.7 million would be returned to the general fund of thetreasury .

the president's fy2005 budget contained a request of $62.1 million for government - wide policy and $82.2 million for operating expenses ; $42.4 millionfor the office of inspector general ; $3.5 million for allowances and office staff forformer presidents ; $45.0 million for interagency electronic government initiatives ; and $17.6 million to be deposited into the federal consumer information centerfund .

in the event of a presidential transition , a total of $7.7 million was requestedin accordance with the presidential transition act , as amended , to provide for anorderly transfer of executive leadership .

of ths total , $1.0 million would be providedfor briefing new personnel associated with the incoming administration .

beginningin fy2005 , appropriation language is proposed to amend the presidential transitionact to permit the expenditure of not more than $1.0 million for briefings forincoming appointees associated with the second term of an incumbent president .

ifthere is no presidential transition , no other expenditures of transition funds would bemade available to an incumbent president .

the remaining $6.7 million inappropriated funds would be returned to the general fund of the treasury .

table 9 .

general services administration appropriations ( in millions of dollars ) source: figures are from a budget authority table provided by the house committeeon appropriations , except senate figure is from budget authority table in s.rept.108-342 .

because of differing treatment of offsets , the totals will not always matchthe administration's totals .

the figures within this table may differ slightly fromthose in the text due to supplemental appropriations , rescissions , and other fundingactions .

columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smaller programline - items .

*fy2004 figures reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.59% .

**fy2005 figures do not reflect an across - the - board rescission of 0.80% .

***the appropriations total does not include the limitations on obligations figure forthe federal buildings fund .

federal buildings fund ( fbf ) .

revenue to the fbf is the principal source of funding .

congress , however , directsthe gsa as to the allocation or limitation on spending of funds .

as agreed to in the conference report ( h.rept .

108-792 ) on h.r .

4818 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 , the house and senaterecommended that $708.5 million remain available for new construction projectsfrom the $7.2 billion federal buildings fund .

an additional $980.2 million is toremain available for repairs and alterations .

the conferees also recommended that thefollowing amounts be made available from the fbf: $161.4 million for installmentacquisition payments ; $3.7 billion for rental of space ; and $1.7 for buildingoperations .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended that $710.9 million remain available until expended for new construction projects from the federalbuildings fund , which totals $7.2 billion .

an additional $980.2 million was toremain available until expended for repairs and alterations .

this amount included$20.0 million to implement a glass fragmentation program ; $13.0 million toimplement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; and amounts necessary to providereimbursable special services such as fencing , lighting , and guard booths on privateor other property not owned by the federal government as may be appropriate toenable the u.s. secret service to perform its protective functions .

the committeealso recommended that the following amounts be made available from the fbf:$161.4 million for installment acquisition payments ; $3.7 billion for rental of space ; and $1.7 billion for building operations .

as passed in the house , h.r .

5025 directs that $522.3 million remain available until expended for new construction projects from the fbf .

anadditional $931.2 million was to remain available until expended for repairs andalterations .

this amount also included $20.0 million to implement a glassfragmentation program ; $13.0 million to implement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; and amounts necessary to provide reimbursable special services such as fencing,lighting , and guard booths on private or other property not owned by the federalgovernment , as may be appropriate to enable the u.s. secret service to perform itsprotective functions pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

3056 .

h.r .

5025 also directedthat the following amounts be made available from the fbf: $161.4 million forinstallment acquisition payments ; $3.7 billion for rental of space ; and $1.7 billion forbuilding operations .

the president's fy2005 budget requested that $650.2 million remain available until expended for new construction projects from the federal buildings fund , whichtotals $7.2 billion .

this amount included $381.0 million for the construction of threenew courthouses .

an additional $980.2 million was to remain available untilexpended for repairs and alterations .

this amount included $135.1 million forrepairs to five existing courthouses ; $20.0 million to implement a glass fragmentationprogram ; $13.0 million to implement a chlorofluorocarbons program ; and amountsto provide such reimbursable fencing , lighting , guard booths , and other facilities onprivate or other property not in government ownership or control as may beappropriate to enable the united states secret service to perform its protectivefunctions pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

3056 .

electronic government fund ( e - gov fund ) .

the fund was ultimately allocated $3 million in theconsolidated appropriations legislation approved by both houses of congress .

thiswas $2 million less than the $5 million requested by the president .

the house hadprovided the amount requested by the president , but the senate had approved the $3million allocation recommended , without any explanation for the reduction , by itscommittee on appropriations .

although the president had requested $5 million for the e - gov fund for fy2005 , the account statement in the appendix to the president's proposed fy2005 budgetstated: "in addition to the $5 million requested for this appropriation , it is proposedthat an additional $40 million will be made available for this activity from surplusrevenues generated in the general supply fund. .

 ( 91 ) those two figures equal the $45million requested for fy2004 , but were $42 million more than the $3 million actuallyallocated by congress for fy2004 .

the fund received an appropriation of $5 millionin both fy2002 and fy2003 .

the account statement for the general supply fund explains that it "finances certain activities within the federal supply service ( fss ) and the federaltechnology service ( fts ) " of gsa .

the "fss offers federal agencies an extensiverange of commercial services and more than 4 million commercial products. .

theseservices and products are "provided by commercial suppliers through more than10,000 fss contractors .

in fy2003 , fss' business volume was $33.8 billion , andis projected to be $38.5 billion in fy2005. .

 ( 92 ) funding for the electronic government fund has been a somewhat contentious matter between the president and congress .

on february 28 , 2001 , in advance of hisproposed budget for fy2002 , the president released: a blueprint for newbeginnings: a responsible budget for america's priorities .

intended as a 10-yearbudget plan , the blueprint , among other innovations , proposed the establishment ofan electronic government account seeded with "$10 million in 2002 as the firstinstallment of a fund - - that will grow to a total of $100 million over three years - - to support interagency electronic government ( e - gov ) initiatives. .

managed by omb , the fund was foreseen as supporting "projects that operate across agency boundaries," facilitating "the development of a public keyinfrastructure to implement digital signatures that are accepted across agencies forsecure online communications," and furthering "the administration's ability toimplement the government paperwork elimination act of 1998 , which calls uponagencies to provide the public with optional use and acceptance of electronicinformation , services and signatures , when practicable , by october 2003. .

 ( 93 ) aboutone month later , on march 22 , omb announced that the administration had decidedto double the amount to be allocated to the e - gov fund , bringing it to $20 million .

 ( 94 ) as included in the president's fy2002 budget , the fund was established as an account within the general services administration ( gsa ) , to be administered by theadministrator of general services "to support interagency projects , approved by thedirector of the office of management and budget , that enable the federalgovernment to expand its ability to conduct activities electronically , through thedevelopment and implementation of innovative uses of the internet and otherelectronic methods. .

the president's initial request for the fund was $20 million , to remain available until september 30 , 2004 .

congress , however , appropriated $5 million for the fundfor fy2002 , to remain available until expended .

appropriators specified thattransfers of monies from the fund to federal agencies could not be made until 10 daysafter a proposed spending plan and justification for each project to be undertakenusing such monies had been submitted to the committees on appropriations .

expressing general support for the purposes of the fund , they also recommended , andboth chambers agreed , that the administration work with the house committee ongovernment reform and the senate committee on governmental affairs to clarifythe status of its authorization .

the president's budget for fy2003 recognized "gsa as operator of the official federal portal for providing citizens with one - stop access to federal services via theinternet or telephone" and , therefore , a key agency in implementing the president'se - gov vision , which will "require cross - agency approaches that permit citizens,businesses , and state and local governments to easily obtain services from , andelectronically transact business with the federal government. .

in this regard , anadministration interagency quicksilver e - gov task force , according to the budget,had "identified 23 high priority internet services for early development. .

seeking $45 million for the e - gov fund , the budget acknowledged that this amount was "a significant increase over the $20 million requested in 2002," butnoted that the request "is supported by specific project plans developed by thequicksilver task force. .

 ( 95 ) furthermore,according to the fund account statement,these monies "would also further the administration's implementation of thegovernment paperwork elimination act ( gpea ) of 1998 , which calls upon agenciesto provide the public with optional use and acceptance of electronic information,services , and signatures , when practicable , by october 2003. .

the house appropriators again rejected the amount requested by the president and recommended $5 million for the fund , reiterating , as previously , that transfers ofmonies from the fund to federal agencies could not be made until 10 days aftersubmission of project information to the committees on appropriations .

the housecommittee also declined to recommend an appropriation for the fund as a gsaaccount , but did fund it as an account under the jurisdiction of omb .

 ( 96 ) senateappropriators , however , recommended the full $45 million requested by thepresident .

their report stated that omb "would control the allocation of the fundand direct its use for information systems projects and affect multiple agencies andoffer the greatest improvements in access and service. .

 ( 97 ) final funding , nonetheless,was $5 million .

the president again requested $45 million for the fund for fy2004 .

house appropriators provided $1 million , offered no report language regarding this reducedamount , but noted that the fund had been authorized by the e - government act of2002 , which had previously been a matter of concern for appropriators .

 ( 98 ) thisallocation was subsequently approved by the house .

the senate approved $5 millionfor the fund , as recommended by its appropriators .

ultimately , a midpointcompromise of $3 million was set by conferees and adopted by each chamber .

national archives and records administration ( nara ) .

the custodian of the historically valuable records of thefederal government since its establishment in 1934 , nara also prescribes policy andprovides both guidance and management assistance concerning the entire life cycleof federal records .

it also administers the presidential libraries system ; publishes thelaws , regulations , and presidential and other documents ; and assists the informationsecurity oversight office ( isoo ) , which manages federal security classification anddeclassification policy ; and the national historical publications and recordscommission ( nhprc ) , which makes grants nationwide to help nonprofitorganizations identify , preserve , and provide access to materials that documentamerican history .

the funds ultimately allocated to nara by the consolidated appropriations legislation , as approved by both houses of congress , were a little over $321 million,an amount very close to the funds recommended by senator appropriators .

thisamount , however , was almost $20 million more than those provided by the house,and $17 million more than the president's request .

of this $321 million , thefollowing distributions were specified: $266.9 for operating expenses , $35.9 for theelectronic records archives , $13.4 for repairs and restoration , and $5 for the nhprc .

within the repairs and restoration account , $3 million was specified for a newregional archives facility in anchorage , ak , and $2 for repairs and restoration at thelyndon b. johnson presidential library in austin , tx .

the house had earlier approved the $302.2 million recommended by the committee on appropriations for nara , a reduction of a little less than $2 millionfrom the amount sought by the president .

this reduction largely fell in the operatingexpenses account , for which $264.2 million had been recommended .

amountsproposed for the electronic records archive and the nhprc were at the levelrequested by the president .

an additional $1 million had been recommended abovethe $6.1 million requested for repairs and restoration .

the senate committee on appropriations had recommended a little over $320 million for nara , exceeding the president's request by $16 million .

of the amount,$266.9 million was allocated for operating expenses ; $35.9 million for electronicrecords archives ; $12.1 for repairs and restoration ; and $5 million for the nhprc .

the president had requested $304 million for nara for fy2005 , which was approximately $2.6 million less than the $306.6 million appropriated for fy2004 .

the bulk of this new amount , $266.9 million , was sought for operating expenses,which is approximately $10 million more than the $255 million allocated to thisaccount for fy2004 .

in addition , of the requested amount , $6.1 million would havefunded repairs and restoration and $3 million would have been provided to thenhprc .

these requests were significantly lower than the $13.6 million appropriatedfor repairs and restoration and the almost $10 million provided to the nhprc forfy2004 .

when congress approved $35.7 million for fy2004 for the new electronicrecords archive account , $22 million of this amount was designated to remainavailable until the end of fy2006 .

the president requested $35.9 million for thisaccount for fy2005 .

merit systems protection board ( mspb ) .

the mspb serves as guardian of the federal government'smerit - based system of employment .

the agency carries out its mission by hearingand deciding appeals from federal employees of removals and other major personnelactions .

the mspb also hears and decides other types of civil service cases , reviewsopm regulations , and conducts studies of the merit systems .

the agency's efforts areto assure that personnel actions taken involving employees are processed within thelaw and that actions taken by opm and other agencies support and enhance federalmerit principles .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $37.3 million for the mspb .

the fy2004 appropriation was $32.9 million , but after the 0.59%rescission was reduced to $32.7 million .

in addition , up to $2.626 million foradministrative expenses could be transferred from the civil service retirement anddisability fund to adjudicate retirement appeals .

after the 0.59% rescission , theamount available for transfer was reduced to up to $2.611 million .

the requestedamount is 5.7% more than the fy2004 total funding after the rescission .

as in its fy2004 budget proposal , mspb again proposed that the funding previously provided from the trust fund for adjudication of civil service retirementappeals be requested as part of the agency's regular appropriation .

ombrecommended this change to simplify financial record keeping .

the fy2005 budgetproposal does not specify how much of the requested $37.3 million would beallocated as transferred funds for adjudication purposes .

the house and senatecommittees on appropriations in fy2004 did not agree with the proposal andinstead recommended ( with the conferees concurring ) that the trust fund transfer becontinued .

according to the house committee report accompanying h.r .

2989 , the committee decided to continue the practice of appropriating funds to mspb from the civil service retirement and disability fund rather thandiscontinuing this practice as requested by the president ; this request has not beenadequately justified .

 ( 99 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended , and the house passed , an appropriation of $34.7 million and a trust fund transfer of up to $2.620 million .

the recommended appropriation is $2.6 million less than the president's request .

according to the committee report accompanying the house bill , "the decrease ...reflects the committee's decision to continue the practice of appropriating funds tomspb from the civil service retirement and disability fund rather thandiscontinuing this practice as proposed in the budget request as this proposal has notbeen adequately justified. .

 ( 100 ) the senate committee on appropriations recommended and the conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $34.7 million , $2.6 million lessthan the president's request .

after the 0.80% rescission , the fy2005 funding is$34.4 million , a reduction of $2.9 million from the president's request .

thecommittee report accompanying the senate bill states that "the decrease from thepresident's request reflects the committee's decision to continue the practice ofappropriating funds to mspb from the civil service retirement and disability fundrather than discontinuing this practice as requested by the president ; this request hasnot been adequately justified. .

 ( 101 ) thecommittee recommended and the conferenceagreement and the law provide the same amount as the president requested for thetrust fund transfer ( up to $2.626 million ) .

after the 0.80% rescission , this amountwould be up to $2.605 million , a reduction of $21,000 from the president's request .

office of personnel management ( opm ) .

the budget for opm is composed of budget authority forboth permanent and current appropriations .

this report discusses the budgetauthority for current appropriations .

the agency "is the central human resourcesagency for the federal government and the primary agency helping the presidentcarry out his responsibilities in managing the federal workforce. .

the strategichuman resources policy division "designs , develops , and leads the implementationof innovative , flexible , merit - based human resources policies and strategies thatenable federal agencies to meet their missions and achieve their goals. .

 ( 102 ) thehuman capital leadership and merit system accountability division assistsagencies in implementing and assessing human capital standards .

the humanresources products and services division supports federal agencies by administeringretirement and insurance programs , providing personnel investigation services,managerial and executive training , and other human resources services .

the office of inspector general ( oig ) conducts audits , investigations , evaluations , and inspections throughout the agency and may issue administrativesanctions related to the operation of the federal employees health benefits programthat "debar from participation in the health insurance program those health careproviders whose conduct may pose a threat to the financial integrity of the programitself or to the well - being of insurance program enrollees. .

 ( 103 ) the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $18.2 billion for opm .

this total includes discretionary funding of $131.3 million ( 104 ) for opmsalaries and expenses and $1.627 million for oig salaries and expenses .

it alsoincludes mandatory funding of $8.1 billion for the government payment forannuitants of the employees health benefits program , ( 105 ) $35 million for thegovernment payment for annuitants of the employee life insurance program , and $9.8billion for payment to the civil service retirement and disability fund .

included inthis total as well are trust fund transfers of $128.5 million ( 106 ) to the opm salaries andexpenses account ( for administrative expenses for the retirement and insuranceprograms ) and $16.461 million ( 107 ) to the oigsalaries and expenses account ( foradministrative expenses to audit , investigate , and provide other oversight of opm'sretirement and insurance programs ) .

according to opm's budget submission , the $131.3 million requested for salaries and expenses "includes $114.876 million in annual funds , $11.415 millionin no - year funds for e - government ( e - gov ) projects , and $5 million in two - yearfunds to coordinate and conduct program evaluation and performance measurement .

"the budget submission states that "annual funds include an increase of $3,042,000...to provide human capital support , hiring solutions , enhanced it support , competitivesourcing studies , and homeland security and emergency response. .

 ( 108 ) with regard to the oig , the budget reported that the amount requested will finance more audit staff , special agent criminal investigators , and improved information systems .

opm expects toreduce the audit cycle to 2.9 years for fehbp [federal employees health benefitsplan] carriers .

total recoveries are expected to increase by $14 million annually .

in2005 , opm will add audits of pharmacy benefit managers and expand the scope ofaudits for the largest community - rated health plans ( comprehensive medical planscommonly referred to as health maintenance organizations ) participating infehbp .

 ( 109 ) the fy2004 appropriation for opm was $17.5 billion after the 0.59% rescission .

the requested amount for fy2005 is 4% more than the fy2004 totalfunding after the rescission .

specifically , it is 10.5% more than the $118.8 millionappropriated in fy2004 for salaries and expenses after the rescission ; 9.3% morethan the $1.5 million for oig salaries and expenses after the rescission ; 12.5% morethan the $7.2 billion for the government payment for annuitants of the employeeshealth benefits program ; the same amount ( $35 million ) for the government paymentfor annuitants of the employee life insurance program ; 2.2% less than the $10.0billion for payment to the civil service retirement and disability fund ; 4.9% less thanthe $135.1 million for opm salaries and expenses transferred from trust funds afterthe rescission ; and 14.8% more than the $14.3 million for oig salaries and expensestransferred from trust funds after the rescission .

 ( 110 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended , and the house passed , an appropriation of $120.4 million for opm salaries and expenses , $10.9 million lessthan the president's request .

the funds for the enterprise human resourcesintegration project , the government - wide initiative to modernize the federal payrollsystems and service delivery , the e - human resources information system project , andthe e - clearance project would be allocated in the same manner as the presidentrequested .

the recruitment one stop project would be appropriated $3.3 million .

theappropriations recommended for oig salaries and expenses , the employees healthbenefits program , the employee life insurance program , the civil service retirementand disability fund , and the trust fund transfers to the opm and oig salaries andexpenses accounts are the same amounts as the president requested .

the trust fundsunder the opm salaries and expenses account would be allocated as the presidentrequested .

the house committee on appropriations' committee report accompanying the house bill lists appropriations for specific programs as follows: performance cultureunder strategic human resources policy should not exceed the fy2004 funding levelof $5.8 million , providing advice to agencies under human capital leadership meritsystems accountability should not exceed the fy2004 funding level of $16.8 million,the compliance program under human capital leadership merit systems accountabilityshould not exceed the fy2004 funding level of $16.5 million , management strategyis funded at $46.2 million , e - gov initiative fees are not funded , completion of thecurrent retirement readiness project is funded at $250,000 , and expansion of theproject to non - federal government employees is funded at $500,000 .

within 60 daysof the act's enactment , opm is directed to submit an operating plan for fy2005,signed by the director , to the house and senate committees on appropriations .

theplan "should include funding levels for the various offices , programs and initiativescovered in the budget justification and supporting documents referenced in the houseand senate appropriations reports , and the statement of the managers. .

according tothe committee report the committee finds that the budget justification materials are severely lacking in any real detail about the programsproposed or underway at opm and the resources involved .

many of the verbosedescriptions in the budget justification did not provide concrete information on theprograms , activities and funding requirements and changes to opm'swork. .

 ( 111 ) additionally , opm is directed "to include with the 'annual report on locality - based comparability payments for the general schedule' in fy2005 andall future fiscal years a report comparing the total pay and non - pay compensationpackages of the federal workforce and the private sector" and , within 30 days of theact's enactment , "respond to the formal request of the butner low securitycorrectional institution regarding its petition on the centralcarolina / richmond - petersburg wage area. .

 ( 112 ) the committee report notes thatopm's decision to make health savings accounts a part of the federal employees'benefits package is welcomed .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended an appropriation of $130.6 million for opm salaries and expenses which is $691,000 less than thepresident's request .

the total would be allocated as follows: enterprise humanresources integration project ( $1.9 million ) ; leading the government - wide initiativeto modernize the federal payroll systems and service delivery ( $6.2 million ) ; e - human resources information system project ( $748,000 ) ; e - clearance project ( $1.9 million ) ; and coordination and conduct of program evaluation and performancemeasurement ( $5 million would remain available through september 30 , 2006 ) .

thecommittee report accompanying the senate bill states that "no more than $10,724,000is to be used for e - government projects. .

 ( 113 ) the committee recommended funding in the same amounts as the president requested for oig salaries and expenses , the employees health benefits program , theemployee life insurance program , the civil service retirement and disability fund,and the trust fund transfers to the opm and oig salaries and expenses accounts .

ofthe total transferred from trust funds to the opm salaries and expenses account ( $128.5 million ) , $27.6 million would fund automation of the retirement recordkeeping systems .

the senate bill also would provide that none of the funds appropriated or made available under this act or any other appropriations act could be used to implementor enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowshipprogram , or to implement opm's proposed regulations , relating to the detail ofexecutive branch employees to the legislative branch , published in the federalregister on september 9 , 2003 .

if the proposed regulations are final on this act'senactment date , none of the funds appropriated or made available under this act couldbe used to implement , administer , or enforce such final regulations .

the senate committee on appropriations directs the gao , in consultation with opm and the gsa , to study the child care needs of federal employees in executive,legislative , and judicial branch agencies .

gao is "to provide guidance andrecommendations of possible options to develop and evaluate additional child carefacility needs and how best to serve the needs of all federal employees. .

opm isdirected "to reevaluate its efforts to provide information and education to agencies"on programs which provide subsidized child care for lower income employees .

 ( 114 ) with regard to opm's ongoing program to automate and streamline the processes for administering the federal retirement program , the committeerecommends that opm continue to seek gao guidance and support .

the gao isdirected "to do a comprehensive audit on the problems and any mismanagement ofthe modernization project. .

 ( 115 ) the conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $125.5 million for opm salaries and expenses , of which $12 million shall remain availableuntil september 30 , 2007 .

this amount is $5.8 million less than the president'srequest .

funding in the same amounts as the president requested is provided for oigsalaries and expenses , the employees health benefits program , the employee lifeinsurance program , the civil service retirement and disability fund , and the trust fundtransfers to the opm and oig salaries and expenses accounts .

of the moneyappropriated for the trust fund transfer from the opm salaries and expenses account,$27.6 million shall remain available until expended for the cost of automating theretirement recordkeeping systems .

after the 0.80% rescission , the fy2005 fundingfor opm salaries and expenses is $124.5 million , for oig salaries and expenses is$1.614 million , for the trust fund transfer from the opm salaries and expensesaccount is $127.4 million , and from the oig salaries and expenses account is$16.329 million .

these amounts represent reductions from the president's requestof $6.8 million , $13,000 , $1.1 million , and $132,000 , respectively .

according to the conference report , the conferees have not included bill language identifying specific resource levels for various e - gov projects ... but direct the officenot to exceed the funding levels for the following projects: $1,870,000 for theenterprise human resources integration project , $6,219,000 for the federal payrollproject , $748,000 for the e - human resources information system project , and$1,887,000 for the e - clearance project .

to accommodate the obligation rate of theseprojects ... $12,000,000 of the funds are made available until september 30 , 2007 .

no funds are provided for the recruitment one stop project or the program evaluationand performance assessment project .

provide $250,000 to complete the retirement readiness project [and] ... urge the office to expand the ... project tonon - federal employees .

allow the director the flexibility to allocate the budget resources consistent with the direction provided in this statementof the managers and the budget justifications .

the conferees reiterate the directionin the house report to submit an operating plan within 60 days of enactment of thisact to the house and senate committees on appropriations detailing programfunding levels for fiscal year 2005. reiterates the house direction to the director to respond to the butner low security correctional institution petitionwithin 30 days of enactment of this act .

direct the director to submit a report by march 4 , 2005 comparing the pay and non - pay compensation packages of the federalworkforce and the private sector .

expect opm and gsa , with technical assistance from gao , to work collaboratively to collect data on child care needs,analyze options to meet the identified needs , and provide the data and analysis togao .

the conferees direct gao to review the data and analyses and provide anevaluation of the results to the committees on appropriations .

the conferees expectan update on the status of these efforts 90 days after enactment of this act ... theconferees reiterate the senate direction to the office to reevaluate efforts to informlow - income employees of programs to assist with child careexpenses .

 ( 116 ) human capital performance fund .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $300 million for thisfund .

the fy2004 appropriation was $1 million , but after the 0.59% rescission was$994,000 .

the fund is designed to create performance - driven pay systems for employees and reinforce the value of employee performancemanagement systems .

it will provide additional pay over and above any annual,across - the - board pay raise to certain civilian employees based on individual ororganizational performance and / or other critical agency human capital needs .

ninetypercent of funds appropriated are to be distributed to agencies on a pro rata basis,upon opm approval of an agency's plan .

the remainder , and any amount withheldfrom agencies due to inadequate plans , will be allocated at the discretion ofopm .

 ( 117 ) the house committee on appropriations recommended , and the house passed , an appropriation of $12.5 million .

this amount is $287.5 million less than thepresident's request .

the house bill would allow the opm director to determine andtransfer to federal agencies such amounts as necessary to carry out the purposes ofthe fund .

no funds would be obligated or transferred until the director has notifiedthe relevant subcommittees of the committees on appropriations of the approval ofan agency's performance plan and the prior approval of such subcommittees has beenobtained .

opm is directed to report annually to the house and senate appropriationscommittees "on the performance pay plans that have been approved , and theamounts that have been obligated or transferred. .

 ( 118 ) the senate committee on appropriations did not recommend and the conference agreement and the law do not provide funding for the performance fund.the committee report accompanying the senate bill states that such an initiative"should be budgeted and administered within the salaries and expenses of eachindividual agency. .

 ( 119 ) office of special counsel ( osc ) .

the agency investigates federal employee allegations of prohibited personnelpractices and , when appropriate , prosecutes matters before the merit systemsprotection board ; provides a channel for whistle blowing by federal employees ; andenforces the hatch act .

in carrying out the latter activity , the osc issues bothwritten and oral advisory opinions .

the osc may require an agency to investigatewhistle blower allegations and report to the congress and the president asappropriate .

the president's fy2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $15.449 million for the osc .

the fy2004 appropriation was $13.5 million , but after the 0.59%rescission was reduced to $13.4 million .

the requested amount is 15.1% more thanthe fy2004 funding after the rescission .

according to the budget , the funding "willenable osc to hire the additional staff needed to increase the case closure rate .

without additional staff , case backlogs will continue to increase at osc. .

 ( 120 ) the house and senate committees on appropriations recommended , the house passed , and the conference agreement and the law provide the same amount as thepresident requested .

after the 0.80% rescission , the fy2005 funding is $15.325million , a reduction of $124,000 from the president's request .

aware of osc'scritical need for more staff to address its case backlog of more than three years , thecommittee report accompanying the senate bill states that "the committee expectsosc to acquire an appropriate mix of new staff that will maximize its ability toreduce this backlog" instead of hiring just attorneys .

no later than march 31 , 2005,osc must report to the committees on appropriations on "the status of its staffingefforts , particularly describing those new positions hired and how the reduction ofosc's case backlog has benefitted as a result of the new personnel. .

 ( 121 ) postal service .

the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) is self - supporting ; it generates nearly all of its funding - - about $69billion annually - - by charging users of the mail for the costs of the services itprovides .

it does receive a regular appropriation from congress , however , tocompensate for revenue it forgoes in providing , at congressional direction , freemailing privileges for the blind and visually impaired and for overseas voting .

theappropriation is termed for "revenue forgone," because it is intended to reimburseusps for the revenue it would have collected from the blind and state voting officesif congress had not chosen to subsidize these services through appropriations .

theterrorist attacks in the fall of 2001 , however , including use of the mail for deliveryof anthrax spores to congressional and media offices , generated new funding needsfor bio - terrorism detection that usps contends should be met through appropriations .

under the revenue forgone reform act of 1993 , congress is authorized to reimburse usps $29 million each year until 2035 , for services provided below costto non - profit organizations at congressional direction in the 1990s , but not paid forat the time .

for the past 11 years , the postal service appropriation has consisted ofthat amount , plus an estimate of the amount needed to pay for mail for the blind andoverseas voters for the current year .

there is also a reconciliation adjustmentreflected in the current year budget to bring actual payments into line with pastestimates .

 ( for more information , see crs report rs21025 , the postal revenueforgone appropriation: overview and current issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in fy2004 , usps received a revenue forgone appropriation of $65.5 million , including $36.5 million for revenue forgone in fy2004 but not payable until october1 , 2004 , and the $29 million due annually under the revenue forgone reform actof 1993 .

the actual estimate for revenue forgone in fy2004 was $55.7 million , butit was reduced by $19.2 million as a reconciliation adjustment to reflect actual versusestimated free mail volume in 2001 .

in its fy2005 budget , the administration proposed an appropriation of $61.7 million , including $55.6 million for revenue forgone in fy2005 .

the postal serviceestimated that the fy2005 amount would be $69.8 million , or $14.2 million morethan omb requested , and asked congress to appropriate that amount .

either amountwould be supplemented by a $6.1 million reconciliation adjustment reflecting thatactual use of the subsidy in fy2002 was underestimated by that amount .

theadministration's budget proposed that the $61.7 million would not be available forobligation until october 1 , 2005 , which is in fy2006 .

however , usps will haveavailable for obligation during fy2005 the $36.5 million provided for revenueforgone in fiscal 2004 .

in its fy2002 budget , the bush administration had proposedto "reverse the misleading budget practice of using advance appropriations simplyto avoid [annual] spending limitations. .

the administration has not renewed theproposal in its three subsequent budgets .

the postmaster general , in testimony before the house appropriations subcommittee on transportation , treasury , and independent agencies on february26 , 2004 , complained about the $14.2 million cut proposed by omb in fy2005revenue forgone .

he said that it would "only compound the financial burden caused"by the recent practice of delaying the revenue forgone payment until the year afterthat in which the services are rendered .

of greater consequence was the fact that the administration's fy2005 budget did not include the usual $29 million annual payment for revenue forgone in pastyears that is set forth in the revenue forgone reform act .

as explained above , theact authorized annual payments to usps of $29 million through the year 2035 .

for11 years the payment was provided as a matter of course .

in its fy2005 budget,however , the bush administration proposed to provide no funds for the payment , andincluded it in the list of 65 "terminations to discretionary programs" in the budget.in response to questions on the matter , omb pointed out that the revenue forgonereform act of 1993 only authorized the appropriations , and many programs acrossgovernment are not funded at the levels contemplated in authorization acts .

omb also mentioned that congress and the administration had relieved usps of the obligation ( in p.l .

108-18 , the postal civil service retirement systemfunding reform act of 2003 ) to pay $3 billion per year for pension costs and that,as a result , usps had $3.8 billion in net income in 2003 .

 ( for more on relievingusps of this obligation , which would have over - funded postal pensions by $78billion , see crs report rl31684 , funding postal service obligations to the civilservice retirement system , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl32346 , pension issues cloud postal reform , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

usps , on theother hand , argues that cancelling the payment could result in the whole 30-yearobligation , totaling $899 million , being written off as a bad debt and charged tocurrent postal ratepayers .

 ( this issue is discussed further in crs report rs21025 , the postal revenue forgone appropriation: overview and current issues , by nyestevens. ) .

in its detailed justification of its fy2005 budget request , usps asked congress for an additional $779 million in emergency response funds to protect the safety ofemployees and customers from threats such as the 2001 anthrax attack .

the fundswould be used to continue acquisition and deployment of ventilation and filtrationequipment that was begun with $762 million provided in fy2002 specifically foremergency response .

the administration's fy2005 budget does not include anyadditional funds for emergency preparedness for the postal service .

the house committee on appropriations recommended , and the house passed , the amounts requested in the president's budget , including $61.7 million as anadvance appropriation not available until fy2006 , and elimination of theappropriation for revenue forgone in past years .

in its report , the house committeeon appropriations expressed concern that omb had not given sufficient attention tothe safety and security of the nation's mail system in its fy2005 budget request , anddirected omb to report within 90 days of the bill's passage on the amount of federal ( i.e .

budgetary ) funding necessary to complete work on securing the mail system .

postal issues were not brought to the house floor preceding the passage of the housetransportation , treasury and general government appropriations bill ( h.r .

5025 ) on september 22 .

the senate committee on appropriations , in its report on s. 2806 , was more generous toward the postal service than either the administration or thehouse in its bill .

in addition to the amounts requested by the administration andreflected in the house bill , the senate committee recommended that the $29 millionpayment for past revenue forgone be continued in fy2005 .

it also recommended theappropriation of $507 million to an emergency preparedness account for usps toreimburse it for past and future expenditures on a biohazard detection program,ventilation and filtration equipment , and the construction of a mail irradiation facilityin washington , dc , for the local irradiation of government mail that is now shippedto a contractor facility in bridgeport , nj , and back .

conferees provided $598 million for the postal service for fy2005 , an increase of $502 million over fy2004 .

this appropriation includes $507 million forbiohazard protection .

this section of the report discusses , briefly , general provisions such asgovernment - wide guidance on basic infrastructure and overhead policies that arecustomarily included in the transportation , treasury , and independent agenciesappropriation legislation .

examples are provisions related to the buy america act,drug - free federal workplaces , and authorizing agencies to pay gsa bills for spacerenovation and other services .

in the past provisions have been included which relateto specific agencies or programs .

for both transportation - and treasury - relatedgeneral provisions and government - wide general provisions , with noted exceptions,the sections discussed here will be those which are new in the fy2005 budget orwhich contain modified policies .

there are also general provisions at the end of eachindividual title within the bill which relate only to agencies and accounts within thattitle .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions can be found in the fy2005 budget appendix .

 ( 122 ) most of the generalprovisions continued language which has appeared under that title for several years .

for an array of reasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language ispreferable to placing the provisions in permanent law .

the administration recommended dropping several such provisions .

the provisions are shown in table 10 .

table 10 .

summary of proposed changes to government - wide general provisions 1 unless otherwise indicated , all references to sections in the "2004 act" in this table refer to the general provisions in division f , title vi of the fy2004 consolidatedappropriations act ( p.l .

108-199 ) .

arc: amtrak reform council aip: airport improvement program ( faa ) air21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation araa: the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-134 ) , the current amtrak authorizing legislation atsa: the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l .

107-71 ) , legislation which created the transportation security administration within the dot brr: bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( fhwa ) bts: bureau of transportation statistics cg: coast guard cmaq: congestion mitigation and air quality program ( fhwa ) dot: department of transportation eas: essential air service ( faa ) f&e: facilities and equipment program ( faa ) faa: federal aviation administration fahp: federal - aid highway program ( fhwa ) fair21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l .

106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation fhwa: federal highway administration fra: federal railroad administration fta: federal transit administration hazmat: hazardous materials ( safety program in rspa ) hpp: high priority projects ( fhwa ) htf: highway trust fund im: interstate maintenance program ( fhwa ) its: intelligent transportation systems ( fhwa ) mcsap: motor carrier safety assistance program ( fmcsa ) new starts: part of the fta's capital grants and loans program which funds new fixed - guideway systems or extensions to existing systems nhs: national highway system ; also a program within fhwa nhtsa: national highway traffic safety administration nmcsa: national motor carrier safety administration o&m: operations and maintenance program ( faa ) oig: office of the inspector general of the dot ost: office of the secretary of transportation raba: revenue - aligned budget authority rd&t: research , development and technology program ( fhwa ) re&d: research , engineering and development program ( faa ) rspa: research and special projects administration scasd: small community air service development program ( faa ) stb: surface transportation board stp: surface transportation program ( fhwa ) tcsp: transportation and community and system preservation program ( fhwa ) tea - 21: transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) , the current highway and transit authorizing legislation tifia: transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( fhwa ) tsa: transportation security administratio .

transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget .

it isalso considered part of the discretionary budget .

funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources .

the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds .

the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds .

the transportation trust funds include the highway trust fund , whichcontains two accounts , the highway trust account and the transit account ; the airportand airway trust fund ; and the inland waterways trust fund .

all of these accountsderive their respective funding from specific excise and other taxes .

in fy2002 trust funds accounted for well over two - thirds of total federal transportation spending .

together , highway and transit funding constitute the largestcomponent of dot appropriations .

most highway and transit programs are fundedwith contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund .

this is verysignificant from a budgeting standpoint .

contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate .

under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation ; although appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations .

where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the oppositesituation .

that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under their controlalready exists , and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs also is inplace .

transportation budgeting uses a confusing lexicon ( for those unfamiliar with theprocess ) of budget authority and contract authority - - the latter , a form ofbudgetauthority .

contract authority provides obligational authority for the funding of trustfund - financed programs , such as the federal - aid highway program .

prior to tea - 21,changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had beenachieved in the appropriations process by combining changes in budget / contractauthority and placing limitations on obligations .

the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds tocongressional budget agreements .

contract authority is tantamount to , but does not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some future date .

under this arrangement , specifiedin title 23 u.s.c. , which tea - 21 amended , authorized funds are automatically madeavailable to the states at the beginning of each fiscal year and may be obligatedwithout appropriations legislation .

appropriations are required to make outlays atsome future date to cover these obligations .

tea - 21 greatly limited the role of theappropriations process in core highway and transit programs because the actenumerated the limitation on obligations level for the period fy1999 throughfy2003 in the statute .

highway and transit grant programs work on a reimbursable basis : states pay for projects up front and federal payments are made to them only when work iscompleted and vouchers are presented , months or even years after the project hasbegun .

work in progress is represented in the trust fund as obligated funds andalthough they are considered "used" and remain as commitments against the trustfund balances , they are not subtracted from balances .

trust fund balances,therefore , appear high in part because funds sufficient to cover actual and expectedfuture commitments must remain available .

both the highway and transit accounts have substantial short - and long - term commitments .

these include payments that will be made in the current fiscal yearas projects are completed and , to a much greater extent , outstanding obligations tobe made at some unspecified future date .

additionally , there are unobligatedamounts that are still dedicated to highway and transit projects , but have not beencommitted to specific projects .

two terms are associated with the distribution of contract authority funds to the states and to particular programs .

the first of these , apportionments , refers to fundsdistributed to the states for formula driven programs .

for example , all nationalhighway system ( nhs ) funds are apportioned to the states .

allocated funds , arefunds distributed on an administrative basis , typically to programs under directfederal control .

for example , federal lands highway program monies are allocated ; the allocation can be to another federal agency , to a state , to an indian tribe , or tosome other governmental entity .

these terms do not refer to the federal budgetprocess , but often provide a frame of reference for highway program recipients , whomay assume , albeit incorrectly , that a state apportionment is part of the federal budgetper se .

