the andean regional initiative was designed to provide assistance to seven countries in thebroadly defined andean region ( 9 ) : bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , and venezuela.the ari built on the clinton administration's 2000 "plan colombia" legislation , which sought toaddress the increasing cultivation of coca and heroin crops in colombia through the creation of acolombian army counternarcotics brigade , and sharply increased assistance for eradication andalternative development programs in the country's two southern provinces of putumayo and caquetã¡,the region where illegal coca production and a leftist guerrilla presence was expanding most rapidly .

the ari expanded assistance to help counter possible spill - over effects in six nearby countries: peruand bolivia , where past successes in reducing cocaine production could be threatened by expectedprogress in eradicating crops in colombia ; ecuador , the most exposed neighbor because of its borderwith colombia's putumayo province ; and brazil , venezuela and panama , where the threat isprimarily confined to common border areas with colombia .

the region is important to the united states because it includes the three major drugproducing countries ( colombia , bolivia , and peru ) where virtually all the world's cocaine and 60%of the heroin seized in the united states are produced .

it also includes two major oil producingcountries ( venezuela and ecuador ) , members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , which supply significant quantities of oil to the united states .

while the designatedcountries have diverse trading relationships , the united states is the major trading partner by far forall of them .

for the five traditional andean countries ( colombia , venezuela , ecuador , peru , andbolivia ) , the andes mountain range that runs through south america poses geographical obstaclesto intra - state and inter - state integration , but the countries are linked together in the andeancommunity economic integration pact .

the ari countries are some of the most heavily populatedin latin america , including the first ( brazil ) , third ( colombia ) , fifth ( peru ) , sixth ( venezuela ) , andeighth ( ecuador ) most populous .

although colombia and venezuela have largely european - indianmixed race ( mestizo ) populations , bolivia , peru , and ecuador have significant amerindianindigenous populations .

in 2003 , congress has acted on a variety of appropriation and authorization measures relatedto the andean region that are cited below .

in april 2003 , the congress passed an fy2003emergency wartime supplemental , to fund continuing operations in iraq , that also included fundingfor the andean counterdrug initiative .

on december 8 , 2003 , the house passed the fy2004consolidated appropriations bill ( h.r .

2673 / h.rept .

108-401 ) , which combined anumber of individual appropriations measures that had not yet been approved .

the bill passed thesenate on janaury 22 , 2004 , and was signed into law the next day ( p.l .

108-199 ) .

 fy2002 request and fy2002 allocations by purpose and by functionalaccounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state .

international affairs function 150 fiscal year 2003 budget request summary andhighlights .

these data include funding from accounts that comprise the andean regional initiative: international narcotics controland law enforcement ( incle .

 ) , andean counterdrug initiative , development aid , child survival and health aid , and foreign militaryfinancing .

the ari has not included ( and consequently these figures do not include ) international military education and trainingfunds , food aid , peace corps funds , or department of defense counternarcotics funds .

prepared by [author name scrubbed] and connieveillette , updated july 17 , 2003 .

totals may not add due to rounding .

the ari for fy2002 also did not include foreign military finance funding ( fmf ) .

the small amount for bolivia is included here,even though it was not specifically for counternarcotics purposes , in order to facilitate comparisons with the fy2003 request , whichincludes fmf for andean regional initiative countries .

amounts for colombia do not include funds from the fy2002 supplemental:$4 million for aci ; $25 million in counter - kidnaping training ; and $6 million to protect the cano - limon oil pipeline .

similarly,amounts for ecuador do not include $3 million in fmf funds .

 fy2003 request and fy2003 allocations by purpose and by functionalaccounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state .

international affairs function 150 fiscal year 2004 budget request summary andhighlights .

february 2003 .

estimates for fy2003 were provided to crs by the department of state .

these data include fundingfrom accounts that comprise the andean regional initiative: international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , andeancounterdrug initiative , development aid , child survival and health aid , and foreign military financing .

the ari has not included ( andconsequently these figures do not include ) international military education and training funds , food aid , peace corps funds , ordepartment of defense counternarcotics funds .

totals may not add due to rounding .

note: amounts for colombia include the fy2003 emergency wartime supplemental .

not included here , because it is not part ofthe ari , is $34 million from dod's counternarcotics program .

prepared by [author name scrubbed] , analyst in latin american affairs , july17 , 2003 .

 fy2004 request by purpose and functional accounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state , resources , plans and policy .

international affairs function 150 summary and highlights,fiscal year 2004 budget request .

prepared by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in international security affairs , and [author name scrubbed],analyst in latin american affairs , updated july 17 , 2003 .

note: the budget documents submitted by the administration make reference to the andean counterdrug initiative only .

it does notreference the andean regional initiative , which has since its inception , included funding for development assistance , children survivaland health , and economic support fund programs .

for purposes of this report , both are included for comparative purposes withprevious years' funding levels .

