severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , a new , highly infectious viral disease , was firstidentified by the world health organization ( who ) in february 2003 .

it is believed to have hadits beginnings in china's guangdong province in november 2002 .

a respiratory disease that causesflu - like symptoms which may progress to pneumonia , sars has an average fatality rate of 15% .

between november 2002 and july 2003 , a total of 8,437 cases and 813 deaths were reported in 31countries .

 ( 1 ) while the overall numbers are not high by comparison with other serious infectious diseases , the speed and distance with which sars spread raised an alarm over the potential risks tointernational public health .

containment appears to be working ; however , there are fears thatanother sars outbreak might take place during the regular influenza season later in 2003 .

thisreport reviews the global response by who and those countries most affected .

it also examines thechallenges that may lie ahead should another outbreak of sars ( or another unknown infectiousdisease ) occur .

 ( 2 ) .

since late february , when who first identified the outbreak of what later became known asthe severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , it has played a key role in the global response tothe disease .

sars is a striking example of the risks to international public health posed by suchinfectious diseases .

it also highlights the need for appropriate mechanisms of containment,particularly as global travel has become the primary means of spreading the disease around theworld .

following its initial assessment , who made containment of sars its main goal .

"despite the lack of understanding about the disease , its cause , and future evolution , the need was great tointroduce a series of emergency measures to contain sars outbreaks in the affected areas andprevent further international spread , thus reducing opportunities for the new disease to establishitself. .

 ( 3 ) although who's representative in china,henk bekedam , reportedly said on june 5 , 2003that the outbreak of sars had reached its peak worldwide , ( 4 ) who continues to stress the importanceof sustaining international public health measures against sars and working towards eliminatingit as a public health threat .

the sars outbreak may reveal valuable lessons about the effectivenessof who's surveillance and response systems , and its capacity to respond to similar outbreaks in thefuture .

examining the evolution of sars also demonstrates the chains of transmission and role ofthe who in responding to unfolding events .

although who led an unprecedented global collaborative effort to contain sars , the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) also played a key role in the global partnership .

for more information on the role of the cdc in relation to sars , see crs report rl31937 , sars:public health situation and u.s .

response .

the sars virus rapidly spread to 30 countries , ultimately infecting 8,437 people , of whom 813died .

 ( 32 ) each country handled the virus differently .

some countries , like vietnam , immediatelycalled for international support .

others , like china , initially downplayed the severity of the viruswithin their borders .

although the united states reported 75 sars cases it had no sars - relateddeaths .

 ( 33 ) countries experiencing five or moresars deaths are discussed in this section .

othercountries that reported sars deaths include: france ( 1 ) , malaysia ( 2 ) , philippines ( 2 ) , south africa ( 1 ) , and thailand ( 2 ) .

the sars outbreak has provided lessons that may have future application .

the who / cdcintervention greatly increased the effectiveness of the global response .

a number of factorsinfluenced the outcome , such as the system of global alerts and awareness , and access to immediate,high - level research and scientific collaboration .

coordinated efforts through the who / cdc,national governments , and the public health professionals also led to positive results , as in the caseof vietnam .

dr. julie gerberding , director of the centers for disease control and prevention , hadhigh praise for who's leadership during the crisis and emphasized communication and transparencyas key to responding to international health crises .

areas in which improvements have been calledfor in the global response to infectious disease threats include .

lack of transparency in promptly reporting and monitoring sars outbreaks directly contributed to the spread of the disease worldwide and had wide - ranging impacts beyond the obvioushealth factors .

the case of sars demonstrated that state responsibility within a globalized worlddoes not end at its borders and that future containment relies on openness and cooperation in theinterests of all populations .

the ability of public health systems and the availability of resources to deal with a threat like sars were clearly inadequate .

addressing the need and ability to mobilize additional resources,both within the country itself , and through the who network during an emergency , would improvethe response to similar challenges in the future .

some have expressed concern about the impactsars could have had if the outbreak had reached developing countries with minimal health careinfrastructures , particularly those already weakened by hiv / aids .

others have argued that sarshas underscored the importance of boosting aid efforts that offer structural support , such as aidingin the training of health care professionals , donating medical supplies and equipment , upgradinghealth technologies , and ensuring universal inoculation against resurgent diseases such astuberculosis .

the who had to strike a balance .

on the one hand it was pressed to give information , and use aggressive tactics of containment .

on the other hand , the information about sars may havecontributed to public panic and anxiety , discrimination in some cases , and other impacts , such aseconomic losses .

some argue that the who did not take into account the impact of itsdecision - making concerning travel advisories and global alert warnings and that the sars risksometimes did not demonstrate the need for such a response .

 ( 90 ) some governments in the future maybe hesitant rapidly and openly to share outbreak information , because they may want to avoidpotential negative economic impacts , such as job losses , hotel closures and flight cancellations asoccurred at the height of the sars crisis .

for example , 60,000 restaurant and hotel workers in hongkong lost their jobs or were placed on unpaid leave during the sars outbreak .

 ( 91 ) in singapore,year - by - year comparisons showed that tourist arrivals fell 15% in march 2003 and 67% in april2003 , and hotels reported occupancy rates of only 10 to 30% , compared to usual occupancy rates of70% or more during the first quarter of the year .

 ( 92 ) .

the weakness of national surveillance systems and health networks within any one country can dramatically affect the area and rate at which a disease spreads .

if the sars virus had spread morerapidly and extensively throughout the affected countries and for a sustained period , it could havehad a significant impact on the health care systems , and other systems .

those in need of health care,such as those with cancer , requiring surgery , or those requiring immediate medical attention may nothave been able to receive care .

in order to contain the sars virus , hospital wards and , at times,entire hospitals were shut down for weeks at a time to decontaminate them .

significant resourceswere used to quarantine sars - infected individuals , schools were closed , and other private facilitieswere adversely impacted .

such problems caused by sars illustrate the need to develop effectivenational response systems .

who officials and others have argued that there is a need for increased funding for laboratories and epidemiological research in the fight to contain diseases like sars .

improvements to theexisting surveillance network and national capacity to address emergency health issues are also badlyneeded .

for example , goarn reportedly needs $200 million to reinforce its network .

 ( 93 ) .

