the united states now has a unified inspections operation at the borders ; one inspector ischarged with examining people , animals , plants , goods , and cargo upon entry to the country .

thisreport delves into border inspections from the perspectives of the three major types of inspections: immigration , customs , and animal and plant health .

the transfer of these functions to thedepartment of homeland security ( dhs ) marks a significant policy shift concerning all of thesefunctions , clarifying that - - although there are important commercial , economic , health,humanitarian , and immigration responsibilities - - ensuring the security of our borders is the toppriority .

the decision by dhs officials to further integrate the inspection duties so that there is "oneface at the border" now means that customs and border protection ( cbp ) inspectors are essentiallyinterchangeable and responsible for all primary inspections .

although the hsa reorganized the administration of border inspections , it did not makesignificant changes in the policies and practices at the border .

most of the statutory revisions of theinspection process that were aimed at antiterrorism and border security were in place prior to theestablishment of cbp .

in part a response to the 1993 world trade center bombing , congress hadalready strengthened the anti - terrorism provisions in the ina and enacted provisions that shiftedimmigration inspectors from the "services" role to the "enforcement" role .

 ( 28 ) in 1996 , congress firstrequired the entry - exit system that is now known as us - visit .

 ( 29 ) in 2000 and 2002,congress revised the plant and animal health protection statutes into a more compactframework .

 ( 30 ) afterthe september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , congress enacted further measures aimed at improvingimmigration inspectors' terrorist detection capabilities .

 ( 31 ) congress also included antiterrorism provisions in legislationreauthorizing the u.s. customs service in 2002 .

 ( 32 ) cbp inspectors now are tasked with more effectivelyaccomplishing the laws and policies of the legacy agencies .

border inspections conducted each year number in the hundreds of millions .

as figure 1 depicts , the number of passenger inspections peaked in fy2000 .

since immigration and customsinspectors were cross - designated , it appears that an unknown number of passengers were enumeratedin the data of both ins and customs .

prior to the establishment of cbp , immigration inspectors didmost passenger inspections , followed by customs inspectors .

agricultural inspections were a distantthird , but aphis still completed 44 million animal and plant inspections of passengers in fy2002 .

unlike customs and immigration inspections data , aphis data enumerate only those passengersreferred to secondary inspections for the purpose of an agricultural inspection .

in fy2003 , cbpreported that they inspected 412.8 million passengers .

analyses of workload trends prior to the establishment of dhs follow for each major typeof inspection - - immigration , customs , and agricultural inspections .

unless otherwise noted , the dataanalyses are based on data provided by the "legacy" agencies of the u.s. immigration andnaturalization service ( ins ) , u.s. customs service and u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

figure 1 .

passenger inspections , fy1998-fy200 .

border inspections are funded through a combination of federal discretionary appropriationsand user fees .

for fy2004 , cbp was given budget authority of $2,496 million for border security,inspections , and trade facilitation at poes .

cbp has requested $2,724 million for fy2005 .

thehouse passed h.r .

4567 , the fy2005 dhs appropriations act , would provide $5.1billion for cbp .

the senate bill , s. 2537 as reported , would provide $5.0 billion forcbp .

 ( 89 ) this sectionof the report analyzes funding trends and staffing for the three functions prior to their merger intocbp .

these historic funding data are not comparable across agencies and , as noted below , mayinclude activities in addition to the inspection functions .

as a result , the funding and staff datapresented below cannot be summed into total spending for inspections .

table 1 .

inspections staff for all locations,fy2001-fy2004 source: crs presentation of cbp field operations data as of jan. 10 , 2004 .

comparable data onagriculture inspections staff were not provided for fy2001 and fy2002 .

cbp's office of field operations , however , has provided data on inspections staff that aredistinct from full - time equivalent ( fte ) staffing used in budget and appropriations documents .

as table 1 presents , the overall number of inspectors grew from fy2001 through fy2003 .

as table1 and the subsequent analysis reveals , there have been more customs inspectors than immigrationand agricultural inspectors combined over the period analyzed in this report .

as discussed above , cbp inspectors are charged with enforcing a host of laws andconducting hundreds of millions of inspections annually .

when congress enacted hsa , it kept theu.s .

customs service intact and created the bureau of border security to oversee immigrationinspections , the border patrol , and interior immigration enforcement activities .

as provided for inhsa , the administration opted to reorganize the major border inspections functions into cbp .

overthe past year since cbp was established , a variety of issues and concerns have emerged .

this reportconcludes with discussions of selected policy , administrative , and constitutional considerations , anda few overarching questions .

competing mandates .

tension exists betweenthe need to conduct thorough inspections searching for terrorists , weapons of mass destruction,illegal drugs and weapons , unauthorized aliens and improperly entered commercial goods , and theneed to process passenger and cargo inspections efficiently so as not to impede the flow of travel,trade , and tourism .

one dramatic illustration of the effect that increased inspections can have on theflow of trade at the border occurred in the immediate aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 terroristattacks .

the wait time for trucks crossing the border was nearly 12 hours at some ports of entry .

theland border between united states and canada was nearly closed , and as a result , some u.s. autoplants began to shut down due to lack of parts .

 ( 98 ) while most observers acknowledge that inspectors should strike a balance of their competinggoals , some warn that cbp inspectors are too concerned about facilitating trade and travel toscrutinize passengers and goods thoroughly .

critics cite the percentages of cargo inspected ( 22.6%of rail containers , 5.2% of sea containers , and 15.1% of trucks ) and the brevity of the averageprimary immigration inspection ( reportedly 45 seconds ) as indications that the current inspectionsprocess is inadequate .

others maintain that cbp inspections are now conducted with much more sophistication,drawing on the combined knowledge and experience of the agriculture , customs and immigrationinspections processes .

they assert that the development of analytical targeting units , whichemphasize high - risk passengers , conveyances , and cargo , is protecting border security while enablingthe smooth flow of goods and people .

targeting high - risk shipments .

cbp's abilityto successfully target high - risk containers ( a cornerstone of the csi program ) is dependent uponinformation regarding which containers are most likely to contain contraband .

the rationale behindthe advance cargo manifest rules is to provide cbp with the necessary information it needs toconduct its targeting operations .

while many observers note the importance of the development ofsophisticated targeting mechanisms and the significant progress cbp has made in collecting advancemanifest information , others have raised concerns .

one issue is the use of the cargo manifest as the primary document by which cbp gathersinformation and conducts risk assessments on cargo shipments destined for the united states .

thecargo manifest has traditionally been used for commercial compliance purposes and has beencharacterized by some as error prone .

some have expressed concern that it may not contain thenecessary information ( such as transshipment information ) to conduct the security screeningcurrently being carried out by cbp .

 ( 99 ) also , recent gao testimony has raised concerns regarding cbp's targeting operations .

gaocredits cbp with establishing the national targeting center , promulgating regulations to improvethe quality and timeliness of cargo data , refining its targeting system , and instituting a nationaltraining program for personnel conducting targeting operations .

however , gao noted that whilecbp's targeting strategy incorporated some elements of risk management , it lacked a comprehensiveset of criticality , vulnerability , and risk assessments and does not follow certain recognized modelingpractices .

 ( 100 ) screening aliens at the border .

since theseptember 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , considerable concern has been raised because the 19 terroristswere aliens who apparently entered the united states legally on temporary visas .

although the inabars terrorists , consular officers issuing the visas and immigration inspectors working at the bordersdid not have access to all the law enforcement and intelligence data that might identify potentialterrorists .

congress has enacted major laws requiring information sharing and interoperabledatabases to screen potential terrorists and criminal aliens , the most recent being the enhancedborder security and visa reform act of 2002 .

whether these provisions are being successfullyimplemented remains an important policy question .

 ( 101 ) last fall , the administration announced the creation of the terrorist screening center ( tsc ) to consolidate the various watchlists into a single terrorist screening database .

 ( 102 ) recently , the directorof tsc , donna bucella , testified about the progress made in developing an unclassified lawenforcement sensitive database , containing identifying information of known or suspected terrorists.some observers point out that no government - wide standards on how individuals get placed on orremoved from watchlists have been established , fueling civil liberty concerns .

some have alsowarned that the lack of clearly designated roles and responsibilities for tsc , foreign terroristtracking task force ( ftttf ) , the terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) , the counterterrorismcenter and other antiterrorist - related entities continue to foster turf battles and plague efforts to haveeffective information sharing .

 ( 103 ) while us - visit , the automated entry and exit data system , has been much heralded as a toolto enhance border security , critics question how many terrorists it will identify and whether it willeffectively track the entry - exit of suspicious foreign nationals .

 ( 104 ) some have expressedconcern that most canadians , the 6.4 million mexicans with border crossing cards , and the 13-18million foreign nationals who enter through the visa waiver program ( vwp ) have not been part ofus - visit , thus establishing a variety of avenues for potential terrorists and criminals to eludedetection through us - visit's biometric background checks .

the recent announcement to addforeign nationals who enter through vwp to us - visit may assuage some of these concerns aboutthe inclusiveness of us - visit , but does not resolve the issue that the nations participating in vwpare not expected to meet the program's october 1 , 2004 deadline for biometric machine - readablepassports .

 ( 105 ) while almost all observers agree that the implementation of us - visit has proven to bechallenging , especially at land ports of entry , many express confidence that it will ultimately besuccessful .

administration officials cite the number of aliens apprehended or denied entry as theresult of the national security entry exit registration system ( nseers ) and the consolidatedconsular data systems ( ccd ) , ( 106 ) two systems that us - visit builds on , as evidence thatus - visit can achieve its objectives .

recently the administration reported that 100 aliens had "hits"on the biometrics in us - visit .

 ( 107 ) 9 / 11 commission recommendations .

thenational commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11commission ) issued several recommendations that directly pertain to inspection policies at theborder .

 ( 108 ) theserecommendations underscore the urgency of implementing legislative provisions congress enactedseveral years ago , as well as suggest areas in which congress may wish to take further action .

thespecific recommendations are: targeting travel is at least as powerful a weapon against terrorists as targetingtheir money .

the united states should combine terrorist travel intelligence , operations , and lawenforcement in a strategy to intercept terrorists , find terrorist travel facilitators , and constrain terroristmobility .

the u.s. border security system should be integrated into a larger network ofscreening points that includes our transportation system and access to vital facilities , such as nuclearreactors .

the department of homeland security , properly supported by the congress,should complete , as quickly as possible , a biometric entry - exit screening system , including a singlesystem for speeding qualified travelers .

 ( 109 ) other 9 / 11 commission recommendations , notably those related to intelligence policy and structures,have been the focus thus far of congressional consideration and media attention .

the 9 / 11commission prepared a subsequent report that deals expressly with immigration issues .

 ( 110 ) legislation implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations ( s. 2845 , h.r .

10 , s. 2774 / h.r .

5040 and h.r .

5024 ) hadvarious provisions affecting border inspections .

 ( 111 ) h.r .

10 , the 9 / 11 recommendationsimplementation act , as amended and passed by the house on october 8 , 2004 , and s.2845 , the national intelligence reform act of 2004 , as amended and passed by the senateon october 8 , 2004 were the competing bills as the 108th congress drew to a close .

h.r .

10 as passed , s. 2845 as passed , s. 2774 / h.r .

5040 and h.r .

5024 all would hasten the development andinstallation of a biometric entry and exit data system that is integrated with various databases anddata systems that process or contain information on aliens , and would apply a system of biometricidentifiers uniformly across agencies and governments .

h.r .

10 as passed , s.2845 as passed , s. 2774 / h.r .

5040 and h.r .

5024 wouldrequire the secretary of homeland security ( secretary ) to develop and implement a plan to expeditethe processing of registered travelers through a single program ( current registered traveler programsinclude nexus and the secure electronic network for travelers' rapid inspection ( sentri ) ) .

thebills would further require the secretary to review and evaluate existing programs that expeditetravel and increase research and development efforts to accelerate the development andimplementation of a single program .

the bills would also require the registered travelers programto be integrated into the entry and exit data system and would authorize dhs to improve the securityof passports and other travel documents , including through the strengthening of securityrequirements for documents that may be used to attain passports or other travel documents .

in addition , h.r .

10 as passed would expand pre - inspection programs in foreigncountries and assistance to air carriers at selected foreign airports in the detection of fraudulentdocuments ; would limit the president's ability to waive general statutory requirements for u.s.citizens traveling abroad or attempting to enter the united states to bear a valid u.s. passport , so thatsuch a waiver can only be exercised with respect to u.s. citizens traveling to or from foreigncontiguous territories who are bearing identification documents designated by dhs as ( 1 ) reliableproof of u.s. citizenship , and ( 2 ) of a type that may not be issued to an unlawfully present alienwithin the united states ; and would amend the present waiver authority concerning documentrequirements for arriving nationals from foreign contiguous countries or adjacent islands , so thatsuch waivers may only be granted ( in non - emergency situations ) through a joint determination bythe secretary of dhs and secretary of state on the basis of reciprocity , and then only if the arrivingforeign national is in possession of identification documents deemed secure by the secretary of dhs .

the national intelligence reform act of 2004 ( p.l.108-458 ) .

the compromise version of s. 2845 that ultimately wasenacted into law , included some - - but not all - - of the border inspections provisions in both thehouse and senate versions of s. 2845 .

foremost , p.l .

108-458 requires accelerated deployment of the biometric entry and exitsystem to process or contain certain data on aliens and their physical characteristics .

the act alsoexpands the pre - inspection program that places u.s. immigration inspectors at foreign airports,increasing the number of foreign airports where travelers would be pre - inspected before departureto the united states .

moreover , it requires individuals entering into the united states ( including u.s.citizens and visitors from canada and other western hemisphere countries ) to bear a passport orother documents sufficient to denote citizenship and identity .

the act requires improvements in technology and training to assist consular and immigrationofficers in detecting and combating terrorist travel .

it ( 1 ) establishes the human smuggling andtrafficking center , which includes an interagency program devoted to countering terrorist travel ; ( 2 ) requires the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the director of the nationalcounter terrorism center , to establish a program to oversee dhs's responsibilities with respect toterrorist travel ; and ( 3 ) establishes a visa and passport security program within the bureau ofdiplomatic security at the department of state .

adequacy of infrastructure .

the fy2000treasury - postal appropriations act ( p.l .

106-58 ) required customs , in consultation with thegeneral service administration ( gsa ) and the federal inspection service agencies , to assessinfrastructure needs on the northern and southwestern borders of the united states this studyidentified 822 projects at a projected cost of approximately $784 million .

 ( 112 ) meanwhile , thetransportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) established the coordinated borderinfrastructure ( cbi ) program to "improve the safe movement of people and goods" across theborders with canada and mexico .

although cbi allows for funding of non - transportation projects,financing projects aimed at customs and immigration enforcement functions at the borders hasproven controversial because many supporters of cbi assert it should be used for transportationprojects .

 ( 113 ) the current infrastructure at most u.s. ports of entry , many warn , is not sufficient toaccommodate the demands of the automated entry and exit data system , us - visit .

thoseconcerned about infrastructure point out that in order to record the departure of every alien leavingthe united states through a land port , there need to be sufficient lanes , staff , and resources .

according to some observers , additional lanes may be necessary at many land ports of entry toaccommodate the large number of individuals seeking entry into the united states .

some alsoexpress concern that the current infrastructure at air ports of entry may not be sufficient toaccommodate us - visit when it is fully operational .

although federal immigration inspectors havea presence at selected airports , the space that is occupied by them is not federally owned .

airportshave limited space and may not have additional resources to fund new construction .

some contendthat this could lead to significant delays as travelers try to make their way through ports of entry.others maintain that as the technologies used at the border become more sophisticated and efficient,concerns about long lines and delays will abate .

infrastructure limitations , they assert , will beresolved by the time us - visit is fully implemented .

 ( 114 ) inter - agency and inter - department coordination .

cooperation between cbp and other agencies is critical to the success of cbp's mission .

thisnecessity is highlighted by the recent spate of new regulations that have been promulgated by severalagencies charged with border security related activities .

one example concerns advance notificationrequirements .

while cbp is completing its rulemaking regarding electronic advanced manifestsubmissions , the fda has promulgated advance notification regulations pertaining to certain foodimports .

 ( 115 ) thefda advance notice rules have different time frames from those being considered by cbp .

thefda rules require electronically filed and complete notice before the shipment arrives at the firstu.s .

port: no more than five days , and no less than eight hours for food arriving bywater ; four hours for food arriving by air or by rail ; and two hours for food arriving by truck .

at this time , it is unclear as to how the two sets ( fda and cbp ) of advanced notice requirementswill be integrated .

the fda rules indicate that importers or their agents must submit their advancenotice using cbp's abi or acs systems .

those food importers without abi or acs access will usefda's prior notice ( pn ) system interface .

according to the fda rule , the commissioners of fdaand cbp will publish a plan detailing the integration and partial harmonization of these rules .

another example of the importance of inter - agency cooperation is evidenced in the variousfederal entities that have the responsibilities for aliens who seek asylum in the united states .

dutiesare spread across dhs's coast guard ( interdiction ) , customs and border protection ( apprehensionsand inspections ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( detention ) , citizenship and immigrationservices ( determination of credible fear ) and doj's executive office for immigration review ( asylum and removal hearings ) .

while the lead agencies for setting asylum standards and policy areuscis and eoir , cbp inspectors are quite often the first point of contact with arriving asylumseekers .

training of personnel .

as is evident from thediscussions of the agricultural , customs , and immigration inspections , the cbp inspector must learna set of complex laws and procedures as well as develop a keen eye for violators and violations ofthe law .

some argue that it is too much to expect that those working in primary inspections areknowledgeable of the various types of travel documents , ( 116 ) as well as when a foreign national is required to have a traveldocument .

 ( 117 ) someexpress concern that the ability to recognize these documents and differentiate fraudulent documentsfrom legitimate ones is learned only from experience and training .

the customs inspector is attunedto targeting travelers and goods from a cargo perspective , a skill some argue , that is quite distinctfrom an immigration inspection .

that the inspector must also be facile in accessing numerous datasystems and databases has raised further questions about the adequacy of training .

 ( 118 ) specific concerns are being raised that primary inspectors in cbp from customs andimmigrations backgrounds may not have sufficient agricultural training .

some argue that currentcbp training in agriculture for new inspectors may be inadequate .

former aphis inspectors hadrequired science and biology backgrounds , combined with extensive pest and disease training .

manystakeholders in the agricultural community are asking whether cbp administrators and front lineinspectors will pay enough attention to agricultural inspections .

others assert that these concerns about training needs are exaggerated and observe that cbphas a new 14-week training course for inspectors .

they point out that the immigration and customsinspectors have been cross - designated for years and are already familiar with the laws , procedures,and databases .

they also observe that agricultural inspections will remain specialized for the timebeing and will occur during secondary inspections .

database technology .

critics of the currenttechnological infrastructure contend that it poses a security risk .

the enhanced border security andvisa entry reform act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-173 ) mandated the integration of immigration databases .

in addition to integrating data systems that contain federal law enforcement and intelligenceinformation relevant to making decisions on visa admissibility and the removal of aliens , p.l.107-173 also mandated that immigration databases be integrated with other relevant data systems .

the integration of law enforcement and intelligence data systems and databases with immigrationdata systems and databases continues to be a concern and is considered critical for the cbp inspectorto adequately screen individuals seeking entry to the united states .

many assert that the need for all agencies involved in admitting aliens to share intelligenceand coordinate activities is essential for u.s. immigration policy to be effective in guardinghomeland security .

some maintain that the reforms congress made in the mid - 1990s requiring allvisa applicants to be checked in the "look out" databases were inadequate because the databasesacross the relevant agencies were not interoperable and the various agencies were territorial withtheir data .

they maintain that , in the long run , the most efficient and effective guard against theentry of aliens who would do us harm is an interagency and inter - departmental database that isaccessible in "real time" to consular officers , cbp inspectors , and key law enforcement andintelligence officials .

others point to the cost , time , and complexity of developing interoperable databases .

theycite the difficulty thus far in determining what biometric identifiers are most appropriate forscreening aliens .

 ( 119 ) they point out competing technologies of the existing databases in which various key agencies havealready heavily invested .

some maintain that success of the interoperable database technologydepends on 100% inclusion of aliens applying for visas and seeking admission , but that the sheerscope of such a system poses "real time" implementation issues .

they also warn that if intelligencedata become too accessible across agencies , national security may actually be breached becausesensitive information may be more likely to fall into the wrong hands .

privacy concerns arise as wellas the data sharing and interoperability broadens .

meanwhile , cbp has been engaged in a long - term effort to acquire a new comprehensivedatabase system that dates back to the u.s. customs service .

the automated commercialenvironment ( ace ) will replace acs which has been characterized as outmoded andinefficient .

 ( 120 ) difficulties with acs are evident in the different levels of automation available for different modesof transportation .

the most recent evidence of the difficulties raised by uneven automation can beseen in the different rollout deadlines for the new mandatory advance electronic manifest ruleproposed by cbp .

the lack of consistent automation , particularly for commercial trucks , means thatseveral different programs will have to be utilized ( fast , paps , brass etc. ) .

until ace becomesfunctional .

the ace strategy is developing commercial automation protocols and procedures so thatexpeditious tracking and more effective screening and monitoring can develop over time .

cbp is also working with other government agencies on developing the integrated tradedata system ( itds ) .

itds will be an interconnected database of all government agencies involvedin the trade process , allowing users to submit data to one agency database available to other agencies .

questions remain however , because ace and itds were envisioned prior to the merging of primaryborder agencies in dhs .

issues such as how ace and itds will be incorporated into the largerdhs strategy , and how they will interact with other existing databases , remain a concern .

fourth amendment .

through the laws of thelegacy agencies , inspectors have unique statutory authorizations to inspect and search individualsand merchandise at the border , as discussed above .

beyond these specific authorities , however,inspections at the border must still adhere to the protections afforded by the constitution .

the scopeof these protections may be more limited at borders and ports of entry than in the interior of theunited states .

the scope of protections also might vary with the particular laws being enforced .

a related constitutional matter that arises in this realm is "racial profiling. .

racial profilingis the practice of targeting individuals for law enforcement purposes based on their race or ethnicityin the belief that specific minority groups are more likely to engage in certain unlawful behaviors .

several courts have considered constitutional ramifications of the practice , as an "unreasonablesearch and seizure," and more recently , as a denial of equal protection of the laws .

 ( 121 ) in the past , some haveaccused customs inspectors of racial profiling .

 ( 122 ) others maintain that it is difficult to discern where legitimatetargeting based on risk management principles crosses the line into racial profiling .

in theimmigration context , the constitutionality of making distinctions on grounds of race or nationalityis unsettled .

 ( 123 ) withrespect to immigration inspections conducted near , but otherwise beyond the actual physical border,however , the case law seems to suggest that race alone cannot justify a stop by a roving patrol , ( 124 ) but can be moredeterminative when questioned at fixed immigration checkpoints .

 ( 125 ) fifth amendment .

for purposes of proceduraldue process under the fifth amendment , immigration law has long made a distinction between thosealiens who have come to our shores seeking admission and those who are within the united statesafter an entry , irrespective of its legality .

in the latter instance , the supreme court has recognizedadditional rights and privileges not extended to those in the former category , who are merely "on thethreshold of initial entry. .

 ( 126 ) indeed , supreme court jurisprudence still questions whetherthe constitution applies at all to aliens seeking entry at the border or a port of entry , particularly indetermining an alien's right to be here .

with respect to due process in the immigration context,therefore , aliens seeking admission to the united states must generally accept whatever statutoryrights and privileges they are granted by congress .

 ( 127 ) in cases where the arriving alien is suspected of being aterrorist , the alien may be summarily excluded by the regional director with no further administrativeright to appeal .

this policy is especially controversial if a suspected terrorist is returned to a countryin which the person is "more likely than not to be tortured. .

 ( 128 ) .

as congress views border inspections through the lens of homeland security , a series ofquestions emerge .

while not an exhaustive set , the selected questions below express a few of thecross - cutting concerns .

are the inspections reforms aimed at enhanced border security that congressenacted being implemented with sufficient urgency ? .

when the new technologies are fully implemented , such as us - visit at landports of entry , will people and goods move expeditiously ? .

if additional resources and infrastructure are needed to secure and facilitateborder inspections , should fees be raised or funds appropriated , or should it be a combination ofboth ? .

is an inspections system geared up to protect against terrorism still versatileenough to also protect the nation against travelers with contagious diseases such as severe acuterespiratory syndrome ( sars ) or flexible enough to recognize bona fide asylumseekers ? .

should any of the underlying laws be amended to further tighten or expand theinspections process ( eg , mandating physical inspections of a greater percentage of cargo orrequiring inspections of certain types of shipments ) ? .

should the underlying laws be amended to reflect the reorganization offunctions ? .

striking the balance of facilitating legitimate travel and trade with protecting against foreignterrorism and other phenomena that would do us harm will remain a daunting challenge .

appendix a: immigration inspection workload,fy2002 source: crs analysis of ins workload data .

note: detail may not add to 100% due to rounding .

appendix b .

selected immigration inspectionsdata source: crs analysis of ins workload data .

appendix c. top 10 u.s. container portscy1998-cy2002 ( thousands of teus ) a source: cy1995-cy2001 from bureau of transportation statistics u.s. international trade andfreight transportation trends , table 11 , p. 32 ( washington: bureau of transportation statistics,2003 ) , cy2002 crs analysis of maritime administration ( marad ) published data .

note: data includes imports , exports , and transshipments ( transshipments do not originate and arenot destined for the united states , but merely pass through it from one foreign country to another ) .

a. teus are 20-foot equivalent units , one 20-foot container equals one teu , while one 40-footcontainer equals two teus .

appendix d. customs workload datafy1998-fy2002 source: u.s. customs service , congressional budget justifications , fy2001-fy2003 .

appendix e. customs narcotics seizuresfy1998-fy2002 source: u.s. customs service , congressional budget justifications , fy2001-fy2004 .

appendix f. u.s. - canada land border: number of truck or railcar crossings ( cy2000-cy2002 ) source: u.s. department of transportation , bureau of transportation statistics , special tabulation , july 2003 .

based on the following primary datasource: u.s. department of treasury , u.s. customs service , office of field operations , operations management database ( washington , dc ) , 2002,published in u.s. department of transportation , bureau of transportation statistics , national transportation statistics 2002 , bts02-08 ( u.s. gpo:washington , dc ) , dec. 2002 .

note: truck data represent the number of truck crossings , not the number of unique vehicles .

data are for both loaded and empty trucks .

rail dataincludes both loaded and unloaded railcars .

appendix g. u.s. - mexico land border: number of truck or railcar crossingscy2000-cy2002 source: u.s. department of transportation , bureau of transportation statistics , special tabulation , july 2003 .

based on the following primary datasource: u.s. department of treasury , u.s. customs service , office of field operations , operations management database ( washington , dc ) , 2002,published in u.s. department of transportation , bureau of transportation statistics , national transportation statistics 2002 , bts02-08 ( gpo:washington , dc ) , dec. 2002 .

note: truck data represent the number of truck crossings , not the number of unique vehicles .

data are for both loaded and empty trucks .

rail dataincludes both loaded and unloaded railcars .

appendix h. agricultural inspections ofinternational passengers , cargo , and mail source: usda - aphis , special tabulations of work accomplishment data .

na = not applicable .

appendix i .

agricultural inspections ofinternational modes of conveyance source: usda - aphis , special tabulations of work accomplishment data .

