in the years following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , considerable concern has been raised because the 19 terrorists were aliens ( i.e. , foreign nationals ) who apparently entered the united states on temporary visas despite provisions in immigration law intended to bar the admission of suspected terrorists .

the report of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) contended that "[t]here were opportunities for intelligence and law enforcement to exploit al qaeda's travel vulnerabilities. .

the 9 / 11 commission maintained that border security was not considered a national security matter prior to september 11 , and as a result the consular and immigration officers were not treated as full partners in counterterrorism efforts .

the 9 / 11 commission's monograph , 9 / 11 and terrorist travel , underscored the importance of the border security functions of immigration law and policy .

in the 108 th congress , several proposals were introduced in response to the 9 / 11 commission's findings , some of which contained provisions relating to border security , most notably the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) .

in the 109 th congress , the real id act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 , division b ) included , among other things , a number of provisions related to immigration reform and document security that were considered during congressional deliberations on the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act , but which were ultimately not included .

under current law , three departments — the department of state ( dos ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of justice ( doj ) — play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens .

dos's bureau of consular affairs ( consular affairs ) is the agency responsible for issuing visas , dhs's citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is charged with approving immigrant petitions , and dhs's bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with inspecting all people who enter the united states .

doj's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) has a significant policy role through its adjudicatory decisions on specific immigration cases .

this report focuses on the terrorism - related grounds for inadmissibility and deportation / removal .

it opens with an overview of the terror - related grounds as they evolved through key legislation enacted in recent years .

the section on current law explains the legal definitions of "terrorist activity," "engage in terrorist activity," and "terrorist organization," and describes the terror - related grounds for inadmissibility and removal .

the report then discusses the alien screening process to determine admissibility and to identify possible terrorists , both during the visa issuance process abroad and the inspections process at u.s. ports of entry .

since 1990 , certain "terrorism" - related activities by an alien have expressly been grounds for exclusion and removal .

over the years , these grounds have been expanded to expressly cover membership in terrorist organizations , as well as an increasingly broad range of activities in support of terrorism - related activities or entities .

many of the terrorism - related grounds for inadmissibility and deportation use certain terms — that is , "terrorist activity," "engage in terrorist activity," and "terrorist organization" — that are expressly defined by the ina to describe particular kinds of conduct or entities .

the following sections provide an overview of the terrorism - related terms defined by the ina , as well as the terrorism - related grounds for inadmissibility and deportation .

legislation was enacted in the 110 th congress to modify the terrorism - related grounds for inadmissibility and removal , as well as the impact that these grounds have upon alien eligibility for relief from removal .

as previously discussed , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , enacted in december 2007 , modified certain terrorism - related provisions of the ina , including by exempting specified groups from the ina's definition of "terrorist organization" and significantly expanding immigration authorities' waiver authority over the terrorism - related grounds for exclusion .

p.l .

110-257 , which was enacted into law on july 1 , 2008 , limits application of the terrorism - related grounds for inadmissibility with respect to the african national congress ( anc ) and certain anc members .

specifically , p.l .

110-257 expressly exempts the anc from the ina's definition of "terrorist organization. .

the act also provides the secretary of state and the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the other and the attorney general , with authority to exempt most of the terrorism - related and criminal grounds for inadmissibility from applying to aliens with respect to activities undertaken in opposition to apartheid rule in south africa .

further , federal authorities are required to take all necessary steps to ensure that databases used to determine admissibility to the united states are updated so that they are consistent with the exemptions provided to aliens for anti - apartheid activity .

immigration reform is an issue in the 111 th congress , and legislative proposals may contain provisions modifying the immigration consequences of terrorism - related activity .

the case of umar farouk abdulmutallab , who allegedly tried to take down northwest airlines flight 253 on december 25 , 2009 , has refocused attention on terrorist screening during the visa issuance process .

the 23-year - old nigerian national allegedly tried unsuccessfully to ignite an explosive device on an incoming flight to detroit .

u.s. consular officers in london , where abdulmutallab was a student at university college london , had issued him a multi - year , multiple - visit tourist visa in june 2008 .

according to a state department spokesman: "at the time that his visa was issued , there was nothing in his application nor in any database at the time that would indicate that he should not receive a visa .

he was a student at a very reputable school .

he had plenty of financial resources , so he was not an intending immigrant .

there was no derogatory information about him last year — last june — that would indicate that he shouldn't get a visa , so we issued the visa. .

the suspect's father , a wealthy banker and former nigerian government official , had reportedly contacted u.s. officials to indicate his concern about his son's welfare and involvement in islamic fanaticism .

state department officials have reported that the father came into the embassy in abuja , nigeria , on november 19 , 2009 , to express his concerns about his son and that the consular officials at the embassy in abuja sent a cable to the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) .

they relied on the standard interagency procedures for screening suspected terrorists , referred to as visa viper .

state department officials acknowledge that a consular officer misspelled abdulmutallab when conducting the name check in the ccd and as a result did not report in the visa viper that abdulmutallab had received a visa in 2008 .

this error was reportedly corrected in a visa viper cable sent november 25 , 2009 .

some have questioned whether the embassy in abuja , nigeria , or other u.s. consular officials had sufficient authority and justification to revoke the visa issued to abdulmutallab in london as a result of the information his father provided .

according to a state department spokesman: "[t]he information in this visas viper cable was insufficient for this interagency review process to make a determination that this individual's visa should be revoked. .

while consular officers have the authority to issue and to revoke visas on terrorist grounds , they defer to the nctc to identify suspected terrorists and designate known terrorists .

after a visa has been issued , the consular officer as well as the secretary of state has the discretionary authority to revoke a visa at any time .

a consular officer must revoke a visa if the alien is ineligible under ina §212 ( a ) as described above to receive such a visa , or was issued a visa and overstayed the time limits of the visa ; the alien is not entitled to the nonimmigrant visa classification under ina §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) definitions specified in such visa ; the visa has been physically removed from the passport in which it was issued ; or the alien has been issued an immigrant visa .

the foreign affairs manual ( fam ) instructs: "in making any new determination of ineligibility as a result of information which may come to light after issuance of a visa , the consular officer must seek and obtain any required advisory opinion. .

this applies , for example , to findings of ineligibility under "misrepresentation," "terrorist activity," or "foreign policy. .

fam further instructs: "pending receipt of the department's advisory opinion , the consular officer must enter the alien's name in the class under a quasi - refusal code , if warranted. .

according to dos officials , they sometimes prudentially revoke visas ( i.e. , they revoke a visa as a safety precaution ) .

when a consular officer suspects that a visa revocation may involve u.s. law enforcement interests , fam instructs the consular officer to consult with law enforcement agencies at post and inform the state officials of the case , to permit consultations with potentially interested entities before a revocation is made .

the rationale for this consultation is that there may be legal or intelligence investigations that would be compromised if the visa were revoked and that law enforcement and intelligence officials may prefer to monitor the individual to further investigate his actions and associates .

visa revocation has been a ground for removal in ina §237 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) since enactment of p.l .

108-458 in december 2004 .

that provision ( §5304 of p.l .

108-458 ) permits limited judicial review of removal if visa revocation is the sole basis of the removal .

