the legislative information system ( lis ) listed 83 bills or resolutions with "asylum' in the title or summary that were introduced in the 108 th and 109 th congresses .

this section of the report highlights major bills with asylum provisions that received action in one or both chambers .

some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the united states , hoping to remain hidden among the hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases .

critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" ( i.e. , saudi arabia , syria , iran , north korea , china , pakistan , egypt , lebanon , jordan , afghanistan , yemen and somalia ) as potential national security risks .

some argue further that — since asylum is a discretionary form of immigration relief — national security risks should outweigh humanitarian concerns , and thus asylum relief should be restricted and judicial review of asylum cases more limited .

others point out that asylum seekers are subject to multiple national security screenings and that — if an asylum seeker is a suspected or known terrorist — the law already bars alien terrorists .

they argue that the extent to which security risks exist , the risks result more from the limited intelligence data on terrorism , rather than an expansive asylum policy .

some assert further that asylees from countries of "special concern" may be beneficial to u.s. national security because they may have useful information that assists in the war on terrorism , much like assistance provided by communist defectors during the cold war .

opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases contend that it would erode two traditional values of u.s. polity — the right to due process and freedom from repression and persecution .

although uscis and eoir are clearly the lead agencies in asylum policy , the first contacts many asylum seekers have with the u.s. government are with customs and border protection ( cbp ) inspectors , border patrol officers , and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) agents , whom some maintain are not adequately trained in asylum policy and other humanitarian forms of immigration relief .

they maintain that these cbp officers and ice agents are front line law enforcement who are so geared up to protect against potential terrorists , criminals and other threats that the they may not be flexible enough to recognize bona fide asylum seekers .

they also question whether there is sufficient communication among the key immigration agencies: cbp , eoir , ice and uscis .

others point out that the cbp inspectors , border patrol officers , and ice agents follow the policy and procedural guidelines to ensure that aliens who express a fear of returning home are given the opportunity to have their fears considered by an asylum officer and / or an immigration judge .

they maintain the training is more than adequate and that ample protections are afforded to those who express fears of persecution .

proponents of expanding expedited removal refer to the provisions giving aliens who express a fear of persecution or an intention to seek asylum the opportunity for a credible fear determination .

they usually cite statistics indicating that more than 90% of aliens who express a fear are deemed to be credible ( pass their credible fear hearing ) and are able to bring their cases to an immigration judge .

they also note that the u.s. commission on international religious freedom ( uscirf ) study found that dhs has mandatory procedures in place to ensure that asylum seekers are protected under expedited removal .

testifying on the issue of expedited removal , c. stewart verdery , jr. , formerly assistant secretary for border and transportation security policy and planning in dhs , concluded , "i am heartened to see that internal and external reviews of the asylum process largely have concluded that dhs has handled this subset of cases appropriately. .

critics of expedited removal maintain that a low - level immigration officer's authority to order removal is virtually unchecked .

the officer's decision to place the person in expedited rather than regular removal proceedings , they argue , can result in the person losing substantive rights .

indeed , they assert that there have been reports of abuse of the procedure since it was first implemented at the ports of entry and many individuals with valid claims have been erroneously removed .

critics refer to one investigation that found cases where aliens had requested the opportunity to apply for asylum but were refused and "pushed back" at primary inspection .

opponents to the mandatory detention of asylum seekers in expedited removal usually cite the u.n. high commissioner on refugees , who maintains that detention of asylum seekers is "inherently undesirable. .

detention is psychologically damaging , some further argue , to an already fragile population that includes aliens who are escaping from imprisonment and torture in their countries .

asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens , a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted .

some contend that congress should provide for alternatives to detention ( eg , electronic monitoring ) for asylum seekers in expedited removal .

others argue that the mandatory detention of asylum seekers provision should be deleted , maintaining that there is adequate authority in the ina to detain any alien who poses a criminal or national security risk .

proponents for current law warn that releasing asylum seekers in expedited removal undermines the purpose of expedited removal and creates an avenue for bogus asylum seekers to enter the united states .

they argue that mandatory detention of asylum seekers is an essential tool in maintaining immigration control and homeland security .

any loosening of these policies , they allege , would divert the cbp and ice officers from their homeland security duties to track down wayward asylum seekers .

supporters of current law also contend that it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally .

u.s. policy toward asylum seekers from cuba and haiti are often discussed in tandem because there are several key points of comparison .

both nations have a history of repressive governments with documented human rights violations .

both countries have a history of sending asylum seekers to the united states by boats .

finally , although u.s. immigration law is generally applied neutrally without regard to country of origin , there are special laws and agreements pertaining to cubans and haitians .

despite these points of similarity , the treatment of cubans fleeing to the united states differs from that of haitians .

many observe that cuban migrants receive more generous treatment under u.s. law than haitians or foreign nationals from any other country .

as a consequence of special migration agreements with cuba , a "wet foot / dry foot" practice toward cuban migrants has evolved .

put simply , cubans who do not reach the shore ( i.e. , dry land ) , are interdicted and returned to cuba unless they cite fears of persecution .

those cubans who successfully reach the shore are inspected for entry by dhs and generally permitted to stay and adjust under the cuban adjustment act ( caa ) the following year .

despite what some consider generous treatment of cubans , there are others who charge that the forced return of cubans interdicted at sea violates the spirit , if not the letter , of u.s. asylum and refugee law .

critics maintain that the haitians are being singled out for more restrictive treatment than any other group of asylum seekers .

haitians interdicted at sea are repatriated , as are cubans ; however , critics charge that haitians who reach the united states are more likely to be detained and less likely to be paroled after the credible fear determination .

the administration maintains that paroling haitians ( as is typically done for aliens who meet the credible fear threshold ) may encourage other haitians to embark on the risky sea travel and potentially trigger a mass migration from haiti to the united states .

the administration further argues that all migrants who arrive by sea pose a risk to national security and warns that terrorists may pose as haitian asylum seekers .

some advocate amending the ina's definition of refugee and asylee to expressly mention gender - based persecution , as was done for resistance to coercive population control policies .

proponents argue that those aliens fleeing such acts as female genital mutilation ( fmg ) , rape by military or police forces , "honor killings," or domestic violence are not adequately protected by the ina because the alien must demonstrate that the abuse was based on race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

they contend that the judicial decisions thus far have been contradictory and often cite attorney general john ashcroft's announcement that he is reconsidering the decision of his predecessor attorney general janet reno to vacate the bia ruling denying asylum to a guatemalan woman who sought asylum based on repeated domestic violence by her husband .

they assert that amending the ina to add gender as a basis would strengthen the policy , clarify the ambiguities resulting from varied judicial decisions , and speed up the lengthy asylum adjudication process .

others maintain that current law affords sufficient protections for aliens fleeing gender - based violence and persecution .

they cite the legal guidance for asylum officers issued in 1995 that stated: "severe sexual abuse does not differ analytically from beatings , torture , or other forms of physical violence that are commonly held to amount to persecution. .

supporters of current law point out that the bia held in matter of kasinga , that a subjective 'punitive' or 'malignant' intent is not required for harm to constitute persecution and set the precedent for asylum on the basis of fmg in1996 .

they assert that adding gender as basis for asylum would impose western cultural norms as well as create a migration magnet for women living in male - dominated cultures and countries .

