this report provides a summary of the status of u.s. compliance efforts in pending world trade organization ( wto ) disputes that have resulted in adverse rulings against the united states .

the report focuses on cases in which panel and appellate body reports have been adopted by the wto dispute settlement body , an action sending the disputes into the compliance phase of the wto dispute process .

although the united states has complied with adverse rulings in many past wto disputes , there are 14 pending cases in which the united states is facing compliance deadlines in 2012 ; deadlines have expired but the united states has not yet fully implemented the wto decisions involved ; or the united states has taken action , including the enactment of legislation , but the prevailing parties in the dispute continue to question whether the united states has fully complied and , as in one case , continue to impose wto - authorized trade sanctions .

compliance in these cases may implicate either legislative or administrative action by the united states , or both .

the report begins with an overview of wto dispute settlement procedures , focusing on the compliance phase of the process , followed by a discussion of u.s. laws relating to wto dispute resolution proceedings .

the report then lists pending wto disputes in the compliance phase categorized by subject matter: trade remedies , subsidies , trade in services , and trade - related intellectual property rights .

disputes are listed in chronological order based on the date on which the panel and any appellate body in the case were adopted by the wto dispute settlement body .

each entry contains a discussion of major issues and u.s. compliance history .

long - standing cases also include a section titled "recent developments" discussing the latest activity in the dispute .

wto disputes are conducted under the terms of the wto understanding on the rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes ( dispute settlement understanding or dsu ) .

the dsu , which entered into force with the establishment of the world trade organization on january 1 , 1995 , carries forward and expands upon dispute settlement practices developed under the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

the dsu is administered by the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , which is composed of all wto members .

where individual wto agreements contain special or additional dispute settlement rules that differ from those in the dsu ( eg , expedited timelines for subsidy disputes in the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ) , the former will prevail .

a list of these agreements and rules is contained in appendix 2 of the dsu .

the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) represents the united states in the wto and in wto disputes .

wto dispute settlement may be characterized as a three - stage process: ( 1 ) consultations ; ( 2 ) panel and , if requested , appellate body ( ab ) proceedings ; and ( 3 ) implementation .

within this framework , the dsb establishes panels ; adopts panel and appellate reports ; authorizes countermeasures when requested ; and monitors the implementation of dispute settlement results .

the establishment of panels , adoption of panel and ab reports , and authorization of countermeasures are decisions that are subject to a "reverse consensus" rule under which the dsb agrees to these actions unless all dsb members object .

in effect , these decisions are virtually automatic .

article 23 of the dsu requires a complaining member to act in accordance with the dsu when it initiates a dispute , including making any internal determination that another member has violated a wto obligation consistent with the wto decision in the case and following dsu procedures to set a deadline by which the defending member must comply , determining the level of sanctions for non - compliance , and obtaining authorization from the dsb to impose any such sanctions .

after the dsb adopts an adverse panel and any appellate body report , the defending member must inform the dsb of its compliance plans .

if it is impracticable for the member to comply immediately , the member will be allowed a "reasonable period of time" to do so .

if the member proposes a compliance period and it is not approved by the dsb , the disputing parties may negotiate a deadline themselves .

if this fails , the length of the period will be arbitrated .

a wto member found to have violated wto obligations is expected to comply by withdrawing the offending measure by the end of the established compliance period , with compensation and temporary retaliation available to the prevailing party as alternative remedies .

full compliance is the preferred outcome , however , so as to ensure that negotiated rights and obligations are preserved and maintained .

article 22 of the dsu provides that if the prevailing member in a dispute believes that the defending member has not implemented the wto rulings and recommendations by the end of the established compliance period , it may request the other member to negotiate a compensation agreement or it may ask the dsb for authorization to suspend wto concessions , usually to impose higher tariffs on selected imports from the defending country .

the member may choose the latter option without first requesting compensation .

in some cases , the prevailing party may agree to extend the original compliance deadline instead of immediately seeking a remedy .

if a prevailing member does choose to suspend concessions , it is expected to do so in the same sector in which the wto violation was found , but if the member finds that this is not "practicable or effective," it may seek to suspend concessions in other sectors in the same agreement .

if , however , the member finds that this alternative would also be impracticable or ineffective and that "the circumstances are serious enough," it may seek to suspend obligations under another wto agreement , referred to as "cross - retaliation. .

a prevailing member may seek to cross - retaliate if , for example , in a dispute involving trade in goods , the member does not import a sufficient amount of goods from the defending member to remedy the trade injury involved or the member believes that placing tariff surcharges on goods imported from the defending member would be unreasonably costly for the prevailing member's economy .

under the dsu , the dsb is to authorize the retaliation request under the reverse consensus rule within 30 days after the compliance period expires .

if the defending member objects to the request , however , the proposed retaliation will be arbitrated and the 30-day deadline for approving the retaliation request effectively extended .

the objection may relate to the level of nullification or impairment of benefits involved or whether dsu cross - retaliation rules have been followed .

the arbitration , which may be carried out by the original panel if members are available , or by an arbitrator appointed by the wto director general , is ordinarily to be completed within 60 days after the compliance period expires .

the dsb then meets to authorize the retaliation request , subject to any modification by the arbitrator .

in addition , article 21.5 of the dsu provides for further dispute settlement proceedings in the event the disputing parties disagree as to whether the defending member has implemented the wto rulings and recommendations in a particular case .

once a compliance panel is convened , it is expected to issue its report within 90 days ; the report may then be appealed .

in practice , compliance panels may require a considerably longer period of time to complete their work where a complicated case is involved .

for example , in the european union's challenge to the u.s. use of "zeroing" in antidumping proceedings ( ds294 ) , the eu made its compliance panel request in september 2007 , panelists were appointed in november 2007 , and the panel report was not publicly circulated until december 2008 .

because the dsu fails to incorporate article 21.5 proceedings into the 30-day period for approving countermeasures and the time frame for any subsequent arbitration , a procedural problem , referred to as "sequencing," has resulted .

disputing members have often filled the gap by entering into ad hoc bilateral procedural agreements setting out timelines for any requested compliance - related proceedings and reserving members' rights in the unfolding of these proceedings .

such agreements have been entered into in many of the cases discussed below .

the dsu provides that any suspension of concessions or other obligations is temporary and may only be applied by the prevailing member until the wto - inconsistent measure is removed , the defending member provides a solution to any trade injury at issue , or a mutually satisfactory resolution of the dispute is reached .

moreover , if a prevailing member is ultimately authorized to impose countermeasures , the member is not required to implement them .

as evident from some of the cases discussed in this report , wto members may manage disputes in a variety of ways at the compliance phase , short of imposing sanctions .

the legal effect of uruguay round agreements and wto dispute settlement results in the united states is comprehensively dealt with in the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) , p.l .

103-465 , which addresses the relationship of wto agreements to federal and state law and prohibits private remedies based on alleged violations of wto agreements .

the statute also requires the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to keep congress informed of disputes challenging u.s. laws once a dispute panel is established , any u.s. appeal is filed , and a panel or appellate body report is circulated to wto members .

in addition , the uraa places requirements on regulatory action taken to implement wto decisions and contains provisions specific to the implementation of panel and appellate reports that fault u.s. actions in trade remedy proceedings .

this case , sometimes referred to as the "irish music" dispute , involves legislation enacted in 1998 ( 17 u.s.c .

§110 ( 5 ) ( b ) , as added by p.l .

105-298 , §202 ( a ) ) , which provides that it is not a copyright infringement for bars and restaurants and other retail outlets to play radio and television music without authorization from the copyright holder or the payment of fees so long as the establishments meet certain size limitations or equipment requirements .

challenged by the european union ( eu ) in 1999 , this so - called "small business" exemption was found to be an improper rights limitation in violation of article 13 of the agreement on trade - related intellectual property rights ( trips ) .

in the absence of u.s. legislative action by the end of the initial compliance period ( july 27 , 2001 ) , complainant eu agreed to extend the period to the end of 2001 , and to consider u.s. compensation for the eu music industry based on an amount of trade injury determined by arbitration under article 25 of the dsu , a free - standing arbitration provision .

a november 9 , 2001 , arbitral award determined that some $1.1 million in eu trade benefits are affected annually .

notwithstanding the arbitration , the eu , in january 2002 , requested authorization from the dsb to impose countermeasures against the united states on the ground that the united states had not fully complied with its obligations in the case by the extended deadline .

the eu proposed suspending concessions under the trips agreement so it could levy "a special fee from us nationals in connection with border measures concerning copyright goods. .

the united states asked for arbitration of the proposal , but the disputing parties later asked that the arbitration be suspended , with the understanding that it could be reactivated by either party after march 1 , 2002 .

in april 2003 , congress appropriated $3.3 million for a "one - time only , lump - sum payment" to the eu to cover a three - year period of nullification and impairment of benefits in the dispute ( p.l .

108-11 ) .

the parties notified the wto in june 2003 that the payment , which will be made into a fund for eu performers , constitutes a temporary settlement of the dispute .

they also agreed that the eu may request that the suspended arbitration be resumed any time after december 20 , 2004 , or if the united states fails to pay within 45 days after being notified that the fund has been established .

in november 2004 , shortly before the three - year u.s. - eu agreement expired , the eu complained to the dsb that the united states had taken only minimal steps to secure the passage of legislation that would bring the united states into full compliance in the case .

the eu has regularly raised the issue of u.s. noncompliance at dsb meetings , with the united states continuing to report to the dsb that it will work with congress on the matter .

during a july 2009 meeting on bilateral trade relations held in washington , dc , ustr kirk and european union trade commissioner ashton "exchanged ideas on potential steps to address" this dispute , and "directed … [their] staffs to explore new options on this dispute in the coming weeks. .

no agreement on resolving the dispute has yet been announced .

as it has since the 2009 meeting with the eu , the united states reported to the dsb in february 2011 that , as well as working closely with congress , it "will continue to confer with the european union in order to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter. .

this dispute , at the time referred to as the "havana club" case , involves a statute ( p.l .

105-277 , 112 stat .

2681-88 ) , which prohibits the registration or enforcement in the united states , without the consent of the original owner or successors , of a trademark that is the same or substantially the same as one used in connection with a business or assets confiscated by the cuban government .

challenged by the european union ( eu ) in 1999 , the law was ultimately found to violate national treatment and most - favored - nation obligations in the trips agreement in that it limited the prohibition on registration and enforcement of rights to rights asserted by cuba and cuban nationals or their successors - in - interest .

panel and appellate body reports in the case were adopted january 2 , 2002 .

the original compliance period , as agreed upon by the united states and the eu , expired december 31 , 2002 ; it was extended four times , also by agreement , most recently to june 30 , 2005 .

the united states did not comply by this date .

instead of agreeing to an extension of the deadline or , alternatively , requesting authorization to retaliate , the eu entered into an agreement with the united states regarding rights and procedures involving any future eu retaliation request .

the eu agreed not to request authorization from the dsb to suspend concessions for the time being , but pledged to notify and consult with the united states before making any such request in the future .

for its part , the united states agreed not to block any retaliation request by the eu on the ground that the request is outside the 30-day window provided for in article 22.6 of the dsu .

the united states also retained the right to object to a proposed retaliation request and to refer the matter to arbitration .

the eu , cuba , and other wto members continue to raise the issue of u.s. noncompliance at dsb meetings , while the united states has reported to the dsb that legislative proposals that would implement the wto ruling have been introduced in the house and senate and that it will work with congress on legislative vehicles to resolve this matter .

a hearing on possible changes to u.s. law in light of the wto decision was held by the house judiciary committee on march 3 , 2010 .

in the 112 th congress , h.r .

255 ( serrano ) and h.r .

1887 ( rangel ) would repeal section 211 , remove the current trade embargo on cuba , and make other statutory changes involving u.s. - cuba relations .

h.r .

1888 ( rangel ) would repeal section 211 and make various statutory changes to facilitate the export to cuba of u.s. agricultural and medical products .

s. 603 ( bill nelson ) and h.r .

1166 ( issa ) would amend section 211 to apply to all persons claiming rights in trademarks confiscated by cuba , whatever their nationality .

