this report provides responses to frequently asked questions about the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant .

it is intended to serve as a quick reference to provide easy access to information and data .

appendix b presents a series of tables with state - level data .

this report does not provide information on tanf program rules ( for a discussion of tanf rules , see crs report rl32748 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a primer on tanf financing and federal requirements , by gene falk ) .

there are no federal rules that help determine the amount of tanf cash benefits paid to a family .

 ( there are also no federal rules that require states to use tanf to pay cash benefits , though all states do so. ) .

benefit amounts are determined solely by the states .

most states base tanf cash benefit amounts on family size , paying larger cash benefits to larger families on the presumption that they have greater financial needs .

the maximum monthly cash benefit is usually paid to a family that receives no other income ( eg , no earned or unearned income ) and complies with program rules .

families with income other than tanf often are paid a reduced benefit .

moreover , some families are financially sanctioned for not meeting a program requirement ( eg , a work requirement ) , and are also paid a lower benefit .

figure 4 shows the maximum monthly tanf cash benefit by state for a single mother caring for two children ( family of three ) in july 2016 .

the benefit amounts shown are those for a single - parent family with two children .

for a family of three , the maximum tanf benefit paid in july 2017 varied from $170 per month in mississippi to $1,201 per month in new hampshire .

the map shows a regional pattern to the maximum monthly benefit paid , with lower benefit amounts in the south than in other regions .

only new hampshire ( at 60% of the federal poverty guidelines ) had a maximum tanf cash assistance amount for this sized family in excess of 50% of poverty - level income .

tanf's main federal work requirement is actually a performance measure that applies to the states , rather than individual recipients .

states determine the work rules that apply to individual recipients .

the tanf statute requires states to have 50% of their caseload meet standards of participation in work or activities — that is , a family member must be in specified activities for a minimum number of hours .

there is a separate participation standard that applies to the two - parent portion of a state's caseload , requiring 90% of the state's two - parent caseload to meet participation standards .

however , the statutory work participation standards are reduced by a "caseload reduction credit. .

the caseload reduction credit reduces the participation standard one percentage point for each percentage point decline in a state's caseload .

additionally , under a regulatory provision , a state may get "extra" credit for caseload reduction if it spends more than required under the tanf moe .

therefore , the effective standards states face are often less than the 50% and 90% targets , and vary by state and by year .

states that do not meet the tanf work participation standard are at risk of being penalized through a reduction in their block grant .

however , penalties can be forgiven if a state claims , and the secretary of hhs finds , that it had "reasonable cause" for not meeting the standard .

penalties can also be forgiven for states that enter into "corrective compliance plans," and subsequently meet the work standard .

the 50% and 90% target standards that states face , as well as the caseload reduction credit , date back to the 1996 welfare reform law .

however , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) made several changes to the work participation rules effective in fy2007 the caseload reduction credit was changed to measure caseload reduction from fy2005 , rather than the original law's fy1995 .

the work participation standards were broadened to include families receiving cash aid in "separate state programs. .

separate state programs are programs run with state funds , distinct from a state's "tanf program," but with expenditures countable toward the tanf moe .

hhs was instructed to provide definition to the allowable tanf work activities listed in law .

hhs was also required to define what is meant by a "work - eligible" individual , expanding the number of families that are included in the work participation calculation .

states were required to develop plans and procedures to verify work activities .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , a law enacted in response to the sharp economic downturn of 2007-2009 , held states "harmless" for caseload increases affecting the work participation standards for fy2009 through fy2011 .

it did so by allowing states to "freeze" caseload reduction credits at pre - recession levels through the fy2011 standards .

hhs computes two work participation rates for each state that are then compared with the effective ( after - credit ) standard to determine if it has met the tanf work standard .

an "all - families" work participation rate is computed and compared with the all - families effective standard ( 50% minus the state's caseload reduction credit ) .

hhs also computes a two - parent work participation rate that is compared with the two - parent effective standard ( 90% minus the state's caseload reduction credit ) .

figure 5 shows the national average all - families work participation rate for fy2002 through fy2017 .

for the period fy2002 through fy2011 , states achieved an average all - families work participation rate hovering around 30% .

the work participation rate increased since then .

in fy2016 , it exceeded 50% for the first time since tanf was established .

however , it is important to note that the increase in the work participation rate has not come from an increase in the number of recipients in regular tanf assistance programs who are either working or in job preparation activities .

this increase stems mostly from states creating new "earnings supplement" programs that use tanf funds to aid working parents in the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) or who have left the regular tanf assistance programs for work .

 figure 6 shows which states did not meet the tanf all - families work participation standards from fy2006 through fy2017 .

before fy2007 , the first year that dra was effective , only a few jurisdictions did not meet tanf all - families work participation standards .

however , in fy2007 , 15 jurisdictions did not meet the all - families standard .

this number declined to 9 in fy2008 and 8 in fy2009 .

in fy2012 , despite the uptick in the national average work participation rate , 16 states did not meet the all - family standard , the largest number of states that did not meet their participation standards in any one year since the enactment of tanf .

fy2012 was the year that arra's "freeze" of the caseload reduction credit expired , and states were generally required to meet higher standards than in previous years .

the number of jurisdictions that did not meet the all - families standard declined over the fy2012 to fy2017 period .

in fy2017 , two jurisdictions did not meet the all - family participation standard: nevada and guam .

in addition to meeting a work standard for all families , tanf also imposes a second standard — 90% — for the two - parent portion of its cash assistance caseload .

this standard can also be lowered by caseload reduction .

figure 7 shows whether each state met its two - parent work participation standard for fy2006 through fy2017 .

however , the display on the table is more complex than that for reporting whether a state met or did not meet its "all family" rate .

a substantial number of states have reported no two - parent families subject to the work participation standard .

these states are denoted on the table with an "na," indicating that the two - parent standard was not applicable to the state in that year .

before the changes made by the dra were effective , a number of states had their two - parent families in separate state programs that were not included in the work participation calculation .

when dra brought families receiving assistance in separate state programs into the work participation rate calculations , a number of states moved these families into solely state - funded programs .

these are state - funded programs with expenditures not countable toward the tanf maintenance of effort requirement , and hence are outside of tanf's rules .

for states with two - parent families in their caseloads , the table reports "yes" for states that met the two - parent standard , and "no" for states that did not meet the two - parent standard .

of the 28 jurisdictions that had two - parent families in their fy2017 tanf work participation calculation , 19 met the standard and 9 did not .

appendix a .

supplementary tables appendix b .

state table .

