when a party involved in a lawsuit makes a payment pursuant to a judgment or binding settlement agreement , the payment may be included in the recipient's income and may be deductible from the payor's income .

a separate issue that also arises in litigation is whether either party may deduct the legal expenses incurred in the suit .

the nature of the underlying claim is critical in determining the proper tax treatment of these payments and expenses .

this report examines the tax consequences of these payments and expenses .

it ends with a summary of the legislation proposed in the 109 th congress that would affect these consequences .

for tax purposes , it does not matter whether the payment is made pursuant to a judgment or a binding settlement agreement .

furthermore , a payment made in a lump sum has the same consequences as a payment made in periodic installments , although the timing of the inclusion and / or deduction will differ .

in this report , the terms "award" and "damages" are used interchangeably and intended to include all such payments .

portions of a payment may face different treatment depending on what each represents ( eg , replacement for lost wages , reimbursement of medical expenses , or punitive damages ) .

the different parts may be designated by the court in the judgment or by the parties in the settlement agreement .

the parties must generally follow these allocations for tax purposes .

if the judgment or agreement is silent , then the taxpayer must make the appropriate allocations .

in any case , the internal revenue service ( irs ) or a judicial authority may reallocate the payment to properly reflect the actual substance of the award .

in order to determine the appropriate allocation , the irs and reviewing authorities will look at such things as the complaint , other pleadings , evidence presented at trial , and a settlement agreement .

for awards received pursuant to a judgment or settlement for claims involving personal physical injury or sickness , the recipient's tax consequences are determined under section 104 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

for all other claims ( i.e. , non - personal injury and personal non - physical injury claims ) , general tax principles include the award in the recipient's income unless an exclusion exists for the item of income that the payment is meant to replace .

when a taxpayer makes a payment pursuant to a judgment or settlement , the payment may be deductible as a business expense under irc § 162 or as an income - production expense under irc § 212 .

this is generally true regardless of whether the payment represents compensatory or punitive damages .

however , a deduction is not allowed to the extent that the taxpayer has been reimbursed for the expenses through insurance or other means .

additionally , fines and penalties paid to a government and payments in antitrust suits are subject to special rules .

h.r .

1985 ( federal whistleblower protection tax act of 2005 ) would exclude damages and the amounts awarded for attorneys' fees and costs from the recipient's income in claims brought under federal whistleblower protection laws .

punitive damages and damages on account of lost income would not be excluded from income .

the bill would allow income - averaging on awards of lost income , so that the whistleblower would not be taxed on the entire award in the year it was received .

h.r .

2755 ( victims tax fairness act of 2005 ) would explicitly state that the recipient's gross income includes awards representing attorneys' fees and costs in non - physical personal injury cases , and then would allow the recipient to deduct the full amount as an above - the - line deduction .

h.r .

3076 ( freedom from unnecessary litigation act of 2005 ) would exclude all medical malpractice damages that were awarded in binding arbitration from the recipient's income .

h.r .

4707 ( simplified usa tax act of 2006 ) would return the law to how it was before sbjpa .

awards , other than punitive damages , for non - physical personal injury or sickness and punitive damages for physical personal injury or sickness would be eligible for the irc § 104 exclusion .

this is one provision in the bill , which is a fundamental tax reform bill .

several bills contain a provision that would amend irc § 162 ( f ) to expand the disallowance of a deduction for the payment of fines and penalties to a government .

under the provision , only the portion of a payment paid to a government in relation to the violation of any law or the investigation or inquiry into the potential violation of any law that represents restitution would be deductible .

additionally , no deduction would be allowed for a payment to a nongovernmental regulatory agency if the payment would have been nondeductible if paid to a government .

the provision would clarify that payments for fines and penalties are not deductible when made under the direction of , and not just to , a government or nongovernmental agency .

it would also require the government or agency to report information on the payment to the irs and all the parties in the suit .

the provision is included in s. 1565 ( tax shelter and tax haven reform act of 2005 ) and the senate - passed version of h.r .

3 ( safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005 ) .

h.r .

3 was enacted into law as p.l .

109-59 with the provision stripped during conference .

additionally , two bills include similar provisions that would also allow a deduction for amounts paid to come into compliance with any law which was violated or involved in the investigation or inquiry .

these are s. 1890 ( government settlement transparency act of 2005 ) and the senate - passed version of h.r .

4297 ( tax relief act of 2005 ) .

a provision in several bills would prohibit a payor from deducting the payment of punitive damages .

a limited exception would exist for punitive damages paid under a wrongful death statute described in irc § 104 ( c ) .

also under the provision , if the punitive damages were paid by insurance , then the insured party would include the amount in income and the insurer would report the amount to the irs .

this provision has been introduced in s. 2020 ( tax relief act of 2005 ) , the senate - passed version of h.r .

4297 ( tax relief act of 2005 ) , and the senate - passed version of h.r .

3 ( safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005 ) .

h.r .

3 was enacted into law as p.l .

109-59 with the punitive damages provision stripped during conference .

