three need - based federal student aid ( fsa ) programs authorized under the higher education act of 1965 , as amended ( hea ) — the federal supplemental educational opportunity grant ( fseog ) program , the federal work - study ( fws ) program , and the federal perkins loan program — are collectively referred to as the campus - based financial aid programs .

the programs are called the campus - based programs largely because participating institutions of higher education ( ihes ) have a significant role in administering the programs and because they must use institutional funds to match the federal funds they receive for the operation of the programs .

in contrast to other need - based fsa programs in which aid is awarded to students according to non - discretionary criteria , the financial aid administrators of participating ihes have discretion in determining the mix and amount of aid individual students receive from funds made available under the programs .

the fseog program allows ihes to provide grant aid to undergraduate students who have not yet earned a first baccalaureate degree .

the fws program supports undergraduate and graduate students through subsidized part - time employment .

under the perkins loan program , ihes use federal capital contributions ( fccs ) to help establish revolving loan funds from which they make low - interest loans to undergraduate and graduate students .

over $3.8 billion in financial aid is awarded annually to students under the three programs .

the programs are popular with many ihes and financial aid administrators because of the flexibility they provide to tailor aid to meet the specific needs of students and for the ability to shift funds between programs .

the programs have come to be criticized , however , for the way in which the majority of funding provided for the programs is allocated to institutions in proportion to the amount they received in previous award years , as opposed to being allocated entirely according to the aggregate financial need of the students attending each institution .

the programs have also been criticized because the current distribution of funds allows institutions that receive proportionately more funding on a per - student basis to give larger campus - based awards to more students and to students with higher incomes than can be awarded at other institutions .

some have proposed modifying the campus - based programs' funding procedures to gradually phase out the current practice of allocating the majority of funds to institutions on the basis of the amounts they received in prior years and to require that all funding eventually be provided in proportion to the aggregate financial need of students at participating institutions .

others have expressed concern that amending the allocation procedures without also providing increased funding for the campus - based programs overall might result only in making more aid available to needy students at some institutions at the expense of needy students at those institutions that would experience funding decreases .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

609 , as introduced in the house , would have amended the allocation procedures for the campus - based programs to gradually phase out provisions that provide for the allocation of funds on the basis of the amounts institutions' received in prior years so that eventually all funds would be allocated to institutions on the basis of their aggregate student financial need .

however , these provisions were removed during consideration of the bill , and h.r .

609 as passed by the house would have retained the current allocation procedures .

the senate bill to reauthorize the hea in the 109 th congress , s. 1614 , also would have retained the current allocation procedures .

while the 110 th congress will likely consider bills to amend and extend the hea , it is unclear whether substantive changes to the allocation procedures to the campus - based programs will be proposed .

 ( additional information on the campus - based programs , including a history of appropriations and basic program data for each of the three programs , and a review and analysis of proposals to amend the programs under bills that would reauthorize the hea can be found in crs report rl31618 , campus - based student financial aid programs under the higher education act , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

this report describes and analyzes the process through which federal funds are currently allocated to ihes under the campus - based programs and also examines the subsequent distribution of aid to recipients of awards provided under the programs .

the report begins with a brief overview of the procedures used to allocate funds to ihes under each of the three programs .

this includes a discussion of the development of the allocation procedures and significant changes to them over the history of the programs .

next , the report analyzes the allocation of funds to ihes according to the current allocation procedures , focusing on key aspects of these procedures that largely affect the distribution of funds to institutions .

the report then discusses issues related to the campus - based programs that may be considered as the 110 th congress debates reauthorization of the hea .

in particular , it examines how the distribution of funds to institutions might be affected should the current allocation procedures for the programs be amended to phase out the allocation of funds on the basis of prior year allocations in favor of providing institutions with funding entirely on the basis of aggregate student need , as had been proposed in prior congresses .

the report concludes with a review and analysis of the distribution of campus - based financial aid to different types of students at participating ihes and an examination of the role that the current allocation procedures may have in affecting the distribution of aid .

under each of the campus - based programs , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) allocates funds to participating ihes according to a complex two - stage procedure .

these allocation procedures are specified in the authorizing statute of each program .

while there are slight differences between programs , the allocation procedures all share the same basic framework .

in the first stage , an ihe that is a continuing participant in a program receives funding based on what it received in prior years .

this is commonly referred to as the base guarantee .

in general , an ihe's base guarantee is equal to some portion of the funds it received in fy1999 ; however , there are also procedures for allocating a base guarantee to ihes that began participating in a campus - based program after fy1999 .

in the second stage , any funds remaining after the allocation of base guarantees are allocated to ihes according to need - based formula allocation procedures .

under the allocation formulas for the programs , each ihe receives funding in proportion to its share of the national total of institutional need that is in excess of the amount it received as its base guarantee .

 ( institutional need is a program - specific measure of the total financial need of all eligible students at an ihe ) .

under each of the formulas , ed determines the amount of funds each ihe would receive if the entire appropriation for the program were to be allocated in proportion to its share of the national total of institutional need ( supposing that no funds were allocated for base guarantees ) .

this amount is referred to as an institution's fair share .

if an ihe's fair share is greater than its base guarantee , it has a shortfall in funding and is eligible to receive additional funding — a fair share increase — to help reduce its shortfall .

an ihe's total allocation is the sum of its base guarantee and its fair share increase .

figure 1 summarizes the allocation procedures for the campus - based programs .

the basic structure for allocating campus - based program funding to institutions — first for base guarantees , and then for fair share increases — can be traced back to procedures developed in the late 1970's and first put into place for the 1979-1980 award year .

funding for the campus - based programs previously was allocated according to a different two - stage procedure in which funds first were apportioned on a state - by - state basis according to the student population in each state , and then sub - allocated to ihes on the basis of the student need at institutions within each state according to a procedure called the panel review process .

under the panel review process , institutions would apply to receive a share of the funds allocated to their state based on the projected financial need of their students .

a regional panel would then review the institutions' applications and determine the amount of funding each ihe would receive .

in the mid - 1970s , the panel review process became subject to criticism for being too complex and time - consuming , and for leading to inequities in the distribution of aid to students .

in response , the u.s. office of education convened a panel of experts to study and make recommendations on how to allocate funds to ihes under the campus - based programs .

the panel's recommendations led to the implementation of new allocation procedures .

over time , these procedures have been modified slightly ; however , the same basic structure remains .

at the time the new allocation procedures were adopted , it was decided that in the first year of their implementation , ihes would first be allocated funds in amounts comparable to what they had received in the past .

called the conditional guarantee , this was the precursor to the current base guarantee .

funds remaining after the allocation of conditional guarantees would be allocated according to the fair share formulas .

in the first year of implementation , conditional guarantees were to be set at the greater of the amount of funds ihes had expended in either the 1977-1978 or 1978-1979 award years .

the next year , they were to receive 90% of that amount .

in subsequent years , conditional guarantees were to be gradually reduced until ultimately all funds were allocated according to the fair share allocation procedures .

ultimately , however , conditional guarantees — now called base guarantees — were not phased out .

the majority of the funds appropriated for each of the three campus - based programs continues to be allocated for institutional base guarantees .

 ( it is important to note that as appropriations increase , a greater proportion of funding becomes available for fair share increases , while a decrease in appropriations results in proportionally more funding being allocated for base guarantees. ) .

the capacity of an ihe to award campus - based aid to eligible students is directly related to the amount of funds it receives .

the major factors determining each ihe's allocation are its base guarantee , its cost of attendance ( coa ) , the number of fsa applicants , and the expected family contributions ( efcs ) of those students .

the remainder of this first part of the report describes the major components of the campus - based allocation procedures .

this part of the report analyzes the allocation of funds to ihes according to the current campus - based allocation procedures .

this analysis draws upon information from both the fiscal operations report and application to participate ( fisap ) and from 2004-2005 award year ( fy2004 ) allocations data .

the two major components of the allocation procedures are analyzed: the base guarantee and the fair share increase .

the primary unit of analysis used throughout the remainder of the report is categories of institutions grouped by average coa .

cost of attendance is used as the primary unit of analysis because , as a variable in the fair share allocation formulas , coa has an important impact in affecting the allocation of funds to institutions .

later , it will be shown that there are also large differences among categories of institutions , grouped by coa , in the percentage of students awarded campus - based aid and in average award amounts .

it has just been shown that at present , the majority of funding provided for the campus - based programs is allocated for base guarantees .

slightly more than 40% of funding is available for allocation according to fair share criteria for the fseog program , one - third for the fws program , and less than 8% for perkins loan fccs .

with most funding being devoted to meeting institutional base guarantees , it might be expected that should the funding of base guarantees be phased out so that all funds would be allocated through the fair share formulas , shifts in the distribution of funds across institutions would occur .

this part of the report estimates and analyzes the prospect of eliminating base guarantees in favor of allocating all campus - based funding according to the existing fair share formulas .

this is done for each of the three campus - based programs following the framework used throughout this report — categories of institutions grouped by coa .

this last part of the report explores the distribution of aid to students under the campus - based programs .

the framework developed earlier in the report — participating ihes grouped into categories based on their average coa — is used to show the differences that exist between ihes in the proportion of students with different incomes and dependency status that receive campus - based awards and the value of their awards .

the distribution of awards is shown and briefly described for each of the three programs , and for combined aid awarded through all the programs .

the procedures currently used to allocate funds to institutions under the campus - based programs were developed several decades ago in response to concerns that had been raised about the inequitable distribution of funds .

when these procedures were developed , it was envisioned that funds would be allocated according to a series of formulas designed to provide each institution with funding in proportion to its fair share of aggregate student need .

to ease the transition to the new formula - based fair share method of allocating funds , for a limited period , ihes were to receive a conditional or base guarantee of funding proportional to the amount they had received in a base year .

however , instead of being phased out over time , base guarantees remain the primary method for allocating the majority of the funds appropriated for the campus - based programs .

in recent years , proposals again have been made to phase out funding for base guarantees and to transition to the allocation of funds to institutions entirely on the basis of their fair share of aggregate student need .

to facilitate an understanding of the potential consequences of modifying the current procedures for allocating funds to institutions , this report has set out to explain in detail the functioning of the current allocation procedures and the resulting distribution of aid to students .

throughout the report , the distribution of funding to institutions and the distribution of aid to students was explored by grouping institutions into categories in rank order of their costs of attendance .

it was shown that under each of the campus - based programs the majority of funding is currently allocated to institutions on the basis of their institutional base guarantees .

in each of the programs , there is only modest variation across categories of institutions in the proportion of total funding allocated to institutions on the basis of their base guarantees , while there is somewhat more variation across institutions grouped by states .

most of the funding provided for the fseog and fws programs is allocated according to institutional base guarantees , and nearly all is for the perkins loan program .

an analysis of the calculation of institutional need has shown that institutional coa plays a critical role in determining the amount of aggregate need calculated under the fair share formulas for any particular ihe .

since coa varies widely across institutions , vastly different amounts of need can be calculated on a per - student basis depending on the characteristics of the institution .

in many instances , for high - cost institutions the average amount of need calculated on a per - student basis greatly exceeds the maximum award amount , and exceeds the federal share by an even greater amount .

when examined in the aggregate for categories of institutions , it was shown that at low - cost institutions , institutional need is largely the aggregate need of undergraduate independent students and low - income dependent students ; whereas at higher - cost institutions , institutional need is largely the aggregate need of upper - income undergraduate dependent students and graduate and professional students .

it was also noted that for the fseog program , aggregate student need is offset by pell grant aid ( which is targeted primarily at low - income students ) , while no adjustments are made for higher education tax benefits ( which are beneficial primarily to middle - and upper - income students ) .

the prospect of eliminating the allocation of funds for institutional base guarantees in favor of providing all funding on the basis of fair share criteria was also examined .

it was found that in the fseog program , there would only be a modest redistribution of funds across categories of ihes based on coa .

nonetheless , there would be a considerable amount of churning in the allocation of funds within categories , and more institutions would receive an increase in funding than a decrease .

for the fws and perkins loan programs , if funds were to be allocated entirely on the basis of the fair share formulas , very high - cost ihes , as a category , would receive a funding increase , due to the high aggregate need of their student bodies .

overall , however , more ihes would receive allocation increases than decreases if base guarantees were eliminated .

analysis of the distribution of aid to students revealed that despite there being a strong correlation between a student's family income and the cost of attendance at the institution a student attends , larger proportions of students at high - cost institutions receive campus - based aid than students at low - cost institutions .

in the fseog program , award amounts are larger at high - cost ihes than at low - cost ones , while in the fws and perkins loan programs , awards tend to be of similar values across institutions and student groups .

higher - cost institutions are more likely to participate in all three campus - based programs than are lower - cost institutions .

however , even when examining only institutions that participate in all three programs , it is revealed that higher - cost institutions are able to give larger awards to a higher proportion of their students than are lower - cost institutions .

the findings presented in this report highlight an important characteristic of need based financial aid — that student financial need is relative to the coa at the institution a student attends .

a middle - or upper - income student attending a higher - cost institution may have financial need , whereas a similarly situated student attending a low - cost institution might have no financial need .

under the campus - based programs , this has resulted in higher - cost institutions having greater institutional need , on a per - student basis , than lower - cost institutions .

in turn , this has allowed higher - cost ihes to provide larger awards — even to students with higher incomes — than could be provided by lower - cost ihes .

still , at higher - cost ihes , these substantially larger campus - based awards typically cover a much smaller portion of coa than do awards at lower - cost ihes .

