public diplomacy is the promotion of america's interests , culture and policies by informing and influencing foreign populations .

immediately after the september 11 th terrorist attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , the bush administration found itself in , not only a military , but also a public diplomacy war on terrorism .

an early realization of the importance of words and cultural understanding surfaced when president bush soon after the attacks named the u.s. response "operation enduring crusade," a name that was quickly changed when experts pointed out that it could be interpreted by muslims as being inflammatory .

in 1999 / 2000 , according to the 2003 pew survey , more than 50% , and as high as 83% , of foreign populations around the world held favorable views of the united states .

perhaps because of complacency with our position in the world and with the end of the cold war , congress and past administrations downplayed the importance of funding public diplomacy activities .

public diplomacy was viewed as having a lower priority than political and military functions , and received less funding , while more money went to other activities deemed more important or more popular with constituents .

funding levels for public diplomacy dropped considerably during the late 1990s , due in part to the consolidation of broadcasting entities in fy1994 and the abolishment of the u.s. information agency in october 1999 — signs , according to some , that public diplomacy was not highly valued .

after the 2001 attacks , people around the world expressed shock and support for the u.s. government .

since then , however , negative attitudes about america have increased and become more intense , not just within muslim populations , but worldwide .

the iraq war , begun in march 2003 , exacerbated negative opinions of america in virtually every country polled — both traditional allies and non allies .

since the beginning of the iraq war , realization emerged that strong negative public opinion about the united states could affect how helpful countries will be in the iraq war and in the separate war on terrorism .

moreover , negative sentiment might assist terrorist groups in recruiting new members .

therefore , in recent years a sense of urgency to utilize public diplomacy to the maximum extent possible has been expressed by top level officials , think tanks , and the 9 / 11 commission .

the 108 th congress weighed in on the importance of public diplomacy by including public diplomacy measures in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) to: promote free media in islamic countries , scholarships for muslims to attend american - sponsored schools , public diplomacy training in the department of state , and establish an international youth opportunity fund within an existing organization such as the united nations educational , science and cultural organization ( unesco ) .

these initiatives will take some time to show any impact .

whether they can generate sufficient good will to effectively counter terrorism , however , remains to be seen .

the 109 th congress has not passed any legislation authorizing any changes in public diplomacy , but has increased public diplomacy funding .

 ( see chart below. ) .

meanwhile , a 2006 pew survey concluded that , "the war in iraq is a continuing drag on opinions of the united states , not only in predominately muslim countries but in europe and asia as well... .

favorable opinions of the united states have fallen in most of the 15 countries surveyed. .

the u.s. government has always targeted public diplomacy to some degree .

from its earliest years , public diplomacy was targeted to reach audiences in europe to influence the outcome of world war i and world war ii .

it was later used primarily in eastern europe and the soviet union to help end the cold war .

in recent years , congress and the administration have sought ways to use public diplomacy tools to influence muslim and arab populations to combat terrorism , improve coordination of public diplomacy activities throughout the government ( via the policy coordinating committee , or pcc ) , increase funding through regular and supplemental appropriations , and better evaluate current programs to gain future effectiveness .

one of the most visible examples of public diplomacy soon after the september 11 th attacks was secretary of state colin powell's appearance on mtv in february 2002 , reaching out to , and candidly answering questions from , young people around the world about what america represents .

mtv at that time reached 375 million households in 63 countries worldwide .

other public diplomacy actions over the past three years targeted toward arab and muslim populations occurred in all three categories of public diplomacy , specifically emphasizing such concepts as religious tolerance , ethnic diversity , the importance of an independent media , elections and educational reform .

despite all that has been accomplished in revamping u.s. public diplomacy in the last three years to better respond to the terrorism threat , the questions arise: is it worth it and is it enough ? .

then - national security council advisor , condoleezza rice cited the new initiatives but conceded that more needed to be done .

she recommended the creation of sister cities programs , student and professional exchanges , and language and area studies programs that focus on the muslim world .

u.s. public diplomacy has been viewed by some as overseas pr , but congressional testimony in 2004 by members of the 9 / 11 commission suggest that it goes much deeper than that .

public diplomacy , they said , must now be viewed as a dialogue , not a monologue , to reach a deeper understanding between societies and build long - term relationships and trust between government officials and their societies .

"if we don't have long - term relationships with muslim populations , we cannot have trust .

without trust , public diplomacy is ineffective. .

the 9 / 11 commission report stated that the u.s. government must use all its tools to win the war on terrorism .

former governor thomas kean testified before congress in august 2004 that terrorism is our number one threat now and that public diplomacy is one tool among many that should be used to combat the ongoing war against terrorism .

"if we favor any [tools] and neglect others , we leave ourselves vulnerable. .

similarly , a former under secretary of state for public diplomacy , stated recently that "activities associated with public diplomacy need to be seriously prioritized on an equal level with an aircraft carrier .

both are equally important. .

among the specific recommendations , the 9 / 11 commission suggested giving the broadcasting board of governors increased funding to do more broadcasting to arab and muslim populations .

enacted bbg total appropriations in recent years have ranged from $420 million in fy2000 to $599.6 million in fy2005 .

post 9 / 11 emergency supplemental appropriations to date have totaled $143.7 million for bbg .

the 9 / 11 report recommended that , just as the united states did during the cold war , this country should identify what it stands for and communicate that message clearly .

in addition to more funding for international broadcasting , the commission urged increased funding for more exchanges , scholarships , and libraries overseas and asserted that whenever assistance is provided , it should be clearly identified as coming from the citizens of the united states .

chairman thomas kean asserted in recent testimony that ( excluding iraq ) egypt is the second largest recipient of u.s. assistance , yet only 15% of egyptians have a favorable view of americans , according to polls .

in addition to bilateral programs , the commission recommended that the u.s. government join with other nations in generously supporting a new international youth opportunity fund .

the report stated that education and literacy lead to economic opportunity and freedom ; therefore , better textbooks that do not teach racism or hatred to arab and muslim children , and offering a choice of schools other than extremist madrassas are among the steps that may be key to eliminating islamist terrorism .

another multilateral approach the commission recommended is the establishment of a forum , perhaps modeled after the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , for engaging both western and arab and muslim representatives to discuss each culture's needs and perspectives .

an organization of this nature , said the commission , would help create long - term relationships and understanding among all countries .

improved relationships would lead to cooperation and trust among western and muslim populations , which is critical for containing or eliminating global terrorism , the report said .

the commission emphasized that the vast majority of muslims worldwide are moderates who do not agree with violence .

in contrast , the commission stated that the islamist terrorists hate america and all that it stands for , and violence and terror are their weapons against the united states .

the commission asserted that the united states , through public diplomacy , can find a way to drive a wedge between the two groups .

we can gain the support of the moderate majority by exporting optimism and hope for a good future for their children through public diplomacy , the commission reported .

prior to establishment of the 9 / 11 commission , several organizations studied public diplomacy in order to improve international goodwill and america's image , as well as to combat terrorism .

the council on foreign relations , the government accountability office ( gao ) , the advisory group on public diplomacy for the arab and muslim world , and the broadcasting board of governors , in addition to some members of congress and congressional committees , offered suggestions intended to elevate public diplomacy and make it more effective .

some options follow: create a corporation for public diplomacy with tax - exempt status under section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the u.s. tax code , that would receive private sector grants and coordinate private and public sector involvement in public diplomacy ; reconstitute usia or some other entity that would have u.s. public diplomacy as its sole mission ; increase the emphasis on public diplomacy throughout all u.s. government agencies , with organizational changes in the white house , national security council , and the state department ; require all foreign policy agencies to train key staff in public diplomacy and languages ; and measure the success of public diplomacy efforts by blending the best practices used in the public and private sectors , and improve public diplomacy program effectiveness with the knowledge attained .

public diplomacy is one of numerous tools that the united states has used since the early 20 th century to promote u.s. interests abroad .

over the decades since its formal authorization by the smith - mundt act of 1948 , views have fluctuated between vigorously supporting public diplomacy as a highly valuable foreign policy tool and disparaging it as a government program with no constituency and uncertain long - term benefits .

after the end of the cold war , many in congress questioned the expense and abolished the usia , moving public diplomacy into the department of state where it could be more closely coordinated with other foreign policy tools .

since the terrorist attacks in 2001 , many in congress have advocated an increase in public diplomacy funding to "win the hearts and minds of muslims" and , perhaps , help prevent future attacks .

the 9 / 11 commission report agreed with significantly increasing the budget and status of public diplomacy as has been done with the military .

some foreign policy experts and members of congress have cautioned , however , that public diplomacy is only good if the message is credible .

recent worldwide polls show that the united states government continues to be viewed with skepticism by much of the world , not just among arab and muslim populations .

when the message isn't consistent with what people see or experience independently , many assert , public diplomacy is not effective .

furthermore , they say , if u.s. foreign policy is the primary cause of negative foreign opinion , then public diplomacy may be less effective than lawmakers would like .

america could benefit , however , if in this view , the government uses public diplomacy more proactively to clearly and truthfully explain u.s. foreign policy actions , rather than appearing indifferent to world opinion .

according to the advisory group on public diplomacy for the arab and muslim world , "spin and manipulative public relations and propaganda are not the answer .

...sugar - coating and fast talking are not solutions , nor is absenting ourselves. .

and as edward r. murrow ( usia director , 1961 - 1964 ) said in 1963 before a house subcommittee regarding u.s. public diplomacy activities: american traditions and the american ethic require us to be truthful.... truth is the best propaganda and lies are the worst .

to be persuasive we must be believable ; to be believable we must be credible ; to be credible we must be truthful .

it is as simple as that .

p.l .

108-458 ( s. 2845 ) intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 .

a bill to reform the intelligence community and the intelligence and intelligence - related activities of the united states government , and for other purposes .

introduced september 23 , 2004 .

s.amdt .

3942 would increase in muslim populations public diplomacy activities including through increased broadcasting , educational exchanges , and establishing the international youth opportunity fund .

the president signed it into law ( p.l .

108-458 ) on december 17 , 2004 .

