the community services block grant traces its roots to the war on poverty , launched by president lyndon johnson more than 50 years ago when he proposed the economic opportunity act of 1964 .

in his march 1964 message to congress , president johnson said the act would "give every american community the opportunity to develop a comprehensive plan to fight its own poverty — and help them to carry out their plans. .

this was to be achieved through a new community action program that would "strike poverty at its source — in the streets of our cities and on the farms of our countryside among the very young and the impoverished old. .

a central feature of the new community action program was that local residents would identify the unique barriers and unmet needs contributing to poverty in their individual communities and develop plans to address those needs , drawing on resources from all levels of government and the private sector .

the program would be overseen by a newly created office of economic opportunity , which would pay part of the costs of implementing these local plans .

president johnson signed the economic opportunity act into law on august 20 , 1964 ( p.l .

88-452 ) , and within a few years , a nationwide network of about 1,000 local community action agencies was established .

this report provides information on the community services block grant ( csbg ) , which is the modern - day program that continues to fund this network of local antipoverty agencies .

the report also describes several smaller related programs that are administered by the same federal office that currently oversees the csbg .

the report begins with background information and legislative history of the csbg and related activities ( " background " ) ; it then summarizes the ways in which csbg eligible entities use funds and who is served ( " csbg program data " ) .

the next section discusses recent funding for csbg ( " funding for csbg and related activities " ) , and the final section provides an overview of legislation in the 114 th congress that would have reauthorized csbg and related activities ( " reauthorization proposal in the 114th congress " ) .

appendix a has tables showing historical funding for csbg and related activities dating back to the beginning of the program , in 1982 , as well as a table with csbg funding distributed to states , tribes , and territories in recent years .

the most recent review of csbg by the government accountability office ( gao ) is discussed in appendix b .

administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the community services block grant ( csbg ) provides federal funds to states , territories , and indian tribes for distribution to local agencies in support of a variety of antipoverty activities .

as noted above , the origins of the csbg date back to 1964 , when the economic opportunity act ( p.l .

88-452 ; 42 u.s.c .

§2701 ) established the war on poverty and authorized the office of economic opportunity ( oeo ) as the lead agency in the federal antipoverty campaign .

a centerpiece of oeo was the community action program , which would directly involve low - income people in the design and administration of antipoverty activities in their communities through mandatory representation on local agency governing boards .

currently , these local agencies , generally known as community action agencies ( caas ) , are the primary substate grantees of the csbg .

in 1975 , oeo was renamed the community services administration ( csa ) , but remained an independent executive branch agency .

in 1981 , csa was abolished and replaced by the csbg , to be administered by a newly created office in hhs .

at the time csa was abolished , it was administering nearly 900 caas , about 40 local community development corporations , and several small categorical programs that were typically operated by local caas .

the csbg act was enacted as part of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-35 , title vi , §671 ; 42 u.s.c .

§9901 ) as partial response to president reagan's proposal to consolidate csa with 11 other social service programs into a block grant to states .

congress rejected this proposal and instead created two new block grants , the social services block grant under title xx of the social security act , and the csbg , which consisted of activities previously administered by csa .

the csbg act was reauthorized in 1984 under p.l .

98-558 , in 1986 under p.l .

99-425 , in 1990 under p.l .

101-501 , in 1994 under p.l .

103-252 , and in 1998 under p.l .

105-285 .

the authorization of appropriations for csbg and most related programs expired in fy2003 , although congress has continued to appropriate funds for the programs each year since then .

the house and senate passed reauthorization legislation during the 108 th congress but it was not enacted .

similar legislation was introduced in the 109 th congress but not considered .

legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress to amend and reauthorize the csbg and related activities through fy2023 ( h.r .

3854 ) ; however , no further action was taken .

similar legislation was introduced in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

1655 ) , but again received no further action .

 ( for more details , see " reauthorization proposal in the 114th congress ." ) .

several related national activities — community economic development ( ced ) , rural community facilities ( rcf ) , and individual development accounts ( idas ) — receive appropriations separate from the block grant and offer grants to assist local low - income communities with economic development , rural housing and water management , and asset development for low - income individuals .

these activities are administered at the federal level by the same office of community services at hhs ( part of the administration for children and families ) that administers the csbg , and in some cases , are also authorized by the csbg act .

congress has also funded other related activities over the years , but none except ced , rcf , and idas have received funding since fy2011 .

data on the programs administered and people served by csbg local eligible entities are captured in csbg annual reports .

since 1987 , hhs has contracted with the national association for state community services programs ( nascsp ) to collect , analyze , and publish data related to csbg through a survey of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

hhs also produces annual csbg reports to congress using the data collected for the csbg annual reports .

the most recent csbg annual report summarizes data from fy2015 .

according to the report , the nationwide csbg network consisted of 1,026 local eligible entities in fy2015 , including 907 community action agencies , 79 local government agencies , 16 "limited purpose agencies" that specialized in one or two types of programs , 16 tribes or tribal organizations , 6 migrant or seasonal farmworker organizations , and 2 organizations that fell into other categories .

this network of local eligible entities reported spending nearly $13.6 billion in fy2015 , with funding coming from federal , state , local , and private sources .

of the total amount spent , $637 million came from the federal csbg allotment , and another $8.3 billion came from federal programs other than csbg .

approximately $1.7 billion came from state governments , $1.5 billion came from private agencies , and nearly $1.5 billion came from local governments .

in addition to these financial resources , the estimated value of volunteer hours was $298 million .

the authorization of appropriations for csbg and related activities expired at the end of fy2003 , although congress has continued to fund these programs through the annual appropriations process .

until 2014 , no reauthorization attempt had been made since the 109 th congress , when legislation was introduced , but not considered , in the house ( h.r .

341 ) .

that legislation was largely identical to a bill that was passed by the house during the 108 th congress ( h.r .

3030 ) .

the senate also passed a reauthorization bill during the 108 th congress ( s. 1786 ) , but conferees never met to resolve differences between the house and senate bills .

in both the 113 th and 114 th congresses , for the first time since the 109 th congress , legislation was introduced in the house to reauthorize csbg and certain related activities .

in the 113 th congress , representative fitzpatrick introduced the community economic opportunity act , with bipartisan support , on january 13 , 2014 ( h.r .

3854 ) .

the bill was referred to the house education and the workforce committee , but no further action occurred .

representative fitzpatrick reintroduced a mostly identical version of the bill ( with some changes ) in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

1655 ) , where it was again referred to the house education and the workforce committee but received no further action .

h.r .

1655 would have made numerous changes in language throughout the statute , with more specific provisions regarding the roles and responsibilities of the federal office of community services , state lead agencies , and local agency governing boards .

the bill would have required federal , state , and local entities to establish performance requirements and benchmarks , and included provisions intended to increase accountability for the use of federal funds and to ensure timely distribution and expenditure of these funds .

the bill had extensive provisions on monitoring of state and local compliance with applicable law and regulations , corrective action , and withholding , reduction , or elimination of federal funds .

h.r .

1655 proposed to authorize appropriations of $850 million per year for fy2014-fy2018 , with "such sums as necessary" authorized for fy2019-fy2023 .

like current law , the bill would have required the secretary to reserve 0.5% of appropriations for grants to territories , but would have increased the amount reserved for training and technical assistance from 1.5% to 2% .

remaining funds would have been allocated among states ( including dc and puerto rico ) .

while no change would have been made in the basic state allocation formula , the minimum allotment would have increased to one - half of 1% or , if appropriations exceeded $850 million in a given year , to three - quarters of 1% .

under current law , each state gets at least one - quarter of 1% or , if appropriations exceed $345 million , one - half of 1% .

current law provisions that hold states harmless at their fy1990 levels , and that establish a maximum allotment percentage , would have been eliminated under the bill .

the bill would have required states to reserve at least 2% of block grant funds received for a new community action innovations program .

these funds would have gone to local eligible entities or their associations to carry out innovative projects that test or replicate promising practices to reduce poverty conditions , and to disseminate the results of these projects .

these funds could have been used to satisfy nonfederal matching requirements when used in conjunction with other federal programs that have such requirements , and could have been used to serve participants with incomes up to 80% of area median income .

state applications and plans would have been subject to the secretary's approval under h.r .

1655 , a change from current law .

likewise , local community action plans would have been newly subject to the state's approval .

like the 113 th congress version of the bill ( h.r .

3854 ) , h.r .

1655 would have allowed states to request waivers from the secretary to increase the income eligibility level for csbg activities .

however , h.r .

1655 also included a provision found in current law that allows states to increase eligibility to 125% of the poverty line whenever the state determines the change serves the objectives of the program , without the need for a waiver .

this provision had not been included in h.r .

3854 .

in designating new or replacement eligible entities , h.r .

1655 would have given priority to existing community action agencies ( which would have been explicitly defined for the first time ) and public agencies could no longer be designated unless they were already serving as an eligible entity .

h.r .

3854 would have allowed two or more local eligible entities to propose a merger , subject to state approval , if they determined their local service areas would be better served by a single agency .

if approved , these agencies would have been eligible to receive merger incentive funds from amounts reserved by the secretary .

h.r .

1655 had the same language with regard to mergers , but also would have allowed states to approve "privatization" proposals from public organizations that determined they could serve their areas more effectively as private eligible entities .

current law provisions affecting the participation of religious organizations in csbg - funded activities would have been retained by h.r .

1655 .

these provisions require federal , state , or local governments to consider religious organizations on the same basis as other nongovernmental organizations , and prohibit discrimination against such organizations on the basis of their religious character .

like current law , the pending legislation would have provided that a religious organization's exemption under section 702 of the civil rights act of 1964 , regarding its employment practices , is not affected by participating in or receiving funds from programs under the csbg act .

the bill also would have established a new provision , prohibiting religious organizations that provide assistance under the act from discriminating against a program beneficiary or prospective beneficiary on the basis of that person's religion or religious belief .

the bill would have separately authorized "such sums as necessary" for related federal activities , including community economic development and rural community facilities , during fy2014-fy2023 .

current law requires that 9% of total appropriations be set aside for these related activities ; however , this has never occurred in practice and the bill would have eliminated this language .

appendix a .

additional funding information this appendix provides additional funding information for community services block grants and related activities .

table a - 1 shows funding amounts distributed to the states , tribes , and territories from fy2013 through fy2017 .

table a - 2 shows funding for csbg ( not including related activities ) from its first year in fy1982 through fy2017 .

table a - 3 shows funding for the various related activities that have been funded at different times from fy1982 to fy2017 .

appendix b .

government accountability office ( gao ) review the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on the csbg program in july 2006 , in response to a request by the house education and the workforce committee .

gao's review focused on three topics related to program monitoring and training and technical assistance: ( 1 ) hhs compliance with legal requirements and standards governing its oversight of state efforts to monitor local csbg grantees ; ( 2 ) efforts by states to monitor local grantee compliance with fiscal requirements and performance standards ; and ( 3 ) targeting by hhs of its training and technical assistance funds and the impact of such assistance on grantee performance .

gao concluded that the office of community services ( ocs ) lacked "effective policies , procedures , and controls" to ensure its own compliance with legal requirements for monitoring states and with federal internal control standards .

gao found that ocs had visited states as mandated by law but failed to issue reports to the states after the visits or annual reports to congress , which also are mandated by law .

ocs failed to meet internal control standards because their monitoring teams lacked adequate financial expertise ; moreover , ocs lost the documentation from the monitoring visits to states .

finally , ocs was not systematic in its selection of states to visit , and did not use available information on state performance or collect other data to allow more effective targeting of its limited monitoring resources on states at highest risk of management problems .

in connection with its assessment of state efforts to monitor local grantees , gao visited five states and found wide variation in the frequency with which they conducted on - site monitoring of local grantees , although officials in all states said they visited agencies with identified problems more often .

states also varied in their interpretation of the law's requirement that they visit local grantees at least once in a three - year period , and gao noted that ocs had issued no guidance on this requirement .

states reported varying capacities to conduct on - site monitoring and some states cited staff shortages ; however , the states all performed other forms of oversight in addition to on - site visits , such as review of local agency reports ( eg , local agency plans , goals , performance data , and financial reports ) and review of annual single audits where relevant .

several states coordinated local oversight with other federal and state programs , and also used state associations of community action agencies to help provide technical assistance .

gao found , with regard to federal training and technical assistance funds , that ocs targeted at least some of these funds toward local agencies with identified financial and program management problems , but generally was not strategic in allocating these funds and had only limited information on the outcome of providing such training and technical assistance .

gao made five recommendations to ocs in its report ( and hhs indicated its agreement and intent to act upon these recommendations ) .

gao recommended that ocs should conduct a risk - based assessment of states by systematically collecting and using information ; establish policies and procedures to ensure monitoring is focused on the highest - risk states ; issue guidance to states on complying with the requirement that they monitor local agencies during each three - year period ; establish reporting guidance for training and technical assistance grants so that ocs receives information on the outcomes for local agencies that receive such training or technical assistance ; and implement a strategic plan for targeting training and technical assistance in areas where states feel the greatest need .

hhs response hhs took a series of steps in response to the gao report .

on october 10 , 2006 , hhs issued an information memorandum to state agencies responding to gao's third recommendation and providing guidance on compliance with the statutory requirement that states conduct a full on - site review of each eligible entity at least once during every three - year period .

subsequently , on march 1 , 2007 , hhs issued another information memorandum , responding to gao's first two recommendations and providing a schedule of states that would receive federal monitoring in each of the next three years ( fy2007-fy2009 ) .

the october 2006 memorandum explained that states were selected through a process intended to identify states that would receive the most benefit from federal monitoring visits .

this process considered the extent to which eligible entities in the state were considered vulnerable or in crisis ; the physical size of the state , its number of eligible entities , and the number of state personnel assigned to the csbg program ; the extent of poverty in the state compared to the number of eligible entities and state csbg personnel ; the number of clients served compared to the number of eligible entities and state csbg personnel ; evidence of past audit problems ; and tardiness by the state in submitting csbg state plans to hhs or responses to information surveys conducted by the national association of state community services programs .

hhs developed a csbg state assessment tool to help states prepare for federal monitoring , and on august 24 , 2007 , issued a strategic plan for the csbg program , which was intended to describe training , technical assistance , and capacity - building activities and promote accountability within the csbg .

as discussed in appendix a of this report , hhs began funding the national community economic development training and capacity development initiative in fy2009 .

more recently , hhs issued an information memorandum on may 4 , 2011 , announcing a reorganization and new "strategy for excellence" in the csbg training and technical assistance program for fy2011 .

