on may 3 , house - senate conferees concluded negotiations on h.r .

1268 , the emergency fy2005 supplemental appropriation , agreeing to an $82 billion total .

the house passed the conference agreement on may 5 ( 368-58 ) , followed by the senate on may 10 ( 100-0 ) .

president bush signed the bill ( p.l .

109 - 13 ) on may 11 .

as approved , the $82 billion conference agreement is roughly the same as the president's overall request , but with numerous changes in funding allocations and policy provision , including the attachment of immigration legislation .

on april 21 , the senate passed h.r .

1268 ( s.rept .

109 - 52 ) , providing $81.3 billion , about $780 million less than the president's $82 billion request and about $80 million below the house level .

the house approved its bill on march 16 ( h.rept .

109 - 16 ) .

p.l .

109 - 13 provides $75.86 billion for the defense - related portion , about midway between the house total of $76.83 billion and the senate total of $74.78 billion which was close to the administration's request .

the enacted bill provides higher benefits to survivors of those who die and have died in combat or combat - related activities .

for state department and foreign aid programs , the final measure falls about $500 million , or 8% , below the president's request for new appropriations .

a $1 billion rescission of previous aid to turkey brings the "net" foreign policy total to $1.5 billion less than proposed .

the conference bill is slightly higher than amounts approved by the senate , and $450 million more than included in the house bill for international affairs .

p.l .

109 - 13 fully or nearly fully funds the u.s. embassy in iraq , contributions to u.n. peacekeeping missions , and humanitarian assistance for the darfur region of sudan , and adds over $150 million for global food aid needs , general africa refugee relief requirements , and support for haiti .

the enacted bill includes most of the house - proposed provisions from h.r .

418 , the real id act of 2005 , which sets minimum standards for state - issued drivers licenses that can be accepted for federal purposes ( eg , to board aircraft ) ; expands the scope of terror - related activity that makes an alien inadmissible or deportable and tightens criteria for asylum , and allows the secretary of homeland security to waive all laws in order to construct barriers at u.s. borders .

p.l .

109 - 13 also includes the mikulski amendment proposed by the senate that would permit additional non - agricultural seasonal workers in fy2005 and fy2006 .

the fy2005 supplemental is the fifth of the bush administration to focus on the global war on terrorism and homeland security .

as emergency funding , these requests have not been subject to limits on spending in annual budget resolutions .

in the case of both foreign assistance and defense department appropriations , some funding to combat terrorism has been included in regular as well as previous supplemental appropriations acts .

while members raised concerns regarding individual elements of the supplemental request , two matters cut across both the defense and foreign policy portions of the proposal: 1 ) funds for iraq and afghanistan security forces ; and 2 ) "emergency" designation of selected requests .

in the fy2005 supplemental , the administration requested a total of $74.96 billion .

the defense department request was in addition to the $25 billion already provided in the fy2005 dod appropriations act ( p.l .

108 - 287 ) for war - related costs in the initial months of the fiscal year .

of that $25 billion , $2 billion was obligated for fy2004 expenses , leaving $23 billion available for fy2005 .

that brings the total amount anticipated by dod for iraq and afghanistan and other expenses in fy2005 to $98.0 billion or 45% higher than the amount appropriated in fy2004 .

several major defense issues were raised during consideration of the fy2005 supplemental: increasing accountability for costs in the global war on terror ; changing the composition of the defense request ; enhancing death benefits for service members ; the emergency nature of investment funding for restructuring ; oversight of flexible funds to support allies ; implications of military construction funding .

the president sought $6.3 billion in fy2005 supplemental funding supporting a broad range of foreign policy activities: u.s. diplomatic costs in iraq afghanistan reconstruction and counternarcotics programs darfur humanitarian relief and peace implementation aid in sudan war on terrorism assistance , including funds for jordan and pakistan palestinian aid ukraine assistance u.n. peacekeeping contributions broadcasting programs in the middle east tsunami recovery and reconstruction if enacted as proposed , fy2005 total spending for foreign policy programs would have increased by roughly 50% over levels approved the international affairs budget immediately prior to the 9 / 11 attacks .

even with congressional reductions to the foreign policy portion of the supplemental , fy2005 international affairs spending , including the supplemental , is 41% higher than before 9 / 11 ( see table 7 ) .

as reported on may 3 , and subsequently approved in the house and senate , h.r .

1268 provides $5.78 billion in new appropriations for state department , foreign aid , tsunami relief , and other foreign policy activities .

this represents a $512 million , or 8% reduction to the president's $6.3 billion request .

conferees , as had earlier house and senate - passed versions of h.r .

1268 , offset part of these costs by rescinding $1 billion in fy2003-appropriated funds for aid to turkey that had not yet been obligated .

as a result , the "net" appropriation for foreign policy programs in h.r .

1268 is $4.78 billion , or $1.5 billion below the request .

the entire amount is designated as emergency appropriations .

beyond congressional decisions to reduce selected supplemental requests , the conference agreement and the $512 million cut may have significant implications for congress' consideration later this year of regular fy2006 appropriations for foreign operations and the state department .

in some cases , house and senate appropriation committees had expressed the view that some supplemental requests did not require immediate funding and could be addressed during the debate on fy2006 appropriation bills .

this is particularly relevant to the funds proposed for afghanistan reconstruction and economic aid programs in southern sudan .

earlier , congress approved a budget resolution for fy2006 ( h.con.res .

95 ) that assumes a reduction in the president's foreign policy funding request of about $2.4 billion , or 7% .

if house and senate appropriation committees add to the pending fy2006 request some of the items not approved in the fy2005 supplemental conference agreement , the challenge of meeting the budget resolution target for international affairs program will be an even greater challenge .

h.r .

1268 , as passed by the house on march 16 , approved $4.92 billion for additional foreign policy programs .

this level was $1.37 billion less than requested .

during house appropriations committee markup on march 8 , the panel excluded items that it felt were not well justified , could be funded by other international donors , or did not require immediate funding and could be considered as part of the regular fy2006 appropriation .

the house committee further redesignated $995 million as non - emergency spending and offset these costs by rescinding $1 billion in unspent economic aid appropriated in fy2003 for turkey .

this brought the "net" total for foreign policy programs in the house version of h.r .

1268 to $3.92 billion .

during house floor debate , members approved an amendment by representative jackson adding $100 million in humanitarian relief for the darfur region in sudan .

the senate passed its version of h.r .

1268 on april 21 , providing $5.74 billion in new appropriations for foreign policy activities , a level about $350 million less than the president's request , but over $800 million more than passed the house .

like the house , the senate version of h.r .

1268 offset the foreign policy total by rescinding $1 billion in fy2003-enacted economic aid for turkey , bringing the "net" amount down to $4.74 billion .

but unlike the house , the senate measure designated the entire foreign policy portion as an "emergency" appropriation .

the senate considered over 20 amendments related to foreign policy items in the supplemental , altering the committee - reported bill in several key ways .

in particular , the senate , in adopting two amendments offered by senator byrd and senator ensign , shifted about $550 million from international peacekeeping and iraq and afghanistan mission operations to bolster u.s. border security .

conversely , the senate added $320 million in food assistance to provide additional resources for humanitarian crisis in darfur and elsewhere , and to replenish food aid accounts which had previously been diverted for emergency purposes .

eight amendments were approved concerning tsunami - affected countries , including a provision allowing up to $45 million , as requested , debt deferral or rescheduling .

among other amendments , the senate: fully funded the request for the state department's office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization and for the ready - response corps , offset by a reduction for the global war on terrorism partners fund ; added $5 million for democracy programs in lebanon , offset by a further reduction in the partners fund ; added $20 million in aid to haiti ; and designated $90.5 million in peacekeeping funds for darfur .

the senate rejected one amendment — by senator coburn — that would have reduced funding for the u.s. embassy in iraq from $592 million , as proposed by the committee , to $106 million .

see table 9 for further information on other amendments .

major recommendations included in h.r .

1268 as agreed to by conferees , and previously passed by the house and senate , include: afghanistan reconstruction and police training — $1.78 billion , $262 million less than requested .

this level fell between the house - passed measure ( $1.4 billion ) and the senate ( $2.05 billion ) .

the conference agreement further fully funds counter - narcotics activities , but reduces policy training by $40 million .

darfur humanitarian aid — at least $238 million , roughly the amount proposed by the president .

the conference agreement , however , adds $90 million in food aid world - wide , some of which might be available for darfur , and permits the transfer of $50 million in support of african union peacekeeping operations in the region .

the house measure had increased the funding level for darfur to $342.4 million .

the senate version approved $242 million , as requested , but added an additional $320 million in food assistance , some of which could be used in darfur , and $90 million that could have been transferred to meet humanitarian and peacekeeping needs .

sudan peace implementation aid — $37 million , as had been included in the house measure .

conferees delete $63 million in rehabilitation and reconstruction funding .

the senate bill had included the entire $100 million request .

palestinian aid — $200 million , as requested and passed in earlier house and senate votes .

the conference measure sets aside $50 million , similar to the senate version , for israel to help facilitate the movement of palestinian people and goods in and out of israel .

conferees recommended that none of the funds be available for direct financial support to the palestinian authority .

pakistan military aid — $150 million , as requested .

jordan economic and military aid — $200 million , as requested .

iraq embassy — $592 million , $66 million below the request .

this is the same level as in the senate bill , while the house measure included an amendment that baring the use of the funds for construction of the embassy .

peacekeeping — $680 million , $100 million below the request .

the conference amount is higher than both the house ( $580 million ) and senate ( $442 million ) .

the senate figure could have been reduced further due to an authority to transfer $90.5 million for african union peacekeeping support in darfur and humanitarian needs in that region .

tsunami relief and prevention — $656 million for relief and $25.4 million for prevention , the same as in the senate bill .

the house - passed amount was slightly higher .

the conference agreement provides authority ( but not the $45 million requested ) to defer and reschedule debt owed by tsunami - affected countries .

the house bill had not granted such authority .

partners fund and solidarity fund — no funds are provided for the partners fund ( $200 million proposed ) , while the full $200 million request for the solidarity fund is included .

in addition , the conference agreements adds $30 million for other global war on terror security assistance , as determined by the president .

the house had denied all funding for these purposes , while the senate approved $225.5 million for the two contingency funds .

ukraine aid — $60 million , as requested and including in the senate measure .

the house had approved $33.7 million .

in addition , similar to the senate , the conference agreement provides $10 million for other regional aid requirements in belarus and the north caucusas .

haiti assistance — $20 million , of which $2.5 million for criminal case management , case tracking , and the reduction of pre - trial detention in haiti , similar to the senate position .

the $20 million had not been requested or included by the house .

iraqi families and communities affected by military operations — $20 million for civilians who have suffered losses due to military activities , similar to a senate - added provision .

these funds will be drawn from the $18.44 billion appropriated in p.l .

108-106 , the fy2004 emergency supplemental for iraq reconstruction .

each of these elements and others are discussed in more detail below .

table 10 ( below ) summarizes the spending request .

the supplemental request included a total of $1.37 billion for u.s. mission operations in baghdad ( $690 million ) , the construction of a new embassy compound ( $658 million ) , usaid operating expenses in iraq ( $24 million ) and usaid inspector general costs in iraq ( $2.5 million ) .

for u.s. mission operations and embassy construction , the supplemental funds are intended to cover costs for the balance of fy2005 and most expenses in fy2006 .

previously , congress appropriated in several spending measures $991 million for mission operations for fy2004 and fy2005 , of which $769 million remained for this year .

the administration estimates that the state department will need $1.06 billion in fy2005 to manage activities of about 1,000 american personnel located in bagdad and four regional offices .

the state department sought $290 million for mission operations , including logistics and security , for the rest of fy2005 , and $400 million for "extraordinary" security and logistical expenses in fy2006 .

the regular fy2006 budget , submitted to congress on february 7 , 2005 , includes $65 million that will serve as a "funding base for basic embassy operations" and assumes that the u.s. mission in baghdad will reach a "basic operations" status at some point in the future .

the state department plans to build the new embassy over the next 24 months and argues that it needs the entire funding now so mission staff can move out of temporary facilities as quickly as possible as promised to the new iraqi government .

the $658 million sought represents the entire estimated construction costs , plus "reasonable" contingency amounts to manage possible risks of the project .

according to the department , planning for the new embassy would be completed by march 15 , 2005 , with an anticipated contract award date of mid - may 2005 , subject to passage of the supplemental .

under this time schedule , the project would be completed in may 2007 .

critics note , however , that congress has already appropriated about $20 million in previous supplementals specifically for construction of the embassy .

moreover , they say , plans for a new facility were far enough along in calendar 2004 that the administration should have amended its fy2005 regular appropriation request to accommodate the sizable funding additions needed for embassy construction .

to them , the proposal does not meet the test of an "emergency" requirement .

the conference agreement on h.r .

1268 provides $690 million for iraq mission operations and usaid operating and ig costs , $27 million less than requested .

conferees further settled on $592 million for construction of a new embassy in baghdad , a level $66 million below the request .

conferees added a $250,000 earmark for a contribution to a scholar - rescue program that would bring iraqi and afghan scholars , whose lives are threatened in their home countries , to the united states and place them in host universities .

the matter of funding for a u.s. embassy in baghdad was one of the most contentious elements of the supplemental debate .

initially , the house appropriations committee had recommended a reduction of $66 million for embassy construction ( the same as in the conference agreement ) , stating that even with this cut , remaining funds would be sufficient for the compound to be constructed within the administration's two - year schedule .

during floor debate , however , the house adopted ( 258-170 ) an amendment by representative upton , prohibiting the use of any funds in the bill for embassy security , construction , or maintenance .

supporters of the amendment argued that since planning for a new baghdad facility had been underway for at least a year , this should not be funded as an emergency requirement .

instead , the administration should have submitted a proposal for consideration in the regular fy2005 appropriation or requested funds in the regular fy2006 spending measure .

before adoption of the upton amendment , the white house had expressed concern over the committee's $66 million cut for embassy construction .

officials argued that full funding of the $658 million request was important for a "secure work and living environment for americans serving in baghdad," and that construction postponement would delay the movement of u.s. staff into "more safe , secure , and functional facilities. .

the senate supported state department construction plans for a graduated design that could be scaled back as requirements in baghdad change .

the $592 million provided — $66 million less than the request — was , in the committee's view , sufficient given reduced mission staffing levels .

during floor debate , the senate tabled ( 54-45 ) an amendment by senator coburn that would have reduced funding for the embassy to $106 million , an amount that supporters of the amendment argued was needed immediately , but contended that the balance could be addressed in regular appropriation bills .

h.r .

1268 , as passed in the senate , also cut funds for state department operating costs in iraq and afghanistan .

a floor amendment by senator byrd set funding for diplomatic and consular programs at $357.7 million , about $400 million below the president's request for both missions .

this reduction came as an offset to fund additional u.s. border security needs in the byrd amendment .

the supplemental proposed $2.046 billion for afghanistan out of foreign policy budget accounts .

by comparison , enacted fy2005 appropriations for economic , law enforcement , and security assistance to afghanistan total about $1 billion , and between $1 billion and $1.1 billion is proposed for fy2006 .

the administration argues that the supplemental is necessary in order to support the newly elected karzai government plan for the upcoming parliamentary elections and to complete high impact projects that could be done in the near term .

the supplemental funds for afghanistan are divided into several components .

u.s. mission operations and security — $60 million .

infrastructure and economic development — $795.8 million .

these funds would be used to continue esf - funded secondary road construction ( $125 million ) , power transmission and generation capacity ( $300 million ) , health sector reforms and services ( $69 million ) , school construction and teacher training ( $68 million ) , provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) infrastructure ( $75 million ) , clean water and agriculture projects ( $82 million ) , and other reconstruction activities .

capacity - building of the afghan government , including strengthening democratic institutions — $265 million .

this would cover government salaries , infrastructure , support for parliamentary elections , and other rule of law and democracy promotion activities .

included is $25 million to complete the kabul airport .

anti - terrorism training and protection — $17.1 million for providing security for president karzai .

congress approved $18.8 million in the regular fy2005 foreign operations appropriations for similar programs funded under the non - proliferation , anti - terrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) account for afghanistan .

for fy2006 , the state department seeks an additional $18.4 million for nadr account activities .

police training — $400 million .

these funds are intended to accelerate on - going efforts that will be expanded further by fy2006 requested appropriations .

activities include task force police training ( $285 million ) , police equipment ( $74 million ) , and salary payments ( $40 million ) .

counternarcotics ( eradication and interdiction ) — $260 million .

of this total , $95 million would cover costs already incurred to begin crop eradication , establish a national interdiction unit , and support public information programs .

the balance of $165 million would expand efforts for eradication ( $89 million ) , interdiction ( $51 million ) , law enforcement ( $22 million ) , and public information ( $3 million ) .

authority is also sought to transfer up to $46 million of the amount to esf programs , presumably in support of alternative livelihood activities .

counternarcotics ( alternative livelihood programs ) — $248.5 million .

a portion ( $139 million ) of this amount would replenish reconstruction and development aid accounts that had been drawn on previously to address alternative livelihood activities .

the balance ( $110 million ) would be used to expand programs into a total of seven provinces .

in total , including defense department and dea accounts , the fy2005 supplemental sought $773 million for counternarcotics in afghanistan and central asia .

conferees approved $1.78 billion for afghan programs covering u.s. mission costs , reconstruction , counter - narcotics , police training , and security for president karzai .

this level is about mid - way between senate ( $2.05 billion , the same as the request ) and house ( $1.4 billion ) amounts .

the conference measure redistributes the funds differently than had been requested .

u.s. mission operations , counter - narcotics activities , and president karzai's security detail are fully funded , while conferees reduced police training from $400 million to $360 million .

the most debated element of the afghanistan request was the portion for economic reconstruction .

the conference measure trims about $220 million of the president's $1.1 billion request , finding that some projects did not fit the "emergency" nature of the supplemental .

the conference level , however , assumes full funding for health programs and expenses of provisional reconstruction teams .

conferees recommend $5 million for women - led ngos in afghanistan and $5 million for displaced persons , as provided by the senate , and earmarks $2.5 million to assist families and communities of afghan civilians who have suffered losses due to military operations .

the senate bill had included a $5 million earmark for this purpose .

in earlier action , the house - passed bill rejected $46 million for aerial eradication efforts and denied funding for several reconstruction projects , including money for the kabul airport , a new law school in kabul , a power plant , industrial parks , a courthouse , and a community housing project .

some of the projects , the house appropriations committee noted , will be reviewed during consideration of the regular fy2006 foreign operations appropriations .

in its report on h.r .

1268 , the committee said that it expected that some of these projects could be financed by other countries , the asian development bank , and the world bank .

the senate measure shifted $46.5 million of the request from operation and maintenance ( o & m ) of a helicopter fleet to eradicate illicit crops to a pilot program to train local afghan police forces .

the committee noted in its report that an earlier reprogramming proposal for procuring the helicopters had been denied , making the o & m funds unnecessary .

the administration requested $100 million for immediate support of the january 9 , 2005 comprehensive peace agreement between the government in khartoum and the sudan people's liberation movement in the south .

in justifying the request , the state department noted that when fy2005 appropriation decisions were finalized , a peace accord was uncertain .

the supplemental programs , officials said , would help ensure that the peace agreement is effectively implemented .

most of the supplemental proposal targeted needs in southern sudan .

the proposal included $22 million for assisting the national commissions required under the peace accords and supporting governance and political party development , $10 million for security sector reform in southern sudan , $63 million for rehabilitation and reconstruction , primarily in southern sudan , and $5 million for unhcr , international organization for migration , and ngo repatriation programs for sudanese refugees .

the $100 million total supplemental requested for sudan compares with about $200 million allocated for all activities in fy2005 and $112 million proposed for fy2006 .

the supplemental proposal for sudan also reflects a new initiative proposed more broadly in the regular fy2006 budget request for post - conflict , fragile countries .

the administration recommends shifting assistance that has traditionally been channeled through usaid's development assistance account to the transition initiative ( ti ) account .

ti funds are available under more flexible programming authorities than regular development assistance , and according to the administration , will permit more effective and better targeted types of support that post - conflict states require in the near - term .

four countries — sudan , ethiopia , afghanistan , and haiti — are scheduled for this funding transfer in the fy2006 request .

included in the $100 million , the supplemental proposal also seeks $63 million for sudan rehabilitation and reconstruction under the ti account .

while fully supporting the requests for security , governance , and refugee repatriation programs , the conference agreement , like the house - passed bill , does not include $63 million for reconstruction programs in southern sudan .

the senate measure provided the full $100 million requested for programs related to the comprehensive peace agreement .

the supplemental sought $242 million for emergency humanitarian relief for the darfur region of sudan and for eastern chad .

these funds would add to the roughly $375 million currently allocated or planned for emergency programs with existing fy2005 funds .

as the crisis worsened throughout 2004 , the demands for a broader u.s. response exceeded those assumed in the fy2005 budget request , according to the administration .

the supplemental request included $48.4 million in refugee aid , $44 million for both replenishing previously expended disaster relief funds and meeting new emergency shelter , clean water , and medical requirements in the region , and $150 million in food aid .

the food aid request was intended to relieve some of the current pressure on the enacted fy2005 food assistance budget in meeting not only the needs in darfur , but in a number of crisis situations around the world .

conferees approved at least $238 million for darfur - related support ( roughly the level requested ) , although this total could climb if the administration decides to allocate additional food aid to the region or transfer peacekeeping funds for the african union's operation in darfur .

the conference agreement adds $90 million in food aid that can be used globally to address emergency shortfalls .

some of this additional amount could be used in darfur if the situation warrants .

the senate bill had added more — $320 million — in food assistance , amounts that also could be used worldwide , including darfur .

conferees also permit the transfer of $50 million in support of african union peacekeeping operations in the region .

these funds would be drawn from the state department's assessed u.n. peacekeeping account from which u.s. contributions might be drawn for a u.n. mission in darfur .

previously , the house - passed supplemental added $100 million — for a total of $342.4 million — to the administration's request for humanitarian assistance to the darfur region .

the initial house committee draft bill had provided $92.4 million .

during appropriations committee markup , the house panel voted 32-31 to approve an amendment by representative jackson to restore $150 million in food assistance that had been requested but not made part of the chairman's draft bill .

earlier , however , the committee had rejected ( 29-30 ) a more expansive amendment by representative jackson that would have provided the additional food aid , plus $100 million for more refugee and disaster relief in the darfur region .

subsequently , during debate on march 15 , the house adopted by voice vote an amendment by representative jackson adding the same $100 million for darfur that had been rejected in committee .

h.r .

1268 , as passed in the senate , provided $242.4 million directly for humanitarian aid for the darfur region and eastern chad , the same as the request .

in addition , two floor amendments could have pushed this figure higher .

as noted above , an amendment by senator kohl added $320 million in food assistance for darfur and to meet other emergency and non - emergency food aid needs around the world .

a second amendment by senator corzine made available $90.5 million out of the contributions to international peacekeeping account specifically for darfur .

of this total , $50 million could be transferred to support african union peacekeeping activities in the region , while $40.5 million could be transferred for additional humanitarian relief needs in darfur .

the administration proposed $750 million in direct aid for jordan , pakistan , and other coalition partners in the war on terrorism , some of which has been challenged for representing an open - ended contingency resource that lacks sufficient controls and congressional oversight .

jordan economic and military aid — $200 million .

these funds , which would be evenly split between economic and military aid , are justified as necessary to help jordan offset the costs of hosting iraq training initiatives , address increasing threats from iraqi insurgents and problems on the syrian and saudi borders , and high oil prices .

the supplemental package would come on top of $452 million already appropriated for jordan in the regular fy2005 appropriation and $456 million requested for fy2006 .

pakistan military aid — $150 million .

as part of a multi - year , $3 billion presidential aid pledge to pakistan , the administration requested in the regular fy2005 appropriation $700 million for pakistan , $300 million of which would support military activities .

congress directly appropriated $148.8 million ( post rescission ) of the military aid request and authorized the president to draw an additional $150 million from prior - year unobligated appropriations .

the administration thus far has not acted on the transfer authority , arguing that it does not want to adversely affect other key aid programs .

instead , the president sought an additional direct appropriation of $150 million that he did not receive in the fy2005 enacted spending measure .

the administration's pakistan aid request for fy2006 again totals $700 million , with $300 million proposed for military aid .

solidarity fund — $200 million .

the supplemental proposed $200 million in military and security assistance for countries that have deployed troops in afghanistan and iraq to meet "extraordinary" defense costs of such operations .

according to state department officials , the funds would not be used to directly reimburse these countries for costs sustained in iraq and afghanistan .

such reimbursements are provided through dod's coalition support fund .

rather , the solidarity fund would help partners address general budget problems related to their presence in both countries by repairing or replacing defense articles and supporting a number of countries currently or about to deploy forces .

global war on terrorism partners fund — $200 million .

this new account would provide economic aid to countries supporting the u.s. in the global war on terror .

it would be constructed as a contingency fund , exempt from restrictions and conditions in any other provision of law , from which the secretary of state could transfer resources to any federal agency in support of the objectives of the fund .

secretary of state rice told the senate appropriations committee on february 17 , 2005 , that the need for such a fund became clear after the regular fy2005 appropriation had been submitted .

she noted that a number of countries , although not deploying troops in iraq or afghanistan , had taken steps , such as securing their borders from terrorist infiltration , to take pressure off u.s. forces .

these proposals to support coalition partners have raised a number of concerns among members of congress .

some question whether circumstances have changed to justify additional aid to jordan and pakistan , especially given the large aid packages approved for both countries in the regular fy2005 appropriation and congressional approval of a transfer authority to accommodate $150 million in military aid for pakistan .

others also ask why financial support for countries with troops on the ground in iraq and afghanistan was not part of the fy2005 regular request or proposed for fy2006 .

another concern relates to possible redundancy between the proposals outlined above and the roughly $2.2 billion in the dod portion of the supplemental for similar support to coalition partners .

the request for creation of the global war on terrorism partners fund drew particular challenges from several members due to its broad flexibility and lack of specificity for how the funds would be directed .

this request followed recent efforts by the administration to gain congressional approval of a flexible contingency fund that could be drawn on to respond to complex foreign emergencies .

congress has rejected these types of requests four times in the past three years .

the administration seeks $100 million for a conflict response fund for fy2006 , although the focus of that account would be on post - conflict and weak states , not partners in the war on terror .

the conference agreement fully supports the solidarity fund with $200 million , plus adds an additional $30 million peacekeeping funds to meet other global war on terror purposes .

conferees , however , do not approve resources for the partners fund .

in addition , the conference measure , like house - and senate - passed bills , provides the full amount requested for additional assistance to pakistan and jordan .

previously , the house had denied the $400 million requested for the partners fund and the solidarity fund , while the senate bill provided partial funding .

the senate measure included the full $200 million in peacekeeping resources for the solidarity fund , recommending the assistance be provided to poland , romania , bulgaria , el salvador , ukraine , mongolia , georgia , lithuania , slovakia , the czech republic , and albania .

the senate - reported bill provided $40 million for the partners fund , urging support for yemen , the krygyz republic , morocco , el salvador , mongolia , and djibouti .

during floor debate , however , the total for the partners fund was reduced to $26.5 million in order to increase amounts for the state department's office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization and to add $5 million for democracy programs in lebanon .

the administration sought $780 million to support a number of existing , recently established , and prospective u.n. peacekeeping missions .

according to officials , in addition to the $484 million fy2005 enacted peacekeeping appropriation , there remains a $780 million "gap" in current funding requirements .

this , officials said , occurred because new u.n. operations — in cote d'ivoire , burundi , and haiti — and an anticipated operation in sudan arose after the fy2005 budget was submitted in early 2004 .

the administration , however , did not seek a budget amendment during congressional consideration of the regular fy2005 appropriation .

the conference committee on the commerce , justice , and state department funding measure noted its concern that the u.s. had voted to support the expansion or the creation of new u.n. operations without submitting a plan for covering the costs of such commitments .

the administration's fy2006 request was $1.035 billion , an amount that reflects these new and expanded u.n. peacekeeping operations .

conferees include $680 million for u.n. peacekeeping missions , $100 million less than requested .

the approved amount could be cut further if the president used $50 million for african union peacekeeping operations in darfur , as the legislation permits .

the conference total is higher than either house - or senate - passed bills .

the house supplemental provided $580 million , including the use of up to $55 million for the establishment of a sudan war crimes tribunal .

h.r .

1268 , as passed by the senate , included $533 million , after two floor amendments shifted $147 million to support enhanced u.s. border security .

unlike the house , however , the senate measure denied funds for a sudan war crimes tribunal .

the conference agreement makes no mention of appropriations for the tribunal .

in his state of the union address on february 2 , 2005 , the president announced a $350 million aid package for the west bank and gaza , $200 million of which is proposed in the fy2005 supplemental .

the fy2006 request includes the balance of $150 million .

the funds would be available , notwithstanding any provision of law , and the administration says that some of the funds — although none in the supplemental request — would be channeled directly to the palestinian authority ( pa ) , including support for training and equipping civilian security services .

existing law includes several restrictions and conditions on aiding the pa related to concerns over accountability , transparency , and corruption .

secretary of state rice defended the proposal , including the need for direct pa funding , arguing that the u.s. needs to move quickly to help the palestinians prepare for governing gaza following israeli withdrawal .

regular u.s. assistance for the west bank and gaza has averaged about $75 million annually and generally channels aid through non - governmental organizations .

the president , however , waived restrictions on direct aid to the pa in december 2004 and july 2003 in order to permit a portion of u.s. assistance to support palestinian authority costs .

the conference agreement provides the full $200 million requested and approved by the house and senate for the palestinians , but with significant restrictions and resource allocation requirements .

of the total amount , $50 million will support israeli - built checkpoints aimed at reducing the bottlenecks at these checkpoints and facilitate the movement of palestinian people and goods in and out of israel .

conferees further specify projects , managed by ngos , for which funds are available .

the measure further recommends $3.5 million for the holy family hospital in bethlehem and $2 million for healthcare activities undertaken by hadassah , the women's zionist organization of america .

the $50 million set - aside for israel and the other earmarks were recommended by the senate , but not included in the house bill .

in addition , conferees state that the bill does not include any direct financing for the palestinian authority , and that the president's waiver that he exercised in december 2004 to provide such direct aid to the pa with fy2005 regular appropriations does not extend to the supplemental funds .

it appears , however , that the president could issue a new waiver , based on authority granted in the general provisions of division d of p.l .

108 - 447 , the fy2005 consolidated appropriations act .

during earlier consideration of h.r .

1268 , the house had prohibited use of any supplemental funds for direct aid to the pa .

the senate bill had not included such a restriction , although the senate appropriations committee reminded the administration of existing conditions on west bank / gaza aid and pa restrictions included in the fy2005 foreign operations appropriations ( p.l .

108 - 467 ) , and that they would apply to supplemental funds as well .

unlike the house - passed measure , however , the senate provision would have allowed the president to use the national security waiver authority provided in p.l .

108 - 467 for direct aid to the pa with supplemental funds if he made such a determination in the future .

following the recent elections in ukraine , the administration proposed $60 million in supplemental economic support for kiev .

the additional resources would support anti - corruption and rule of law programs ( $19 million ) , economic reforms ( $13 million ) , civil society outreach ( $10 million ) , hiv / aids activities ( $4.5 million ) , nuclear safety ( $5.5 million ) , parliamentary election assistance ( $5 million ) , and political transition aid for the new government ( $3 million ) .

these amounts would come on top of the $79 million regular appropriation for fy2005 .

the state department proposes $88 million for fy2006 .

the conference agreements provides the full $60 million request for ukraine , the same as the senate , but above the house - passed level of $33.7 million .

in its report on h.r .

1268 , the house appropriations committee stated its intent that the funds be used for programs that will demonstrate quickly u.s. support for the yushenko government and assist in the upcoming parliamentary elections .

the senate bill recommended an increase of $3.65 million in planned support for ukrainian civil society organizations .

conferees further add $5 million each for democracy programs in belarus and for humanitarian and conflict mitigation needs in chechnya , ingushetia , and elsewhere in the north caucasus .

the senate had included a similar provision .

the supplemental included $4.8 million for the voice of america , the middle east broadcasting networks , and the international broadcasting bureau supporting programming in the middle east , south asia , and europe , especially in countries with significant muslim and arab populations .

an additional $2.5 million would support an upgrade of transmitting systems located in tajikistan and boost broadcasting signals to pakistan and central asia .

the conference bill , like the senate measure , fully supports both items .

the house had included the $4.8 million for broadcasting activities , but rejected the request for transmitting systems upgrades .

in mid - 2004 , the state department created a new office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( o / crs ) , an entity designed to strengthen u.s. capacity to prepare for and respond to post - conflict reconstruction situations and to help weak states .

the supplemental included $9.4 million for start - up personnel costs of the office that was not budgeted in the regular fy2005 appropriation .

the request for fy2006 proposes about $24 million to expand the o / crs by 57 positions .

the supplemental request further included $7.8 million to development an initial corps of civilian staff to create a ready - response capacity within the state department .

conferees settled on $7.7 million for the office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization , with the expectation that funds will be used for personnel in washington and sudan .

this is less than half the amount requested .

through an amendment by senator lugar , the senate had supported the entire $17.2 million requested , while the house had recommended $3 million , exclusive for the coordinator's office .

the tragedy of the december 26 , 2004 tsunami that took the lives of perhaps as many as 200,000 people in 12 southeast asian , south asian , and east african nations has elicited over $12 billion in aid pledges and commitments from governments , multilateral institutions , and private individuals .

the united states made an early pledge of $350 million for immediate relief efforts , but the administration increased this amount by seeking $600 million in its request for a $950 million fy2005 supplemental .

of this total , $120 million would replenish usaid emergency aid accounts that had been drawn in support of the initial american government response .

likewise , the supplemental also proposed $226 million to make similar reimbursements to defense department accounts that were used in the immediate aftermath of the tsunami .

the largest portion of the tsunami recovery and reconstruction supplemental account — $581 million — would be used for small transition and longer term large infrastructure activities .

of this amount , up to $45 million could be used to provide debt relief to the affected countries if their governments request such debt reduction .

an additional $22.6 million would support creation of tsunami warning systems in the region , activities carried out by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the u.s. geological survey .

out of the total $950 million request , $701 million falls under international affairs budget accounts managed by usaid and the state department .

the conference agreement reduces the tsunami recovery and reconstruction fund by $45 million , the amount proposed for possible debt relief for tsunami - affected countries .

the legislation , however , grants authority for the administration to defer or reschedule debt owed by these nations .

the senate measure also supported this debt relief authority while the house had not included it .

additional earmarks for specific tsunami - related activities included in the conference bill are: $5 million for environmental recovery activities , as recommended by the senate ; $10 million for projects creating new economic opportunities for women , as recommended by the house ; $1.5 million for programs that protect women and children from violence , trafficking , and exploitation , as suggested by the senate ; $1.5 million for the needs of people with physical and mental disabilities , less than the $12 million recommended by the senate ; $20 million for microenterprise programs , similar to a senate provision ; $12.5 million for projects focusing on the needs of children ; $25 million to prevent and control the spread of the avian influenza virus , similar to a senate recommendation .

conferees did not include a senate earmark of $3 million for teacher training programs in aceh and sri lanka where there has been a high death rate among teachers .

previously , tsunami relief issues were a particular focus of debate during house floor consideration of h.r .

1268 .

the house defeated ( voice vote ) an amendment by representative tancredo that would have barred the use of any funds in the bill for tsunami relief .

the amendment's author believed that the more than $1 billion in private donations for victims of the tsunami represent a significant outpouring of american support for relief and recovery efforts , and that given existing budget constraints and disaster needs in the u.s. , further american taxpayer funds were not warranted .

opponents noted that a portion of the request would repay foreign aid accounts from which immediate tsunami relief assistance had been drawn , and would disrupt these other aid activities if funds were not restored .

moreover , they argued , the enormity of the tsunami destruction , extensive loss of life , and the long - term reconstruction requirements justified the full u.s. government pledge .

in further debate , the house adopted ( voice vote ) an amendment offered by representative maloney that increased the tsunami fund by $3 million .

although not directly stated in the text of the amendment , the intent of its supporters was to provide $3 million for a u.s. contribution to the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) related to organization's work in tsunami - affected countries .

in order to cover the additional costs of responding to unanticipated tsunami disaster needs , unfpa issued a $28 million "flash appeal" to which supporters of the amendment hope the united states would respond with a $3 million contribution .

other members noted , however , that the text of the amendment did not direct the administration to use the $3 million as a unfpa contribution , but only to supplement the tsunami recovery and reconstruction fund .

conferees do not include the extra $3 million added by the maloney amendment and make no reference to unfpa in the conference report .

u.s. funding for unfpa has been a controversial issue for some time because of the organization's continuing programs in china , where most agree that coercive family planning and involuntary sterilization activities have been applied by the government for many years .

the bush administration determined in july 2002 that unfpa was in violation of u.s. law ( the "kemp - kasten provision" in annual foreign operations appropriations ) banning contributions to organizations that are involved in the management of coercive family planning programs .

executive branch determinations have blocked u.s. transfers to unfpa , fy2002-fy2004 , and a review of the fy2005 funding status is expected later this year .

