carbon dioxide , the major "greenhouse gas" of concern in possible climate change , is producedin large part as a result of energy production and use .

the federal government has had programsdealing with energy efficiency and with climate research and services for more than 20 years .

thecongress has held hearings about them since the mid - 1970s , when a major goal of such programswas to reduce u.s. dependence on oil imports during the energy crisis , and to expand scientificunderstanding of the dynamics of the climate system and its societal consequences as a basis forpolicy decisions that depend on improved predictions of future climate conditions and on betterclimate impact assessments .

u.s. government policies explicitly addressing possible climate change linked to "greenhouse gas" emissions date back to the mid - 1980s .

 ( 4 ) thesepolicies have focused heavily on scientificresearch .

the energy policy act of 1992 , in conjunction with the u.s. ratification of the 1992united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , influenced the direction ofu.s .

efforts , which continued in the first bush and clinton administrations toward energy efficiency,renewable energy , and r&d , ( 5 ) to try to movetoward reducing greenhouse gas emissions .

the climate change action plan , designed with the goal of reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and announced in 1993 by the clinton administration , included more than 40 on - goingfederal programs to influence , assist , or work with business , state and local governments , scientificand other entities .

r&d and other programs since then were largely maintained or modified withsome new activities and names .

with evolution from prior efforts , coupled with some augmentation,packages of programs in the clinton administration such as the 1997 climate change technologyinitiative ( ccti ) were built upon the earlier efforts , including efforts originally aimed at reducingdependence on oil imports .

during the preparations for the final negotiations of the december 1997 kyoto protocol to the unfccc , ( 6 ) president clinton announced thethree - stage ccti on october 22 , 1997 .

 ( 7 ) it wasdescribed as "the cornerstone of the [clinton] administration's efforts to stimulate the developmentand use of renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency products that will help reducegreenhouse gas emissions," ( 8 ) through a combinationof r&d , and information and tax incentiveprograms .

stage 1 included funding for r&d , tax incentives for early action , a set of federalgovernment energy initiatives including various tax credits to encourage purchase and use of moreefficient technologies , and industry consultations to explore ways to reduce greenhouse gasemissions .

stage 2 , which was planned to begin around 2004 , would have reviewed and evaluatedstage 1 .

stage 3 , as envisioned prior to the kyoto protocol , included actions aimed at reducingemissions to 1990 levels by 2008-2012 , meeting the binding targets anticipated in the kyoto protocolthrough measures that would include domestic and international emissions trading .

the kyotoprotocol ( which the united states signed on november 11 , 1998 but which has not been submittedto the u.s. senate for advice and consent on ratification ) , outlines an obligation for the united statesto reduce its total greenhouse gas emissions by an average of 7% below 1990 levels , on average,between 2008 and 2012 .

 ( 9 ) the clintonadministration supported united states participation in thisprotocol .

the bush administration , on the other hand , has rejected the protocol .

the congress has in the past passed budget resolutions and appropriations bills with provisions prohibiting the use of funds to implement the kyoto protocol , which has not been ratified by theunited states or entered into force internationally .

some controversy was engendered by thepossible linkage of funding proposals associated with the ccti to the kyoto protocol goals .

aftersome early consideration of these concerns , for the most part the r & d elements were funded bythe congress .

moreover , many of the programs related to the ccti and other climate research preceded the kyoto protocol , and were mainly influenced by the voluntary commitments the unitedstates made in the u.n .

framework convention on climate change to try to meet a voluntary goalof returning greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 , and to current efforts toreduce intensity of emissions .

 ( see crs report rl30024 , global climate change policy: cost,competitiveness , and comprehensiveness ) .

the government's activities relating to climate change have been accomplished through severalprograms , initiatives , and agencies .

coordinating these activities continues to be a challenge .

various organizational structures have been attempted over the past two decades in the effort toimprove coordination and efficiency .

an early effort , dating back to the late 1970s , was embodied in the national climate program act of 1978 ( h.r .

6669 , public law 95-367 ) , involving twelve federal agencies vestedwith responsibilities in climate research and services .

 ( 10 ) designed to centralize planning and toimprove interagency and intergovernmental coordination , the national climate program emphasizeddevelopment and delivery of useful climatic information and services to a wide range of users , basedon current knowledge of climate and better use of existing climatic data .

simultaneously , theprogram sought an expanded federal effort in scientific research to foster better understanding of theclimate system and the societal consequences of climate change as a basis for national decisionmaking that depended on improved predictions of future climate conditions and better climate impactassessments .

some ten years after its enactment , however , the national climate program was faced with criticisms that involved charges of paucity of funding and concerns expressed among agencyprincipals that any program combining individual agency capabilities and resources into acoordinated effort could compromise or impede existing agency responsibilities .

possible climate change linked to "greenhouse gas" emissions has been addressed by variousu.s .

government policies since the mid - 1980s , with an emphasis on energy r&d and on climateresearch and services .

u.s. efforts in the former bush and clinton administrations toward r&din energy efficiency and renewable energy , and research into climate and global change were givendirection by the energy policy act of 1992 , which implemented united states responsibilities underthe unfccc , and by the global change research act of 1990 .

the 1993 climate change actionplan linked or made partnerships among various federal agencies , business , state and localgovernments , and other entities with the goal of reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

theclinton administration's ccti built upon these earlier efforts .

the current bush administrationhas introduced its u.s .

climate change research initiative , the national climate changetechnology initiative , and the climate change science program strategic plan .

the plan , asreleased on july 24 , 2003 , describes five major research goals ( improve knowledge of past andpresent climates , improve understanding of climate change forces , reduce uncertainty in climatechange projections , understand sensitivity and adaptability of ecosystems to climate change , andexplore uses and limits of knowledge to manage risks and opportunities ) .

as funding and otherdetails become available , similarities to and differences from earlier climate - change programs maybecome apparent .

the evolving organizational structure , however , makes it difficult to determineprecisely some of the interrelationships among science and technology programs .

some critics of current climate change policy call for sharper goals , better defined priorities , and more detailed , clearly stated objectives for climate change r&d , and its associated fundingprofile .

some observers point out , for example , that the total ccsp request for spending in fy2004was up only 0.1% over the fy2003 request , from $1.747 billion to $1.749 billion , while that portionof the funding request allocated to the embedded ccri was up 355% from $40 million in fy2003to $182 million in fy2004 .

an issue for congress in this regard is the extent to which such ademonstrably large ccri increase actually represents new money , and how much is attributable tothe reclassification of ongoing research programs , especially given the fact that the overall requestis up only 0.1% .

on the other hand , some proponents note that further r&d is needed to justifycertain climate change management strategies , to focus those strategies on key policy questions , andto reduce scientific uncertainties surrounding prospective climate change so that policymakers canmake better , more informed decisions .

