some believe there is a disconnect between how the social security and immigration rules treat unauthorized aliens .

immigration policies are designed to discourage and penalize foreign nationals who work without authorization in the united states .

in contrast , under the social security program , there are certain circumstances when a foreign national who worked in the united states without authorization can collect social security benefits based on taxes paid while the foreign national was working illegally .

as a result of this perceived inconsistency , some oppose paying social security benefits to unauthorized aliens and others who worked without authorization , arguing that foreign nationals who violate immigration law should not be rewarded by receiving social security benefits .

others contend that foreign nationals who work in social security - covered employment ( i.e. , had payroll taxes withheld from their earnings ) should be eligible for benefits whether or not they had employment authorization , because they "paid into the system. .

the following section presents an example of this tension .

in 1994 , ssa began sending "no - match" letters to employers to inform them of a discrepancy between a w - 2 form and ssa records .

as discussed above , receipt of a no - match letter does not imply that the employee is using a fraudulent ssn ; the discrepancy could be the result of a clerical error .

for tax years 1993 through 2000 , an employer received no - match letters only if more than 10 employees had discrepancies and the number of employees with mismatches equaled more than 10% of the employer's workforce .

in 2002 , ssa implemented a policy change that substantially increased the number of no - match letters sent to employers ; it received much attention because of the impact on unauthorized aliens .

under the revised policy , ssa began sending no - match letters to every employer that had at least one employee with discrepancies on his or her w - 2 form .

the number of no - match letters sent by the agency increased from approximately 110,000 to approximately 950,000 for tax year 2001 .

employers were not required to respond to or act on the letters ; however , under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) employers may be subject to penalties for hiring or retaining unauthorized alien workers .

in addition , the internal revenue service can penalize employers for providing incorrect information on w - 2 forms .

although ssa maintained that the letters were sent to employers to ensure that workers were properly credited with their earnings , due to the controversy surrounding the increase in the number of no - match letters , ssa quickly altered their policy , reverting to one similar to the previous policy .

some argued that ssa should not have reduced the number of no - match letters that were sent to employers .

they contended that ssa should coordinate with other agencies to locate unauthorized alien workers , and that no - match letters can be a tool to help reduce the unauthorized population in the united states .

in addition , the no - match letters could have helped employers who do not know that the employees' documents are fraudulent but would be liable if they were caught employing unauthorized aliens .

others contended that ssa has no immigration - related enforcement powers , and it is not the job of ssa to enforce immigration laws .

in addition , some immigration advocates contended that tens of thousands of foreign nationals left their jobs or were fired as a result of the letters .

they argued that no - match letters do little to combat unlawful employment as those who use false documents simply find employment in another company , increasing the risk of workplace exploitation .

they also contended that some firms may have experienced a loss of revenue caused by worker shortages or by terminated employees who do not have employment authorization moving to competitors .

the letters also raised concerns that employers were discriminating based on alienage ( i.e. , that an employer who received a no - match letter for a noncitizen would fire the noncitizen worker without ascertaining if they have employment authorization ) .

appendix a .

exception countries the following lists of countries , which are subject to change periodically , are taken from the electronic code of federal regulations ( e - cfr ) with data current as of november 1 , 2016 , and the ssa program operations manual system ( poms ) .

social insurance or pension system countries under the alien nonpayment provision , a noncitizen's benefits are suspended if he or she remains outside the united states for more than six consecutive months , unless one of several broad exceptions is met .

for example , an alien may receive benefits outside the united states if he or she is a citizen of a country that has a social insurance or pension system that pays benefits to eligible u.s. citizens residing outside that country .

the following countries meet the social insurance or pension system exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 2 ) of the social security act: albania , antigua and barbuda , argentina , australia , austria , bahamas , barbados , belgium , belize , bolivia , bosnia - herzegovina , brazil , bulgaria , burkina faso , canada , chile , colombia , costa rica , cote d'ivoire , croatia , cyprus , czech republic , denmark , dominica , dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , finland , france , gabon , grenada , guatemala , guyana , hungary , iceland , jamaica , jordan , latvia , liechtenstein , lithuania , luxembourg , macedonia , malta , marshall islands , mexico , federated states of micronesia , monaco , montenegro , nicaragua , norway , palau , panama , peru , philippines , poland , portugal , romania , st. kitts and nevis , st. lucia , st. vincent and the grenadines , samoa , san marino , serbia , slovak republic , slovenia , south korea , spain , sweden , switzerland , the netherlands , trinidad - tobago , trust territory of the pacific islands , turkey , united kingdom , uruguay , venezuela .

treaty obligation countries to receive benefits outside the united states , alien dependents and survivors must have lived in the united states previously for at least five years ( lawfully or unlawfully ) , and the family relationship to the worker must have existed during that time .

the law provides several broad exceptions to the five - year u.s. residency requirement for alien dependents and survivors .

for example , an alien dependent or survivor is exempt from the u.s. residency requirement if he or she is a citizen of a treaty obligation country ( i.e. , if nonpayment of benefits would be contrary to a treaty between the united states and the individual's country of citizenship ) .

as indicated in the code of federal regulations ( 20 c.f.r .

ยง404.463 ) , the following countries meet the "treaty obligation" exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 3 ) of the social security act: germany , greece , ireland , israel , italy , japan , netherlands* *the treaty of friendship , commerce , and navigation now in force between the united states and the kingdom of the netherlands creates treaty obligations precluding the application of the alien nonpayment provision to citizens of that country with respect to monthly survivor benefits only .

totalization agreement countries the following countries meet the "totalization agreement" exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 11 ) ( e ) of the social security act .

the effective date is shown for each agreement .

appendix b .

definition of "lawfully present" the following is the definition of the term lawfully present aliens for purposes of applying for title ii social security benefits under p.l .

104-193 ( the personal responsibility and welfare reform act ) as defined in 8 c.f.r .

ยง103.12 .

an alien who is lawfully present in the united states includes ( 1 ) a "qualified alien" as defined by the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) ; ( 2 ) an alien who has been inspected and admitted to the united states and who has not violated the terms of his status ; ( 3 ) an alien who has been paroled into the united states pursuant to section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) of the act for less than one year , except: ( i ) aliens paroled for deferred inspection or pending exclusion proceedings under section 236 ( a ) of the act ; and ( ii ) aliens paroled into the united states for prosecution pursuant to 8 c.f.r .

ยง212.5 ( b ) ( 3 ) ; ( 4 ) an alien who belongs to one of the following classes of aliens permitted to remain in the united states because the attorney general has decided for humanitarian or other public policy reasons not to initiate deportation or exclusion proceedings or enforce departure: ( i ) aliens currently in temporary resident status pursuant to section 210 or 245a of the ina ; ( ii ) aliens currently under temporary protected status ( tps ) ; ( iii ) cuban - haitian entrants , as defined in section 202 ( b ) p.l .

99-603 , as amended ; ( iv ) family unity beneficiaries pursuant to section 301 of p.l .

101-649 , as amended ; ( v ) aliens currently under deferred enforced departure ( ded ) ; ( vi ) aliens currently in deferred action status pursuant to service operations instructions at oi 242.1 ( a ) ( 22 ) ; ( vii ) aliens who are the spouse or child of a united states citizen whose visa petition has been approved and who have a pending application for adjustment of status ; ( 5 ) applicants for asylum and applicants for withholding of removal under section 241 ( b ) ( 3 ) of the act or under the convention against torture who have been granted employment authorization , and such applicants under the age of 14 who have had an application pending for at least 180 days .

an alien may not be deemed to be lawfully present solely on the basis of the service's decision not to , or failure to , issue an order to show cause or solely on the basis of the service's decision not to , or failure to , enforce an outstanding order of deportation or exclusion .

