on april 29 , 2004 , the department of state released its patterns of global terrorism report ( hereafter referred to as patterns 2003 ) .

 ( 1 ) shortly thereafter it was observed that the original numbersof terrorist attacks and casualties were understated and on june 22 , 2004 , an updated version wasreleased .

 ( 2 ) revised data ( 3 ) show minimal change in the number of terrorist attacks worldwide in 2003over 2002 levels - - an increase from 205 attacks to 208 .

in 2003 , the overall number of reported anti - u.s. attacks declined visibly , 60 anti - us attacks in 2003 as opposed to 77 attacks in the previousyear .

the report indicates that worldwide deaths from international terrorist activity were down roughly 14% in 2003 ( from 725 to 625 ) and the number of wounded was up roughly 81% from 2,013to 3,646 .

in 2003 , as in 2002 , both the highest number of attacks ( 80 ) and highest number ofcasualties ( 159 dead and 1,268 wounded ) continued to occur in asia where the number of attacksdeclined roughly by one - fifth , and the number of casualties increased roughly 11% .

the reportemphasizes that most of the attacks in iraq that occurred during operation iraqi freedom do not meetthe u.s. definition of international terrorism employed by patterns because they were directed atcombatants , that is , "american and coalition forces on duty. .

 ( 4 ) in additional to statistical charts , patterns includes in its appendixes a summary chronology of significant terrorist incidents and background information on u.s. designated foreign terroristorganizations and other terrorist groups .

 ( 5 ) .

in addition to data on terrorist trends , groups , and activities worldwide , the report provides adescription as to why countries are on the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism that are subject tou.s .

sanctions .

thus , included in patterns are detailed data on the seven countries currently on the"terrorism list": cuba , iran , iraq , libya , north korea , sudan and syria .

u.s. administrationofficials maintain that the practice of designating and reporting on the activities of the state sponsorsof terrorism list and concomitant sanctions policy has contributed significantly to a reduction in theovert - - and apparently overall - - activity level of states supporting terrorism in the past decade .

libya and sudan are frequently cited as examples of such success .

countries designated as state sponsors of terrorism are subject to severe u.s. export controls - - particularly of dual use technology .

the anti - terrorism and arms export amendments act of1989 ( p.l .

101-222 ) prohibits export of dual use items , as well sales of military items and foreigneconomic assistance to countries on the terrorism list .

also , the foreign assistance act prohibitsproviding foreign aid to these designated countries .

section 6 ( j ) of the 1979 export administrationact stipulates that congress must be notified at least 30 days in advance before any licenses areissued for exporting equipment or services that could be used for terrorist or military purposes .

other sanctions include denying foreign tax credits on income earned in those countries .

the degree of support for , or involvement in , terrorist activities typically varies dramatically from nation to nation .

in 2003 , of the seven on the u.s. terrorism list , iran continued to becharacterized on one extreme as an active supporter of terrorism: a nation that uses terrorism as aninstrument of policy or warfare beyond its borders .

closer to the middle of the spectrum is syria .

although not formally detected in an active role since 1986 , patterns reports that the assad regimereportedly uses groups in syria and lebanon to export terror into israel and allows groups to trainin territory under its control .

on the less active end of the spectrum , one might place countriessuchas cuba or north korea , which at the height of the cold war were more active , but in recent yearshave seemed to settle for a more passive role of granting ongoing safe haven to previously admittedterrorists .

also at the less active end of the spectrum , and arguably falling off it , are libya andnotably sudan , which reportedly has stepped up counterterrorism cooperation with u.s. lawenforcement and intelligence agencies after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in the wake of discrepancies contained in the patterns 2003 as originally released , the chairmenof three house committees ( international relations , judiciary , government reform ) forwarded aletter to secretary of state , colin powell , dated july 15 , 2004 .

the letter cites discussions betweenstate department and other officials with committee staff and reiterates "that there will be acomprehensive review of the definitions of terrorist acts as compared to ( 1 ) the language in thestatute ; and ( 2 ) the current experiences with multinational terrorist organizations that sponsor orotherwise promote terrorist acts perpetrated by 'local' terrorist organizations. .

moreover , it reaffirmsan understanding that the executive branch has assigned an appropriate level of staff to provide fulltime attention to the contents of the report .

the results of this executive branch internal review arerequested by october 1 , 2004 .

it has been some fifteen years since congress mandated the first patterns report .

at the time the report was originally conceived as a reference document , the primary threat from terrorism wasstate sponsored .

since then , the threat has evolved , with al qaeda affiliated groups and non - statesponsors increasingly posing a major threat .

over the years , the report has increased in length andexpanded in scope .

it has been disseminated on the internet , translated into five additionallanguages , and is widely recognized as a primary resource on terrorist activities and groups .

however , in view of the earlier - noted data issues , the report may be subject to increased criticismand scrutiny .

in light of the high level of international attention attached to the report and theincreased complexity and danger posed by the terrorist threat , some observers have suggested thata thorough executive / congressional review of patterns , its structure and content , may be timely andwarranted .

patterns of global terrorism data , 2002-2003 note: based on revised data published in patterns 2003 .

traditionally , this data hadbeen providedto the state department by the central intelligence agency .

more recently this function has beentransferred to the newly operational terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) .

periodic requestsfrom analysts at the department of state and from analysts at the congressional research servicein april 2004 for quarterly access to an unclassified version of the data base of terrorist incidentshave , to date , not resulted in access to the data desired .

a .

compared with 487 attacks in 1982. b .

in 2003 the highest percent of targets were businesses ( 40% ) ; the most common method of attackwas bombing ( 67% ) .

c. casualties include dead and wounded .

d. 2002 figures include relatively high casualties in a number of anti - russian attacks , such as theoctober 2002 moscow theater attack .

e. note that the reason for this dramatic increase is not apparent .

