the natural gas market is composed of three major components on the supply side ; producers,pipelines , and local distribution companies .

the price of natural gas paid by consumers is layered,in the sense that the wellhead price paid to producers forms a baseline .

pipeline transportation costsare then added , which yields the city gate price .

finally , local distribution companies add additionalcharges to yield the prices actually paid by consumers .

consumer markets themselves are dividedinto segments , each of which tends to pay a different , in many cases a significantly different , price .

residential consumers pay the highest prices , followed by commercial , industrial , and electricityusers .

table 1 shows the relationship between these prices in recent months .

the residential prices presented in table 1 represent an increase of 7% over residential pricesfor a comparable period in 2003 .

the most recent eia natural gas price data available at the timeof this report was august 2004 .

on the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) , natural gas fordelivery in december 2004 was trading at $6.80 per mcf and january and february 2005 natural gaswas trading at over $7.50 per mcf .

 ( 1 ) table 1 .

natural gas prices source : eia natural gas price data , measured as dollars per mcf .

natural gas monthly , october,2004 , table 4 , p.8 .

in addition to multiple prices faced by consumers , other prices are key variables for supply and policy decisions .

the wellhead price of natural gas , as noted in this report , is competitivelydetermined by market forces .

this was not always the case .

the process of natural gas pricederegulation began in 1978 when the natural gas policy act ( p.l .

95-621 ) became law .

under thenatural gas policy act , nearly all price controls were phased out by the end of 1984 .

 ( 2 ) the spot price of natural gas is recorded at a transportation hub , the largest in the united statesbeing henry hub in louisiana , and is generally somewhat higher than the wellhead price becauseit includes some processing and transportation costs .

natural gas futures contract trading on thenymex establishes forward prices for natural gas , and allows market participants to hedge shortand medium term price risk .

the nymex future price is determined by the interaction of traderswho have business interests in the real , physical natural gas market , and financial traders whospeculate on the market .

natural gas is also traded by numerous brokers and other entities forphysical delivery at a number of local markets .

interstate pipeline rates are not directly regulated and their pricing structure largely reflects open access for shippers and market pricing .

the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) monitors pipeline tariffs to assure "just and reasonable" pricing , and has intervened in a number oftariff situations .

the city gate price includes the addition of these pipeline transportation charges .

residential and small commercial consumers buy gas from a local distribution company , which delivers gas from a long - haul pipeline to the customer's premises .

local distribution companies areregulated by state public service commissions , who set distribution charges .

the price data in table1 indicates that residential prices have recently been almost double city gate prices in 2004 .

theprice premium paid by residential and commercial consumers reflects the high fixed cost associatedwith distribution of their supply , as well as the added cost of small volume purchases .

the eia defines effective productive capacity as the maximum production available fromnatural gas wells , allowing for limitations in the production , gathering , and transportation systems .

 ( 3 ) the effective capacity utilization rate ( ecur ) is the ratio of actual production to effective productivecapacity .

surplus capacity is the difference between effective productive capacity and actualproduction .

figure 1 shows , for monthly data over the period 1987 to 2001 , that the average wellheadpricehas stayed below $3.00 per mcf whenever the ecur was below 90% .

the data also show howupwardly volatile natural gas prices can be as the ecur rises above 90% .

the correlation betweenhigh values of the ecur and high prices suggests that when the ecur is above 90% , conditionsare in place that are consistent with high , volatile natural gas prices .

figure 2 shows the history of the ecur , capacity and production since 1985 .

several trendsare noticeable in the data .

productive capacity has declined since the late 1980s , but appears to haveremained stable since 1993 .

actual production has trended up from 1985 to 1995 and has beenrelatively stable since then .

these two trends , taken together , drove the ecur to 90% or higherlevels for almost all of the past eight years .

an ecur in excess of 90% indicates that available natural gas output is nearly fully allocated to meeting demand .

any further increase in demand , or disruption of supply , can only be metthrough extraordinary draws on existing gas wells , increased draws from storage , or increasedimports .

all of these alternatives suggest that prices for the consumer are likely to rise .

if thesesources are unavailable for expansion the price could rise dramatically , and supply disruption mightoccur .

as part of the market adjustment to higher prices , increased development drilling could take place , but exploration and development does not immediately result in gas on the market .

the eiaestimates that there is a lag of between 6 and 18 months between an increase in natural gas pricesand an increase in developmental drilling and ultimately higher production .

 ( 4 ) the decliningproductivity of u.s. fields is also a factor .

according to one industry observer , "it takesapproximately 2.5 times more active rig capacity to produce the same amount of gas as just eightyears ago. .

 ( 5 ) alternatively , when the ecur is below90% , any requirement for additional supply canbe quickly brought to the market by increasing production from existing wells .

source : u.s. energy information administration , derived from data available at http: / / tonto.eia.doe.gov / dnav / ng / hist / n9190us3a.htm .

figure 3 shows the history of the wellhead price of natural gas from 1973 through 2003 .

again , several trends are noticeable .

the first run up in prices , from 1973 to the mid 1980s was theresult of price deregulation in a market where supply was not abundant , demand - after years ofregulated prices - was strong , and oil prices were high , as a result of the arab oil embargo of theunited states in 1973-74 , and the iranian political upheaval of the late 1970s .

prices declined after1985-as did demand - and the united states entered a decade long period of relatively low , stableprices .

during this period , use of natural gas as an abundant , cheap , clean fuel was promoted .

increasing demand , in conjunction with the supply trends shown in figure 2 ,has resulted in theecur remaining at , or above , 90% since 1995 .

these conditions set the stage for the gas priceincreases and price volatility experienced since 2000 .

an interesting break in the pattern of the figure 2 data is associated with the sharp price increases of the winter of 2000-01 .

as can be seen in figure 2 , the ecur achieved very highvaluesduring this period .

when coupled with the low temperatures of that winter , the result was highprices that set off a boom in exploration and drilling .

while only 496 rotary drilling rigs , on average,were drilling for natural gas in 1999 , that number increased to 720 in 2000 and rose to 939 for 2001 .

as the resulting production entered the market in 2002 ( 6 to 18 months later ) the ecur fell below90% in 2002 and the price of natural gas fell .

 ( 6 ) thelower price , however , resulted in lowerdevelopmental drilling and set the stage for sharp price increases in the winter of 2002-03 .

as pricesdeclined in 2002 , as seen in figure 3 , the drilling rig count also declined , to 691 .

the ecur,reflecting the lower anticipated increments to production from reduced exploratory drilling , againrose above 90% , and price increases beginning during the winter of 2002-03 followed .

drilling activity may be responding to 2003's higher prices .

the eia reported that the average monthly drill rig count for 2003 was 872 , with the count running over 900 per month from june todecember .

the nine month average drilling rig count for 2004 is 1009 , and has been on a path ofsteady monthly increases since january 2004 .

 ( 7 ) whether the recent increase in drilling activity resultsin large enough supply increases to allow the price of natural gas to fall depends on the explorationsuccess rate , the size of the fields found , and the degree to which existing producing wells showoutput declines .

any factor that increases demand or decreases supply will increase the ecur .

when theecur is below 90% extra pressure on the market is likely to result in higher production .

once theecur rises to 90% or above , timely increases in production are less available and pressure on themarket manifests itself as higher prices .

higher prices create incentives that eventually could causeprice increases to moderate , although new sources may require higher prices to satisfy investmentcriteria .

the potential effects of high , volatile natural gas prices on both the national economy as wellas individual consumers is not insignificant .

high , sustained levels of natural gas prices can act asa drag on economic growth .

as with oil price shocks in the past , high natural gas prices canconstitute a classic supply side shock which reduces output and productivity growth .

if severeenough , a shock of this type can increase unemployment and cause inflation in the short term .

on the level of individual consuming sectors , high natural gas prices negatively affect specific industrial users who make heavy use of natural gas in their production process , which makes themuncompetitive .

residential users might have difficulty paying their winter heating bills , forcing themto choose between adequate home heating and other necessities .

in the very near term little can be done to affect natural gas prices , except through market intervention in the form of price controls , mandatory conservation , and prioritized rationing .

theconditions that will determine market balance for 2004 and 2005 are largely in place , with the majorexception of the weather .

to help mitigate the effects of possible price spikes this winter , aid to lowincome gas consumers through the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) couldbe increased .

 ( 14 ) much can be done to alter the demand and supply characteristics of the natural gas market in the long term .

conservation , expansion of lng use , access to areas not currently available forexploration , and new pipeline construction , among others can be debated .

any of these options willtake significant time to implement and must be considered in a long term context .

none of themare likely to have significant influence on prices over the next six months to one year .

