the usafta is one among a number of bilateral and regional free trade agreements the bushadministration has negotiated in the last few years , it has negotiated and entered into free tradeagreements with jordan , singapore , and chile .

along with the usafta , the bush administrationcompleted negotiations and has signed the central american free trade agreement ( cafta ) withfive countries in the region , an agreement with the dominican republic , and an agreement withmorocco .

it has also launched or intends to launch fta negotiations with even more tradingpartners in various regions of the world all as part of its strategy of "competitive liberalization. .

that strategy aims to use greater access to u.s. markets as a incentive for trading partners to lowertheir trade and investment barriers .

u.s. and australian political leaders have also viewed the usafta as a mechanism to deepen economic ties beyond the bilateral relationship as they pursue similar goals in the doha developmentagenda round of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

 ( 2 ) it has also been argued that since theevents of september 11 , 2001 , the bush administration has employed trade policy in general , andftas in particular , to reward those countries that have allied themselves with the united states inthe war on terrorism and the war in iraq .

australia fits that model .

 ( 3 ) the usafta builds on theu.s. - singapore fta in establishing an institutionalized u.s. economic presence in the asia - pacificregion .

the united states and australia have a strong bilateral economic relationship .

the twocountries share similar economic and trade goals .

both are strong supporters of achieving significanttrade liberalization in agriculture and services in the current round of multilateral negotiations in thewto , while at the same time , both are pursuing market access through regional and bilateral freetrade agreements .

the economic relationship is also built upon increasing flows of trade in goods and services andof capital in various forms of investment in a wide range of sectors .

both countries anticipate thatthe usafta will facilitate trade and investment flows .

australian prime minister john howard had approached president bush early in 2001 with aproposal to form an fta .

while not completely dismissing the idea , the bush administration at firstappeared to give it lower priority than other trade matters .

but , on november 13 , 2002 , ustrzoellick notified congressional leaders that the administration would begin negotiations withaustralia .

the negotiations proved unexpectedly difficult .

president bush and australian primeminister howard had committed to completing the negotiations by the end of 2003 , but differencesover agriculture and other sensitive issues caused the deadline to slip .

the first of five rounds ofnegotiations took place in canberra march 17-21 , 2003 .

the fifth , last , and longest round took placein washington , december 1 , 2003 and february 8 , 2004 .

although the negotiations took longerthan expected , they were completed in less time than the fta negotiations with chile andsingapore .

the usafta negotiations over manufactured goods proceeded smoothly .

tariffs on bilateral trade in most manufactured goods are already low .

the average applied australianmost - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariff is 4.3% , and its average tariff on agriculture imports is 1.2% .

 ( 8 ) theaverage applied u.s. mfn tariff is 5.1% and its average mfn tariff on agricultural products is10.0% .

 ( 9 ) issues pertaining to trade in agriculturalgoods proved the most difficult and forced thenegotiations into overtime .

in the end , both countries were determined to complete the agreement .

to do so , each side acceded to very sensitive areas of the other in order to bring the negotiations to a conclusion .

thismeant that australia acceded to the u.s. objective not to liberalize trade in sugar and to only gradualopening of dairy and beef .

it meant that the united states acceded to australia's position onpreserving its pharmaceutical subsidy program and on maintaining monopolies for the export ofwheat , barley , and rice .

the united states also largely conceded to australia the right to restrict foreign content of television programs and advertising and to preserve its sanitary and phytosanitaryregime .

the negotiations resulted in an agreement to substantially free manufactured goods trade substantially from duties , and to eliminate or reduce tariffs and other barriers on most agriculturalproducts ( with the notable exception of sugar ) .

the agreement commits both countries to remove,or at least reduce , barriers to trade in services and to foreign investment .

the usafta covers virtually all aspects of the u.s. - australian economic relationship fromtraditional trade in goods to leading - edge trade in e - commerce .

the agreement also commits the twocountries to ensure mutual access in foreign investment and government procurement and to protectthe rights of intellectual property owners in each other's territory .

a more detailed discussion of theprovisions follows .

with some notable exceptions , the reactions to the usafta of representatives from affectedsectors of the u.s. economy have been positive , although the reaction of any specific industry orsector is largely a function how it will be affected by the agreement .

the advisory committee fortrade policy and negotiations ( actpn ) was established by the congress to provide private sectoradvice to the president on trade agreements before he signs them .

the actpn's membership cutsacross virtually all sectors of the economy , including manufacturing , agriculture , labor , services , andthe environment .

with the exception of one member ( see below ) , the actpn has endorsed theu.s. - australia free trade agreement .

the vast majority of the committee's membership concludedthat the agreement fulfills u.s. trade objectives that congress set down in the trade act of 2002 , andthe membership supports the trade liberalizing measures to which the agreement commits the unitedstates and australia .

 ( 28 ) although , endorsing the agreement , the majority of the actpn expressed some concerns: that some issues regarding australia's sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) regime still needed to be resolved before u.s. agricultural exporters will be able to take full advantage ofthe agreement ; that the agreement does not include an investor - state dispute provision and calls for the u.s. government to ensure that such a provision be added if it proves warranted ; and that the environmental provisions in the agreement are adequate for australia , since australia has a strong record on environmental protection , but they should not be considereda model for other u.s. fta agreements where the partners' records on the environmental protectionis not so strong .

 ( 29 ) the actpn member representing labor , james p. hoffa , jr. , general president of the international brotherhood of teamsters , filed the lone dissenting view against approval of theagreement .

he argued that the agreement's labor provisions only require australia to enforce itslabor laws .

hoffa claims , "while australia is a developed country with a relatively high standardof living and a vibrant , independent labor movement , it has an imbalanced , inadequate system oflabor laws that fail to fully protect workers' rights. .

 ( 30 ) the agricultural negotiations were the most difficult and the results somewhat ambiguous .

the reactions of agricultural and food producers reflect the ambiguity .

u.s. sugar producers wererelieved that the agreement did not include liberalization of sugar imports , while sugar - usingprocessors were critical .

u.s. wheat exporters oppose the agreement because australia will bepermitted to retain its single - desk monopoly on wheat exports .

pork producers have indicated thatthey will not support the agreement until australia implements a final risk assessment on u.s. porkfor import into australia and u.s. pork exports to that market begin to increase .

the reaction of beefproducers has been mixed .

they are disappointed that greater access to the u.s. market foraustralian exporters was not matched by openings in other foreign markets for u.s. beef exportersthrough the wto negotiations .

they are pleased that the u.s. beef market will be opened graduallyto australian exporters over an 18-year period .

the american farm bureau supports the usaftaas long as the sps issues and other issues that affect u.s. agricultural exports are resolved beforethe congress votes on the agreement .

 ( 31 ) u.s. manufacturers strongly support the usafta , calling for immediate congressional approval .

national association of manufacturers ( nam ) vice - president frank vargo has labeledthe usafta "the manufacturers agreement. .

 ( 32 ) .

united states trade representative robert zoellick and australian trade minister mark vailesigned the agreement on may 18 , 2004 , in washington .

within 60 days after signing the agreement,the president must submit a preliminary list of u.s. laws that will have to be changed in order tocomply with the agreement .

after entering into the agreement , but within no specific time frame,the president then can submit a draft of the agreement , the implementing legislation , and statementof administrative action to both houses of congress .

the three documents must be submitted ondays in which both houses are in session .

the congress then has a total of 90 legislative days inwhich to act: the house committees with jurisdiction over the agreement have 45 legislative daysduring which to review and report out the agreement followed by 15 legislative days for floor action .

the senate committees of jurisdiction have an additional 15 legislative days to consider and reportout the implementing legislation followed by an additional 15 legislative days for floor action .

under trade promotion authority the amount of time for debate on the agreement in both housesis limited and the vote is strictly yea or nay ( no amendments ) .

 ( 33 ) on june 23 , 2004 , the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee each held a "mock mark - up" of implementing legislation .

the ways and means committeeapproved by voice vote the "legislation" on june 23 without amendment .

on a largely party - linevote , the finance committee approved an amendment that will require the ustr to obtain approvalfrom the ways and means and finance committees before he could waive requirement to implementa safeguard measure against imports australian beef .

on june 24 , senate finance reported thelegislation out unfavorably ( 7-14 ) .

the bush administration was expected to submit implementinglegislation based on the house ways and means committee version .

on july 6 , 2004 , the president formally submitted legislation to implement the agreement .

on july 8 , the house ways and means committee favorably reported out the implementing bill , h.r .

4759 , by voice vote , and the full house approved the measure ( 314-109 ) on july15 .

on july 15 , the senate finance committee reported out bill , and the full senate approved themeasure ( 80-16 ) on july 16 .

the bill was sent to the president for his signature .

president bushsigned the u.s. - australia free trade agreement implementation act on august 3 , 2004 ( p.l.108-286 ) .

the australian parliament approved implementing legislation on august 13 , 2004 , but with two amendments insisted on the by opposition labour party , whose support the government needed inorder to get sufficient support to get it passed by the senate .

the amendments stipulate thatpharmaceutical companies that hold drug patents must certify that any legal action they seek to blockcheaper generic drugs from entering the australian market must have been done in good faith .

thecompanies would be subject to monetary penalties if they violate the certification .

the ustr mustcertify to the president that the amendments comply with the fta as signed by the two countriesbefore the agreement goes into effect .

on november 17 , 2004 , ustr zoellick and trade ministervaile exchanged diplomatic notes certifying acceptance of each other's implementing legislation butonly after australia assured the united states that the implementing legislation would be changedto address u.s. concerns .

the fta entered into force on january 1 , 2005 .

the usafta will have implications for the u.s. - australia economic relationship and possiblyfor u.s. trade and trade policy as a whole .

because tariffs on most manufactured goods and manyagricultural products were already low , one can conclude that the removal of the tariffs and otherrestrictions will not result in major shifts in trade patterns , in large increases in the total volume oftrade , or in significant trade diversion .

an analysis of the potential economic effects of the usaftaconducted by the united states international trade commission concluded that the largestpercentage increases in u.s. exports to australia will occur in coal , oil , gas , and other mineralproducts ; textiles , apparel , and leather products ; and other processed food and tobacco products,although these increases will occur from small bases .

the largest value increases in u.s. exports toaustralia will occur in other machinery and equipment and motor vehicles and parts .

the largestpercentage increases in u.s. imports from australia will occur in textile , apparel , and leatherproducts ; meat products ; and other processed food and tobacco products .

the greatest increase invalue of u.s. imports from australia will occur in meat products .

the report estimated that u.s.consumers will realize a net welfare benefit increase of $438 million to $639.4 million if theagreement is fully implemented .

 ( 34 ) under the usafta , the united states and australia addressed the few significant irritants in their bilateral economic relationship .

accordingly , the agreement could further solidify an alreadystrong relationship .

for australia , those irritants include u.s. restrictions on beef and dairyproducts .

for the united states they include australian local content requirements in televisionprogramming , sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures , state - sanctioned monopolies in exportsof wheat and other grains , and screening of foreign investments .

in some cases , such as u.s.restrictions on beef and dairy and australian investment screening , the two sides agreed to loosenrestrictions .

in the case others , such as the australian sps measures and state - sanctionedmonopolies , they agreed to establish mechanisms for further discussion .

however , in the case ofsome irritants , such as u.s. import controls on sugar , the two countries agreed no change waspossible .

the agreement may have implications for u.s. trade policy and strategy as a whole .

enactment of the agreement will build on the increased u.s. use of ftas , especially by the bushadministration , as a trade liberalization tool .

for some observers , ftas act as building blocks toglobal trade liberalization , especially at a time when the multilateral negotiations in the wto areproceeding slowly at best .

others have argued that ftas undermine multilateral trade liberalizationefforts and create a confusing web of intertwining economic relationships .

if approved by congress , the usafta may also set precedents for other ftas the united states might form .

for example , the steps that australia agreed to take to make the pharmaceuticalbenefits system more transparent may be a model for the united states in future ftas withcountries that have similar government - subsidized drug programs .

some observers have alsosuggested that the exclusion of u.s. sugar import restrictions from the usafta will encourageother trading partners to exclude politically - sensitive products from agreements with the unitedstates or encourage other u.s. import - sensitive industries to push for exclusion in future tradeagreements .

