during the past century , congress adopted a series of labor standards statutes applicable to contract work for the federal government: construction , production of goods , or provision of services .

these statutes do not apply to the private sector except when it is engaged in contract work for the federal government .

in some instances , coverage is triggered by a contract to which the federal government is a signatory .

on other occasions , the laws may apply to various forms of federally assisted work through grants , loan guarantees , revolving funds , and the like .

the first of these statutes , the davis - bacon act ( 1931 ) , set certain wage and related standards for federal contract construction work .

in 1936 , congress added the walsh - healey public contracts act , setting basic labor standards in the production of goods under contract for the federal government .

the third of these statutes , the mcnamara - o'hara service contract act ( 1965 ) , mandates minimum labor standards where services are provided , under contract , to the federal government .

these statutes are supplemented by other federal enactments and , often , by laws at the state and local level .

this report sketches the history of these statutes: what they provide , how they are similar , and how they differ .

it suggests how they fit into the broader framework of general wage / hour and related legislation .

and , it notes certain areas of controversy that have developed with respect to the several enactments .

early in the 19 th century , the federal government began development of a special body of labor standards protections applicable to its own direct workforce .

however , much of the work of the federal government was not undertaken by its direct employees , but rather through contracts with the private sector: by employers who operated beyond the reach of federal regulation and to whom standards applicable to federal employees did not apply .

through the early 20 th century , public work was awarded to the lowest responsible bidder .

responsible was defined as the ability to fulfill the terms of the contract: that is , to provide the goods , services , or construction work the government sought .

no consideration was given to the conditions under which such work was performed .

regulation of wages , hours , and child labor was regarded as beyond the reach of government .

attempts to legislate in those areas were generally found to be unconstitutional and were vigorously opposed as an illegal and unjustified intrusion upon private sector prerogatives .

industrial health , safety and sanitation were left , largely , to local jurisdictions .

where states and local governments were able to enact measures that would withstand the test of constitutionality , they appear to have been of little impact: either lacking substance or unenforced .

most contractors appear to have been reputable ; some were not .

often , bid brokers sought contracts and then , with the award in hand , would sub - contract to firms willing to work at the lowest cost .

since government would normally specify the quality of the fabric or materials , the style and construction standards , the prime area in which to cut costs was on labor: engaging the cheapest viable workers and pressing them to work as long as endurance would permit .

these were often not permanent employees of the contractor but , rather , casual workers whose welfare was of little continuing concern — neither to the bid broker nor to the sub - contractor .

where government protected its own direct workforce through wage / hour and related standards , contracting out for public work placed a premium on low wages and sometimes led to adverse working conditions .

by paying less , private contractors could enhance their competitive position .

thus , an informal alliance might be struck between the procurement officer and the low - wage employer , each , for their own reasons , conspiring to cut costs by keeping wages low .

at the same time , by indirectly tolerating abusive conditions , government sacrificed its role as a model employer ( an oft - expressed desire ) and as an example for the private sector .

first the states and then the federal government embarked upon a program of reform: often encountering constitutional challenges .

but , in at least two areas , government was free to act .

as an employer , it could set standards that applied to its own direct employees — just as any private sector employer could then do .

more significant here , as a consumer , it could set standards for the goods , services and construction that it was willing to purchase in the public marketplace .

it could , for example , write into bid specifications requirements that certain unfair labor practices would not be tolerated in the context of public procurement .

and , in that way , it reserved to itself the right to define the concept of fairness .

through the years , each act — davis - bacon , walsh - healey , and mcnamara - o'hara — has been intermittently a focus of attention , most often sparked by critics .

to some extent , the controversy surrounding each of these statutes may be a measure of its impact .

judged by the literature it has sparked and the frequency with which it has been an active part of the legislative agenda , the davis - bacon act ( 1931 ) has been the most controversial of the three .

at least two factors may be at work here .

first .

there are strong and articulate interest groups both defending and opposing the davis - bacon act .

second .

aside from the act , per se , davis - bacon ( prevailing wage ) provisions have been included in numerous program statutes thereby expanding the impact of the act to groups of people ( in government and in the contracting community ) unfamiliar with its operation and requirements .

as a result , when these program statutes have come up for review and / or reauthorization , davis - bacon is frequently called into consideration .

mcnamara - o'hara ( 1965 ) was a subject of contention during the 1970s and 1980s .

however , it would appear that , following a strong attack by certain segments of industry and by the general accounting office , it has largely disappeared from the legislative agenda .

it does , however , resurface during discussions of general procurement policy and has been a subject of administrative rulemaking .

while the walsh - healey act ( 1936 ) may have been moderately controversial when it was adopted ( and again in the 1950s and early 1960s ) , it appears to have been overshadowed by other more contentious new deal statutes: for example , the wagner - connery labor relations act ( national labor relations act , 1935 ) and the fair labor standards act ( 1938 ) .

perhaps because its minimum wage and overtime standards have become co - equal with those of the fair labor standards act , it seems to be no longer a focus of attention — neither legislative nor administrative .

each of these protective legal structures — the federal contract labor standards statutes , the flsa , and the state and local protective legislation — was enacted to protect workers and to assist , in some measure , in stabilizing industry and the workplace .

each , very largely , has developed in a separate pattern as legislators ( responding to workplace realities: accommodating workers , employers and the public ) have modified the statutes , adding technical corrective provisions and giving way to the need for flexibility .

hardly static , the statutes have been in a continuing state of evolution .

some have argued with respect to the federal structure , that it is dated , difficult to enforce and to comply with , and very much in need of updating .

is such updating worth considering ? .

could it be achieved without major change to the substance of protections that have been crafted through nearly a century ? .

at the same time , some may question whether advocates of modernity ( of flexibility , of bringing labor standards law into the 21 st century ) want to update or to diminish the protective qualities of the statutes to the point of de facto repeal .

through the years , some have questioned a certain redundancy in the labor standards law structure and the continuing need for protective standards for federal contract workers separate from those applicable to the workforce at large .

might a consolidation of the statutes be useful ? .

were that attempted , how complex might that process become and what difficulties might be encountered ? .

are there areas in which reform is needed and where , through restructuring , the labor standards statutes could be rendered easier to enforce , more protective of workers and less burdensome for employers ? .

