the united states and the international community have achieved substantial successes in the balkans since the 1990s .

the wars in the former yugoslavia were ended .

all of the countries of the region are undertaking political and economic reforms and orienting their foreign policies toward euro - atlantic institutions .

u.s. officials have stated that ensuring the stability of the balkans is an important part of a u.s. vital interest in securing a europe whole , free , and at peace .

for more than thirteen years , the united states has provided significant aid and troop deployments to the balkans in support of this goal .

both aid amounts and the u.s. troop commitments have declined as the region has stabilized and more pressing u.s. foreign policy priorities have emerged .

at the same time , the european union has increased its role , with the ultimate goal of extending eu membership to the countries of the region .

however , analysts believe the united states still may have an important role to play in the balkans .

observers note that the united states has political credibility in the region , particularly among bosniaks and albanians , which the europeans may lack .

in particularly , some analysts say that greater u.s. diplomatic engagement is needed to re - energize constitutional reforms in bosnia , which have languished since 2006 .

the region may have a higher strategic profile given u.s. use of military bases in romania and bulgaria , which could be useful for u.s. operations in the middle east .

continued u.s. attention may also be needed to uproot possible terrorist networks in the region .

congress has played an important role in shaping u.s. balkans policy .

members of congress spoke out strongly against atrocities by serbian forces in croatia and bosnia in the early 1990s .

some members pushed for lifting the arms embargo against the bosniaks , so that they could better defend themselves .

congressional pressure may have encouraged the clinton administration to play a bigger role in stopping the fighting in bosnia , ultimately culminating in the dayton peace accords in 1995 .

congress also played an important role in supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia and pressing for the arrest and transfer of indictees .

despite the activism of some members on these issues , many in congress remained cautious about u.s. military involvement in the balkans .

the deployment of u.s. peacekeepers in bosnia in 1995 and the air war in kosovo in 1999 provoked heated debate in congress , in part due to policy disagreements , in part due to partisan conflict between the clinton administration and a republican - led congress .

however , despite sometimes harsh criticism , both military missions received full congressional funding .

nevertheless , concerns about the costs of open - ended missions led congress to try several strategies to limit these uncertainties .

these included pressing the administration to set benchmarks for the deployments and to report on them .

congress also sought to limit u.s. engagement by pushing for greater burdensharing .

as a result of legislation and congressional pressure , the u.s. aid and troop contributions in bosnia and kosovo were capped at no more than 15% of the total contributions of all countries .

the end of the wars in the balkans and the shift in u.s. priorities in the wake of the september 11 attacks have moved the balkans to the periphery of congressional concerns , at least when compared to the situation in the 1990s .

however , congress continues to have an important impact in several areas .

foreign operations appropriations bills have at times moderated seed funding cuts proposed by the president .

congress has also played a critical role in helping to bring serbian war criminals to justice .

since fy2001 , congress has included provisions in foreign operations appropriations bills that attached conditions on some u.s. aid to serbia's central government , requiring cooperation with the war crimes tribunal , ending support to bosnian serb structures , and respect for minority rights .

it can be argued that these provisions were a key catalyst for former serbian leader slobodan milosevic's transfer to the tribunal in 2001 , as well as the transfer of many others since then .

however , the fear of suspected war criminals that they would be turned over to the tribunal to comply with the aid criteria may have led to the murder of prime minister djindjic in march 2003 .

three major indicted war criminals remain at large , including former bosnian serb army chief ratko mladic .

another balkan issue on which some members focused on is the status of kosovo .

in the 108 th congress , several house and senate resolutions ( h.res .

11 , h.res .

28 , and s.res .

144 ) were introduced that dealt with the issue , some of them supporting independence for kosovo .

however , while some members have strongly favored kosovo's independence , others have been leery of taking steps that they believe could destabilize the region .

h.res .

28 was discussed at a house international relations committee hearing on kosovo's future in may 2003 and at a markup session on the resolution in october 2004 , but was not voted on by the committee and did not receive floor consideration in the 108 th congress .

the 109 th congress also took up the issue of kosovo's status .

on january 4 , 2005 , representative tom lantos introduced h.res .

24 , which expresses the sense of the house that the united states should support kosovo's independence .

on october 7 , 2005 , the senate passed s.res .

237 , a resolution supporting efforts to "work toward an agreement on the future status of kosovo. .

the resolution said that the unresolved status of kosovo is not sustainable .

it did not express support for any particular status option but said that it should "satisfy the key concerns" of the people of kosovo and serbia and montenegro .

an identical house resolution was introduced on december 17 , 2005 ( h.res .

634 ) .

legislation on kosovo's status has been introduced in the 110 th congress .

on january 5 , 2007 , representative lantos introduced h.res .

36 , which calls on the united states to express its support for kosovo's independence .

on march 29 , 2007 , senator lieberman introduced s.res .

135 , which expresses the sense of the senate that the united states should support kosovo's independence .

it says that if the u.n. security council does not pass a resolution supporting the ahtisaari proposal in a timely fashion , the united states and like - minded countries should recognize kosovo's independence on their own .

a companion house measure , h.res .

309 , was introduced by representative engel on april 17 .

on may 24 , representative bean introduced h.res .

445 , which expresses the sense of the house that the united states should reject an imposed solution on kosovo's status and not take any unilateral steps to recognize kosovo's independence .

the second session of the 110 th congress may also consider legislation on kosovo's post - status development .

congress has supported nato enlargement into the balkan region .

in march 2007 , congress approved the nato freedom consolidation act ( p.l .

110-17 ) .

the legislation offered support for the nato membership aspirations of albania , croatia , and macedonia , and designated them as eligible for u.s. military aid under terms of the nato participation act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-447 ) .

on may 19 , 2008 , the senate passed s.res .

570 , which congratulated albania and croatia on the invitations they received to join nato at the alliance's april 2008 summit , as well as invitations to bosnia , montenegro , and serbia to have an intensified dialogue with nato .

in the 111 th congress , h.res .

152 , passed by the house on march 30 , 2009 , reaffirmed u.s. support for nato , and said the admission of albania and croatia to the alliance would add to nato's capabilities and bolster its capacity to integrate former communists states into a community of democracies .

it said that nato should "pace the process of nato enlargement and remain prepared to extend invitations for accession negotiations to any appropriate european democracy meeting the criteria for nato membership..." there has been debate in congress and elsewhere about whether greater u.s. diplomatic involvement in the region is needed in order to fight a perceived tendency of drift in u.s. and european policy in the balkans that could potentially lead to the destabilization of the region .

this discussion has focused largely on the failure of bosnia to establish effective central government institutions , in part due to bosnian serb obstructionism .

in the 111 th congress , rep. berman introduced h.res .

171 , which calls for constitutional reform in bosnia .

it calls for the administration to appoint a special envoy to the balkans to assist reform efforts in bosnia , as well as elsewhere in the region .

it also warns against a withdrawal of ohr before the international conditions are met , and asks the eu reconsider plans for a withdrawal of eufor .

it calls on the united states to work with the eu in the eu's efforts to transition from the ohr to a leading role for the eu special representative in bosnia in a way that will aid bosnia's eu integration .

h.r .

171 was passed by the house on may 12 , 2009 .

