title i , part a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , the largest federal k - 12 education program , authorizes financial aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children and youth at the preschool , elementary , and secondary levels .

since the 1988 reauthorization of the esea ( the augustus f. hawkins - robert t. stafford elementary and secondary school improvement amendments of 1988 , or "school improvement act," p.l .

100-297 ) , the accountability provisions of this program have been increasingly focused on achievement and other outcomes for participating pupils and schools .

since the subsequent esea reauthorization in 1994 ( the improving america's schools act of 1994 , p.l .

103-382 ) , and particularly under the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) , a key concept embodied in these outcome accountability requirements is that of "adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) " for schools , leas , and ( more recently ) states overall .

the primary purpose of ayp requirements is to serve as the basis for identifying schools and leas where performance is inadequate , so that these inadequacies may be addressed , first through provision of increased support and , ultimately , through a variety of consequences .

this report is intended to provide an overview of the ayp concept and several related issues , a description of the ayp provisions of the no child left behind act , and an analysis of the implementation of these provisions by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) and the states .

the authorization for esea programs expired at the end of fy2008 , and the 111 th congress may consider whether to amend and extend the esea .

this report will be updated regularly to reflect major legislative developments and available information .

nclb provisions regarding ayp may be seen as an evolution of , and to a substantial degree as a reaction to perceived weaknesses in , the ayp requirements of the 1994 iasa .

the latter were frequently criticized as being insufficiently specific , detailed , or challenging .

criticism often focused specifically on their failure to focus on specific disadvantaged pupil groups , failure to require continuous improvement toward an ultimate goal , and their required applicability only to schools and leas participating in title i - a , not to all public schools or to states overall .

under nclb , the title i - a requirements for state - developed standards of ayp were substantially expanded in scope and specificity .

as under the iasa , ayp is defined primarily on the basis of aggregate scores of pupils on state assessments of academic achievement .

however , under nclb , state ayp standards must also include at least one additional academic indicator , which in the case of high schools must be the graduation rate .

the additional indicators may not be employed in a way that would reduce the number of schools or leas identified as failing to meet ayp standards .

one of the most important differences between ayp standards under nclb and previous requirements is that under nclb , ayp calculations must be disaggregated ; that is , they must be determined separately and specifically for not only all pupils but also for several demographic groups of pupils within each school , lea , and state .

test scores for an individual pupil may be taken into consideration multiple times , depending on the number of designated groups of which they are a member ( eg , a pupil might be considered as part of the lep and economically disadvantaged groups , as well as the "all pupils" group ) .

the specified demographic groups are as follows: economically disadvantaged pupils , lep pupils , pupils with disabilities , and pupils in major racial and ethnic groups , as well as all pupils .

however , as is discussed further below , there are three major constraints on the consideration of these pupil groups in ayp calculations .

first , pupil groups need not be considered in cases where their number is so relatively small that achievement results would not be statistically significant or the identity of individual pupils might be divulged .

as is discussed further below , the selection of the minimum number ( n ) of pupils in a group for the group to be considered in ayp determinations has been left largely to state discretion .

state policies regarding "n" have varied widely , with important implications for the number of pupil groups actually considered in making ayp determinations for many schools and leas , and the number of schools or leas potentially identified as failing to make ayp .

second , it has been left to the states to define the "major racial and ethnic groups" on the basis of which ayp must be calculated .

and third , as under the iasa , pupils who have not attended the same school for a full year need not be considered in determining ayp for the school , although they are still to be included in lea and state ayp determinations .

in contrast to the previous statute , under which ayp standards had to be applied only to pupils , schools , and leas participating in title i - a , ayp standards under nclb must be applied to all public schools , leas , and for the first time to states overall , if a state chooses to receive title i - a grants .

however , consequences for failing to meet ayp standards need only be applied under federal law to schools and leas participating in title i - a .

another major break with the past is that state ayp standards must incorporate concrete movement toward meeting an ultimate goal of all pupils reaching a proficient or advanced level of achievement by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .

the steps — that is , required levels of achievement — toward meeting this goal , known as annual measurable objectives ( amos ) , must increase in "equal increments" over time .

the first increase in the thresholds must occur after no more than two years , and remaining increases at least once every three years .

as is discussed further below , several states have accommodated this requirement in ways that require much more rapid progress in the later years of the period leading up to 2013-2014 than in the earlier period .

the nclb ayp provisions include an assessment participation rate requirement .

in order for a school to meet ayp standards , at least 95% of all pupils , as well as at least 95% of each of the demographic groups of pupils considered for ayp determinations for the school or lea , must participate in the assessments that serve as the primary basis for ayp determinations .

the primary model of ayp under the nclb currently is a group status model .

as noted in the example above , group status models set as their amos threshold levels of performance , expressed specifically in terms of the percentage of pupils scoring at a proficient or higher ( advanced ) level on state assessments of reading and mathematics .

these amos must be met by any school or lea , both overall and with respect to all relevant pupil subgroups , in order to make ayp , whatever the school's or lea's "starting point" ( for the multi - year period covered by the accountability policy ) or performance in the previous year .

this amo "uniform bar" is applicable to all pupil subgroups of sufficient size to be considered in ayp determinations .

the threshold levels of achievement are to be set separately for reading and math , and may be set separately for each level of k - 12 education ( elementary , middle , and high schools ) .

for example , it might be required that 65% or more of the pupils in any of a state's public elementary schools score at the proficient or higher level of achievement in reading in order for a school to make ayp .

the initial minimum starting point for the "uniform bar" was to be the greater of ( a ) the percentage of pupils at the proficient or advanced level of achievement for the lowest - achieving pupil subgroup in the base year ( 2001-2002 ) , or ( b ) the percentage of pupils at the proficient or advanced level of achievement for the lowest - performing quintile ( 5 th ) of schools statewide in the base year .

the "uniform bar" must generally be raised at least once every three years , although in the initial period it must be increased after no more than two years .

such group status models attempt to emphasize the importance of meeting certain minimum levels of achievement for all pupil groups , schools , and leas , and arguably apply consistent expectations to all pupil groups .

the secondary model of ayp under the nclb currently is the "safe harbor" provision , an example of a successive group improvement model .

this is an alternative provision under which schools or leas that fail to meet the usual requirements may still be deemed to have made ayp if they meet certain other conditions .

a school where aggregate achievement is below the level required under the group status model described above would still be deemed to have made ayp , through the "safe harbor" provision , if , among relevant pupil groups who did not meet the primary ayp standard , the percentage of pupils who are not at the proficient or higher level in the school declines by at least 10% , and those pupil groups make progress on at least one other academic indicator included in the state's ayp standards .

for example , if the standard amo is 65% , and a school fails to meet ayp because of the performance of one pupil group ( eg , the math performance of white pupils ) for whom the percentage scoring at a proficient or higher level the previous year was 30% , then the school could still make ayp if the percentage of white pupils scoring at a proficient or higher level in math increases to at least 37% ( the 30% from the previous year plus 10% of ( 100% - 30% ) , or seven percentage points ) .

a third model of ayp , individual growth , is not explicitly authorized by the nclb / esea statute .

however , as discussed later in this report , it has been allowed through waivers and revised program regulations .

for the sake of simplicity , in the remainder of this report we will refer to the three ayp models by the abbreviated titles of "status," "improvement," and "growth" models .

the most recent available compilations of state ayp data are discussed below in two categories: reports focusing on the number and percentage of schools failing to meet ayp standards for one or more years versus reports on the number and percentage of public schools and leas identified for improvement — that is , they had failed to meet ayp standards for two consecutive years or more .

the primary challenge associated with the ayp concept is to develop and implement school , lea , and state performance measures that are: ( a ) challenging , ( b ) provide meaningful incentives to work toward continuous improvement , ( c ) are at least minimally consistent across leas and states , and ( d ) focus attention especially on disadvantaged pupil groups .

at the same time , it is generally deemed desirable that ayp standards should allow flexibility to accommodate myriad variations in state and local conditions , demographics , and policies , and avoid the identification of so many schools and leas as failing to meet the standards that morale declines significantly systemwide and it becomes extremely difficult to target technical assistance and consequences on low - performing schools .

the ayp provisions of nclb are challenging and complex , and have generated substantial criticism from several states , leas , and interest groups .

many critics are especially concerned that efforts to direct resources and apply consequences to low - performing schools would likely be ineffective if resources and attention are dispersed among a relatively large proportion of public schools .

others defend nclb's requirements as being a measured response to the weaknesses of the pre - nclb ayp provisions , which were much more flexible but , as discussed above , had several weaknesses .

the remainder of this report provides a discussion and analysis of several specific aspects of nclb's ayp provisions that have attracted significant attention and debate .

these include the provision for an ultimate goal , use of confidence intervals and data - averaging , population diversity effects , minimum pupil group size ( n ) , separate focus on specific pupil groups , number of schools identified and state variations therein , the 95% participation rule , state variations in assessments and proficiency standards , and several issues specific to the use of growth models to determine ayp .

it should be noted that this report focuses on issues that have arisen in the implementation of nclb provisions on ayp .

as such , it generally does not focus on alternatives to the current statutory provisions of nclb .

the required incorporation of an ultimate goal — of all pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement within 12 years of enactment — is one of the most significant differences between the ayp provisions of nclb and those under previous legislation .

setting such a date is perhaps the primary mechanism requiring state ayp standards to incorporate annual increases in expected achievement levels , as opposed to the relatively static expectations embodied in most state ayp standards under the previous iasa .

without an ultimate goal of having all pupils reach the proficient level of achievement by a specific date , states might simply establish relative goals ( eg , performance must be as high as the state average ) that provide no real movement toward , or incentives for , significant improvement , especially among disadvantaged pupil groups .

nevertheless , a goal of having all pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement , within 12 years or any other specified period of time , may be easily criticized as being "unrealistic," if one assumes that "proficiency" has been established at a challenging level .

proponents of such a demanding ultimate goal argue that schools and leas frequently meet the goals established for them , even rather challenging goals , if the goals are very clearly identified , defined , and established , if they are attainable , and if it is made visibly clear that they will be expected to meet them .

this is in contrast to a pre - nclb system under which performance goals were often vague , undemanding , and poorly communicated , with few , if any , consequences for failing to meet them .

a demanding goal might maximize efforts toward improvement by state public school systems , even if the goal is not met .

further , if a less ambitious goal were to be adopted , what lower level of pupil performance might be acceptable , and for which pupils ? .

at the same time , by setting deadlines by which all pupils must achieve at the proficient or higher level , the ayp provisions of nclb create an incentive for states to weaken their pupil performance standards to make them easier to meet .

in many states , only a minority of pupils are currently achieving at the proficient or higher level on state reading and mathematics assessments .

even in states where the percentage of all pupils scoring at the proficient or higher level is substantially higher , the percentage of those in many of the pupil groups identified under nclb's ayp provisions is substantially lower .

it would be extremely difficult for such states to reach a goal of 100% of their pupils at the proficient level without reducing their performance standards .

there has thus far been some apparent movement toward lowering proficiency standards in a small number of states .

reportedly , a few states have redesignated lower standards ( eg , "basic" or "partially proficient" ) as constituting a "proficient" level of performance for title i - a purposes , or established new "proficient" levels of performance that are below levels previously understood to constitute that level of performance , and other states have considered such actions .

for example , in submitting its accountability plan ( which was approved by ed ) , colorado stated that it would deem students performing at both its "proficient" and "partially proficient" levels , as defined by that state , as being "proficient" for nclb purposes .

in its submission , the state argued that "colorado's standards for all students remain high in comparison to most states .

colorado's basic proficiency level on csap is also high in comparison to most states. .

similarly , louisiana decided to identify its "basic" level of achievement as the "proficient" level for nclb purposes , stating that "[t]hese standards have been shown to be high ; for example , equipercentile equating of the standards has shown that louisiana's 'basic' is somewhat more rigorous than naep's 'basic. .

in addition , representatives from louisiana's business community and higher education have validated the use of 'basic' as the state's proficiency goal. .

this is an aspect of nclb's ayp provisions on which there will likely be continuing debate .

it is unlikely that any state , and few schools or leas of substantial size and a heterogeneous pupil population , will meet nclb's ultimate ayp goal , unless state standards of proficient performance are significantly lowered or states aggressively pursue the use of such statistical techniques as setting high minimum group sizes and confidence intervals ( described below ) to substantially reduce the range of pupil groups considered in ayp determinations or effectively lower required achievement level thresholds .

some states have addressed this situation , at least in the short run , by "backloading" their ayp standards , requiring much more rapid improvements in performance at the end of the 12-year period than at the beginning .

these states have followed the letter of the statutory language that requires increases of "equal increments" in levels of performance after the first two years , and at least once every three years thereafter .

however , they have "backloaded" this process by , for example , requiring increases only once every two - three years at the beginning , then requiring increases of the same degree every year for the final years of the period leading up to 2013-2014 .

for example , both indiana and ohio established incremental increases in the threshold level of performance for schools and leas that are equal in size , and that are to take effect in the school years beginning in 2004 , 2007 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 .

as a result , the required increases per year are three times greater during 2010-2013 than in the 2004-2009 period .

these states may be trying to postpone required increases in performance levels until nclb provisions are reconsidered , and possibly revised , by congress .

many states have used one or both of a pair of statistical techniques to attempt to improve the validity and reliability of ayp determinations .

use of these techniques also tends to have an effect , whether intentional or not , of reducing the number of schools or leas identified as failing to meet ayp standards .

the averaging of test score results for various pupil groups over two - or three - year periods is explicitly authorized under nclb , and this authority is used by many states .

in some cases , schools or leas are allowed to select whether to average test score data , and for what period ( two years or three ) , whichever is most favorable for them .

as discussed above , recent policy guidance also explicitly allows the use of averaging for participation rates .

the use of another statistical technique was not explicitly envisioned in the drafting of nclb's ayp provisions , but its inclusion in the accountability plans of several states has been approved by ed .

this is the use of "confidence intervals," usually with respect to test scores , but in a couple of states also to the determination of minimum group size ( see below ) .

this concept is based on the assumption that any test administration represents a "sample survey" of pupils' educational achievement level .

as with all sample surveys , there is a degree of uncertainty regarding how well the sample results — average test scores for the pupil group — reflect pupils' actual level of achievement .

as with surveys , the larger the number of pupils in the group being tested , the greater the probability that the group's average test score will represent their true level of achievement , all else being equal .

put another way , confidence intervals are used to evaluate whether achievement scores are below the required threshold to a statistically significant extent .

"confidence intervals" may be seen as "windows" surrounding a threshold test score level ( i.e. , the percentage of pupils at the proficient or higher level required under the state's ayp standards ) .

the size of the window varies with respect to the number of pupils in the relevant group who are tested , and with the desired degree of probability that the group's average score represents their true level of achievement .

this is analogous to the "margin of error" commonly reported along with opinion polls .

while test results are not based on a small sample of the relevant population , as are opinion poll results , since the tests are to be administered to the full "universe" of pupils , the results from any particular test administration are considered to be only estimates of pupils' true level of achievement , or of the effectiveness of a school or lea in educating specified pupil groups , and thus the "margin of error" or "confidence interval" concepts are deemed by many to be relevant to these test scores .

the probability , or level of confidence , is most often set at 95% , but in some cases may be as low as 90% or as high as 99% — that is , it is 95% ( or 90% or 99% ) certain that the true achievement level for a group of pupils is within the relevant confidence interval of test scores above and below the average score for the group .

all other relevant factors being equal , the smaller the pupil group , and the higher the desired degree of probability , the larger is the window surrounding the threshold percentage .

for example , consider a situation where the threshold percentage of pupils at the proficient or higher level of achievement in reading for elementary schools required under a state's ayp standards is 40% .

without applying confidence intervals , a school would simply fail to make ayp if the average scores of all of its pupils , or of any of its relevant pupil groups meeting minimum size thresholds , is below 40% .

in contrast , if confidence intervals are applied , windows are established above and below the 40% threshold , turning the threshold from a single point to a variable range of scores .

the size of this score range or window will vary depending on the size of the pupil group whose average scores are being considered , and the desired degree of probability ( 95% or 99% ) that the average achievement levels for pupils in each group are being correctly categorized as being "truly" below the required threshold .

in this case , a school would fail to make ayp with respect to a pupil group only if the average score for the group is below the lowest score in that range .

the use of confidence intervals to determine whether group test scores fall below required thresholds to a statistically significant degree improves the validity of ayp determinations , and addresses the fact that test scores for any group of pupils will vary from one test administration to another , and these variations may be especially large for a relatively small group of pupils .

at the same time , the use of confidence intervals reduces the likelihood that schools or ( to a lesser extent ) leas will be identified as failing to make ayp .

also , for relatively small pupil groups and high levels of desired accuracy ( especially a 99% probability ) , the size of confidence intervals may be relatively large .

ultimately , the use of this technique may mean that the average achievement levels of pupil groups in many schools will be well below 100% proficiency by 2013-2014 , yet the schools would still meet ayp standards because the groups' scores are within the relevant confidence interval .

another important technical factor in state ayp standards is the establishment of the minimum size ( n ) for pupil groups to be considered in ayp calculations .

nclb recognizes that in the disaggregation of pupil data for schools and leas , there might be pupil groups that are so small that average test scores would not be statistically reliable , or the dissemination of average scores for the group might risk violation of pupils' privacy rights .

both the statute and ed regulations and other policy guidance have left the selection of this minimum number to state discretion .

while most states have reportedly selected a minimum group size between 30 and 50 pupils , the range of selected values for "n" is rather large , varying from as few as five to as many as 200 pupils under certain circumstances .

one state ( north dakota ) has set no specific level for "n," relying only on the use of confidence intervals ( see above ) to establish reliability of test results .

although most states have always set a standard minimum size for all pupil groups , some states until recently established higher levels of "n" for pupils with disabilities or lep pupils .

in general , the higher the minimum group size , the less likely that many pupil groups will actually be separately considered in ayp determinations .

 ( pupils will still be considered , but only as part of the "all pupils" group , or possibly other specified groups. ) .

this gives schools and leas fewer thresholds to meet , and reduces the likelihood that they will be found to have failed to meet ayp standards .

in many cases , if a pupil group falls below the minimum group size at the school level , it is still considered at the lea level ( where it is more likely to meet the threshold ) .

in addition , since minimum group sizes for reporting achievement data are typically lower than those used for ayp purposes , scores are often reported for pupil groups who are not separately considered in ayp calculations .

at the same time , relatively high levels for "n" weaken nclb's specific focus on a variety of pupil groups , many of them disadvantaged , such as lep pupils , pupils with disabilities , or economically disadvantaged pupils .

there are several ongoing issues regarding nclb's requirement for disaggregation of pupil achievement results in ayp standards , namely the requirement that a variety of pupil groups be separately considered in ayp calculations .

the first of these was discussed immediately above: the establishment of minimum group size , with the possible result that relatively small pupil groups will not be considered in the schools and leas of states that set "n" at a comparatively high level , especially in states that set a higher level for certain groups ( eg , pupils with disabilities ) than others .

a second issue arises from the fact that the definition of the specified pupil groups has been left essentially to state discretion .

this is noteworthy particularly with respect to two groups of pupils: lep pupils and pupils in major racial and ethnic groups .

regarding lep pupils , many have been concerned about the difficulty of demonstrating that these pupils are performing at a proficient level if this pupil group is defined narrowly to include only pupils unable to perform in regular english - language classroom settings .

in other words , if pupils who no longer need special language services are no longer identified as being lep , how will it be possible to bring those who are identified as lep up to a proficient level of achievement ? .

in developing their ayp standards , some states addressed this concern by including pupils in the lep category for one or more years after they no longer need special language services .

as was discussed above , ed has recently published policy guidance encouraging all states to follow this approach , allowing them to continue to include pupils in the lep group for up to two years after being mainstreamed into regular english language instruction , and further allowing the scores of lep pupils to be excluded from ayp calculations for the first year of pupils' enrollment in united states schools .

if widely adopted , these policies should reduce the extent that schools or leas are identified as failing to meet ayp standards on the basis of the lep pupil group .

another aspect of this issue arises from the discretion given to states in defining "major racial and ethnic groups. .

neither the statute nor ed has defined this term .

some states defined the term relatively comprehensively ( eg , maryland includes american indian , african american , asian , white , and hispanic pupil groups ) and some more narrowly ( eg , texas identifies only three groups — white , african american , and hispanic ) .

a more narrow interpretation may reduce the attention focused on excluded pupil groups .

it would also reduce the number of different thresholds some schools and leas would have to meet in order to make ayp .

a final , overarching issue arises from the relationship between pupil diversity in schools and leas and the likelihood of being identified as failing to meet ayp standards .

all other relevant factors being equal ( especially the minimum group size criteria ) , the more diverse the pupil population , the more thresholds a school or lea must meet in order to make ayp .

while in a sense this was an intended result of legislation designed to focus ( within limits ) on all pupil groups , the impact of making it more difficult for schools and leas serving diverse populations to meet ayp standards may also be seen as an unintended consequence of nclb .

this issue has been analyzed in a recent study by thomas j. kane and douglas o. staiger , who concluded that such "subgroup targets cause large numbers of schools to fail ... arbitrarily single out schools with large minority subgroups for sanctions ... or statistically disadvantage diverse schools that are likely to be attended by minority students... .

moreover , while the costs of the subgroup targets are clear , the benefits are not .

although these targets are meant to encourage schools to focus more on the achievement of minority youth , we find no association between the application of subgroup targets and test score performance among minority youth. .

according to the ed report , "title i implementation — update on recent evaluation findings," published in 2009 , the percentage of schools failing to make ayp ranged from 7% for those with only 1 subgroup to 20% for those with 2 subgroups , 37% for those with 3 subgroups , and 43-51% for those with 4-8 subgroups .

however , without specific requirements for achievement gains by each of the major pupil groups , it is possible that insufficient attention would be paid to the performance of the disadvantaged pupil groups among whom improvements are most needed , and for whose benefit the title i - a program was established .

under previous law , without an explicit , specific requirement that ayp standards focus on these disadvantaged pupil groups , most state ayp definitions considered only the performance of all pupils combined .

and it is theoretically possible for many schools and leas to demonstrate substantial improvements in achievement by their pupils overall while the achievement of their disadvantaged pupils does not improve significantly , at least until the ultimate goal of all pupils at the proficient or higher level of achievement is approached .

this is especially true under a "status" model of ayp such as the one in nclb , under which advantaged pupil groups may have achievement levels well above what is required , and an overall achievement level could easily mask achievement well below the required threshold by various groups of disadvantaged pupils .

one possible alternative to current policy would be to allow states to count each student only once , in net , in ayp calculations , with equal fractions for each relevant demographic category ( eg , a hispanic lep pupil from a low - income family would count as one - third of a pupil in each group ) .

as was discussed earlier , concern has been expressed by some analysts since early debates on nclb that a relatively high proportion of schools would fail to meet ayp standards .

on the basis of assessment results for 2007-2008 , 35% of all public schools nationwide failed to make ayp .

further , approximately 13% of all public schools were identified as needing improvement ( i.e. , failed to meet ayp standards for two or more consecutive years ) for 2007-2008 .

future increases in performance thresholds , as the ultimate goal of all pupils at the proficient or higher level of achievement is approached , may result in higher percentages of schools failing to make ayp .

in response to these concerns , ed officials have emphasized the importance of taking action to identify and move to improve underperforming schools , no matter how numerous .

they have also emphasized the possibilities for flexibility and variation in taking consequences with respect to schools that fail to meet ayp , depending on the extent to which they fail to meet those standards .

it should also be re - emphasized that many of the schools reported as having failed to meet ayp standards have failed to meet ayp for one year only , while nclb requires that a series of actions be taken only with respect to schools or leas participating in esea title i - a that fail to meet ayp for two consecutive years or more .

further , some analysts argue that a set of ayp standards that one - third or more of public schools fail to meet may accurately reflect pervasive weaknesses in public school systems , especially with respect to the performance of disadvantaged pupil groups .

to these analysts , the identification of large percentages of schools is a positive sign of the rigor and challenge embodied in nclb's ayp requirements , and is likely to provide needed motivation for significant improvement ( and ultimately a reduction in the percentage of schools so identified ) .

others have consistently expressed concern about the accuracy and efficacy of an accountability system under which such a high percentage of schools is identified as failing to make adequate progress , with consequent strain on financial and other resources necessary to provide technical assistance , public school choice and supplemental services options , as well as other consequences .

in addition , some have expressed concern that schools might be more likely to fail to meet ayp simply because they have diverse enrollments , and therefore more groups of pupils to be separately considered in determining whether the school meets ayp standards .

they also argue that the application of technical assistance and , ultimately , consequences to such a high percentage of schools will dilute available resources to such a degree that these responses to inadequate performance would be insufficient to markedly improve performance .

the proportion of public schools identified as failing to meet ayp standards is not only relatively large in the aggregate , but also varies widely among the states .

as was discussed above , the percentage of public schools identified as failing to make ayp on the basis of assessment results for 2007-2008 ranged from 7% to 80% among the states .

this result is somewhat ironic , given that one of the major criticisms of the pre - nclb provisions for ayp was that they resulted in a similarly wide degree of state variation in the proportion of schools identified , and the more consistent structure required under nclb was widely expected to lead to greater consistency among states in the proportion of schools identified .

it is likely that state variations in the percentage of schools failing to meet ayp standards are based not only on underlying differences in achievement levels , as well as a variety of technical factors in state ayp provisions , but also on differences in the degree of rigor or challenge in state pupil performance standards and assessments .

particularly now that all states receiving title i - a grants must also participate in state - level administration of naep tests in 4 th and 8 th grade reading and math every two years , this variation can be illustrated for all states by comparing the percentage of pupils scoring at the proficient level or above on naep versus state assessments .

such a comparison was conducted by a private organization , achieve , inc. , based on 8 th grade reading and math assessments administered in the spring of 2003 .

for a variety of reasons , the analysis excluded several states ; 29 states were included in the comparison for reading , and 32 states for math .

according to this analysis , the percentage of pupils statewide who score at a proficient or higher level on state assessments , using state - specific pupil performance standards , was generally much higher than the percentage deemed to be at the proficient or higher level on the naep tests , and employing naep's pupil performance standards .

of the states considered , the percentage of pupils scoring at a proficient or higher level on the state assessment was lower than on naep ( implying a more rigorous state standard ) for five states ( out of 32 ) in math and only two states ( out of 29 ) in reading .

further , among the majority of states where the percentage of pupils at the proficient level or above was found to be higher on state assessments than on naep , the relationship between the size of the two groups varied widely — in some cases only marginally higher on the state assessment , and in others the percentage at the proficient level was more than twice as high on the state assessment as on naep .

more recently , a report by the national center for education statistics mapped each state's standard for a proficient level of performance in reading and mathematics at the 4 th and 8 th grade levels for the 2004-2005 school year onto the equivalent naep scales .

the purpose was to compare the level of performance deemed to be proficient under each state's assessment program with the proficient level of performance on the equivalent naep test .

the report's authors concluded that in comparison to the common standard embodied in naep , state standards of proficiency varied widely , and in almost all cases were lower on state tests than under naep .

in fact , the proficient level of performance in many states was found to be lower than the basic level of performance on naep .

a second issue is whether some states might choose to lower their standards of "proficient" performance , in order to reduce the number of schools identified as failing to meet ayp and make it easier to meet the ultimate nclb goal of all pupils at the proficient or higher level by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .

in the affected states , this would increase the percentage of pupils deemed to be achieving at a "proficient" level , and reduce the number of schools failing to meet ayp standards .

it seems likely that the pre - nclb variations in the proportion of schools failing to meet ayp reflected large differences in the nature and structure of state ayp standards , as well as major differences in the nature and rigor of state pupil performance standards and assessments .

while the basic structure of ayp definitions is now substantially more consistent across states , significant variations remain with respect to the factors discussed in this section of the report ( such as minimum group size or use of confidence intervals ) , and substantial differences in the degree of challenge embodied in state standards and assessments remain .

overall , it seems likely that the key influences determining the percentage of a state's schools that fails to make ayp include ( in no particular order ) : ( 1 ) degree of rigor in state content and pupil performance standards ; ( 2 ) minimum pupil group size ( n ) in ayp determinations ; ( 3 ) use of confidence intervals in ayp determinations ( and whether at a 95% or 99% level of confidence ) ; ( 4 ) extent of diversity in pupil population ; ( 5 ) extent of communication about , and understanding of , the 95% test participation rule ; and ( 6 ) possible actual differences in educational quality .

it appears that in many cases , schools or leas have failed to meet ayp solely because of low participation rates in assessments , meaning that fewer than 95% of all pupils , or of pupils in relevant demographic groups meeting the minimum size threshold , took the assessments .

while , as discussed above , ed recently published policy guidance that relaxes the participation rate requirement somewhat — allowing use of average rates over two - to three - year periods , and excusing certain pupils for medical reasons — the high rate of assessment participation that is required in order for schools or leas to meet ayp standards is likely to remain an ongoing focus of debate .

although few argue against having any participation rate requirement , it may be questioned whether it needs to be as high as 95% .

in recent years , the overall percentage of enrolled pupils who attend public schools each day has been approximately 93.5% , and it is generally agreed that attendance rates are lower in schools serving relatively high proportions of disadvantaged pupils .

even though schools are explicitly allowed to administer assessments on make - up days following the primary date of test administration , and it is probable that more schools and leas will meet this requirement as they become more fully aware of its significance , it is likely to continue to be very difficult for many schools and leas to meet a 95% test participation requirement .

why is there increased interest in growth models for determining ayp under nclb ? .

what might be the major advantages and disadvantages of growth models of ayp , in comparison to status or improvement models ? .

these questions are addressed in the following pages .

many proponents of growth models for school / lea ayp see them as being more fair — to both pupils and school staff — and accurate than status or improvement models , primarily because they can be designed to take into consideration the currently widely varying levels of achievement of different pupil groups .

growth models generally recognize the reality that different schools and pupils have very different starting points in their achievement levels and recognize progress being made at all levels ( eg , from below basic to basic , or from proficient to advanced ) , giving credit for all improvements over previous performance .

growth models would likely increase the ability to attribute pupil achievement to their current school , as opposed to their past schools or background characteristics , especially ( but not only ) if controls ( and / or predicted growth elements ) are included in the model .

they more directly measure the effect of schools on the specific pupils they serve over a period of years , attempting to track the movement of pupils between schools and leas , rather than applying a single standard to all pupils in each state .

they have the ability to focus on the specific effectiveness of schools and teachers with pupils whom they have actually taught for multiple years , rather than the change in performance of pupil groups among whom there has usually been a substantial amount of mobility .

they can directly ( as well as indirectly ) adjust for non - school influences on achievement , comparing the same students across years and reducing errors due to student mobility .

proponents of growth models often argue that status models of ayp in particular make schools and leas accountable for factors over which they have little control , and that status models focus insufficiently on pupil achievement gains , especially if those gains are below the threshold for proficient performance , or gains from a proficient to an advanced level .

status models , such as the current primary model of ayp under nclb , might even create an undesirable incentive for teachers and schools to focus their attention , at least in the short run , on pupils who are only marginally below a proficient level of achievement , in hopes of bringing them above that sole key threshold , rather than focusing on the most disadvantaged pupils whose achievement is well below the proficient level .

the current status model of ayp also confers no credit for achievement increases above the proficient level , that is , bringing pupils from the proficient to the advanced level .

at the same time , growth models of ayp have the significant disadvantage of implicitly setting lower thresholds or expectations for some pupil groups and / or schools .

although any growth model deemed consistent with nclb would likely need to incorporate that act's ultimate goal of all pupils at a proficient or higher level of achievement by 2013-2014 ( see below ) , the majority of such models used currently or in the past do not include such goals , and tend to allow disadvantaged schools and pupils to remain at relatively low levels of achievement for considerable periods of time .

growth models of ayp may be quite complicated , and may address the accountability purposes of nclb less directly and clearly than status or ( to a lesser extent ) improvement models .

if the primary purpose of ayp is to determine whether schools and leas are succeeding at raising the achievement of their current pupils to challenging levels , with those goals and expectations applied consistently to all pupil groups , then the current provisions of nclb might more simply and directly meet that purpose than growth model alternatives .

pupil mobility among schools and leas is substantial , and has important implications for all models of ayp .

however , its implications are multifaceted , and do not necessarily favor a particular ayp model .

growth models have the advantage of attempting to track pupils through longitudinal data systems .

but if they thereby attribute the achievement of highly mobile pupils among a variety of schools and leas , accountability is dispersed .

at the same time , the presence of highly mobile pupils in the groups considered in determining ayp under status and improvement models may seem unfair to school staff .

however , the impact of such pupils in school - level ayp determinations is limited by nclb's provision that pupils who have attended a particular school for less than one year need not be considered in such determinations .

it is generally agreed that growth models of ayp are more demanding than status or improvement models in several respects , especially in terms of data requirements and analytical capacity .

for a longitudinal data system sufficient to support a growth model , it is likely that states would need to have pupil data systems incorporating at least the following: 1. a unique statewide student identifier ; 2. the ability to produce comparable results from grade - to - grade and from year - to - year ( vertically - scaled assessments ) ; 3. student - level enrollment , demographic and program participation information ; 4. information on untested students ; 5. student level graduation and dropout data ; and 6. a statewide audit system .

although the availability of information on state data systems is insufficient to enable one to determine with precision how many states could or could not currently implement such models if they chose to do so , it is very likely that growth models generally require resources and data systems that some states currently lack .

this concern is being addressed through an ed program intended to help states design , develop , and implement statewide , longitudinal data systems .

an initial appropriation of $24.8 million was provided for this program , administered by ed's institute of education sciences ( ies ) , for fy2005 .

subsequently , $24.6 million was appropriated for each of fy2006 and fy2007 , $48.3 million for fy2008 , and $65 million for fy2009 .

in addition , $250 million was appropriated for this program for fy2009 under p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

further , the establishment of longitudinal data systems for education is a priority for state participation in the state fiscal stabilization fund and the "race to the top" discretionary grant competition under the arra .

thus far , at least 41 states have received awards through three rounds of competition .

under this program , aid is provided to state educational agencies ( seas ) via cooperative agreements , not grants , to allow increased federal involvement in the supported activities .

according to the announcement in the april 15 , 2005 , federal register , the program is intended "to enable seas to design , develop , and implement statewide , longitudinal data systems to efficiently and accurately manage , analyze , disaggregate , and use individual student data... .

applications from states with the most limited ability to collect , analyze , and report individual student achievement data will have a priority.... " according to ed , the program is designed to help seas meet the ayp and reporting requirements of nclb , as well as to conduct value - added or achievement growth research , including "meaningful longitudinal analyses of student academic growth within all subgroups specified by the no child left behind act of 2001. .

there will also be an emphasis on encouraging data sharing among states , while at the same time protecting the security and privacy of data .

most growth models used before initiation of ed's growth model pilot , or still used as part of state - specific accountability systems , have not incorporated an ultimate goal such as the one under nclb — that all pupils reach a proficient or higher level of achievement by 2013-2014 .

non - nclb growth models have generally incorporated one of two types of growth target , the "how much improvement is enough" aspect of the model: ( a ) data driven / predicted growth , or ( b ) policy driven / required growth targets .

the first type of growth target has been most common , while nclb's ultimate goal would represent a growth target of the second variety , with separate paths ( with presumably separate starting points ) for each relevant pupil cohort .

the models approved thus far under ed's growth model pilot arguably meet the ultimate goal requirement .

however , under some of these models , pupils need only be proficient or on track toward proficiency within a limited number of years as of 2013-2014 .

