liquefied natural gas ( lng ) historically has played a minor role in u.s. energy markets , but in reaction to rising natural gas prices , price volatility , and the possibility of domestic shortages , demand for lng imports has increased significantly in recent years .

to meet anticipated growth in lng demand , new onshore and offshore lng import terminals have been constructed or approved in united states coastal regions .

more have been proposed .

because lng ( like other fossil fuels ) is a hazardous liquid transported and stored in enormous quantities — often near populated areas — concerns exist about the federal government's role in addressing lng safety in the terminal siting process .

in addition , various energy policy proposals could impact the need for new lng terminals by encouraging the development of alternative u.s. energy supplies and promoting conservation and efficiency .

this report provides an overview of recent industry development of new lng import terminals .

the report summarizes lng hazards and the industry's safety record .

it discusses federal laws and regulations related to lng terminal siting with a focus on the authorities of key federal agencies and safety provisions in the permitting of onshore facilities .

the report reviews controversial safety issues in recent lng siting proceedings , such as safety zones , marine hazards , hazard modeling , and remote siting .

the report outlines policy issues related to lng terminal safety , including the federal energy regulatory commission's ( ferc's ) lng siting authority , regional lng siting , "remote" siting requirements in federal regulations , state permitting requirements , terrorism , and other issues .

the safety hazards associated with lng terminals have been debated for decades .

a 1944 accident at one of the nation's first lng facilities killed 128 people and initiated public fears about lng hazards which persist today .

technology improvements and standards since the 1940s have made lng facilities much safer , but serious hazards remain since lng is inherently volatile and is usually shipped and stored in large quantities .

a 2004 accident at algeria's skikda lng terminal , which killed or injured over 100 workers , added to the ongoing controversy over lng facility safety .

the department of transportation ( dot ) and ferc are the federal agencies primarily responsible for the regulation of onshore lng facilities .

although federal statutes do not explicitly designate the relative jurisdiction of dot and ferc , the agencies have clarified their roles through interagency agreement .

these roles and their relation to other authorities are summarized below .

proposals for new lng terminal facilities have generated considerable public concern in many communities .

some community groups and government officials fear that lng terminals may expose nearby residents to unacceptable hazards , and that these hazards may not be appropriately considered in the federal siting approval process .

ongoing public concern about lng terminal safety has focused congressional attention on the exclusivity of ferc's lng siting authority , proposals for a regional lng siting process , the lack of "remote" siting requirements in ferc regulations , state permitting requirements under the clean water act ( cwa ) and the coastal zone management act ( czma ) , terrorism attractiveness of lng , the adequacy of coast guard security resources , and other issues .

proposals for new u.s. lng import terminals pose safety challenges .

lng is inherently hazardous and its infrastructure is potentially attractive to terrorists .

the 2004 lng terminal fire in algeria demonstrates that , despite technological improvements since the 1940s , lng facilities can still experience serious accidents .

many lawmakers and the general public are concerned about these hazards .

the u.s. lng industry is subject to more extensive siting and safety regulation than many other similarly hazardous facilities .

federal , state , and local governments have also put in place security measures intended to safeguard lng against newly perceived terrorist threats .

some community groups and other stakeholders fear that federal siting requirements for lng facilities are still not stringent enough , but the responsible federal agencies disagree .

the safety issues associated with lng terminal siting are both important and familiar .

every major energy source poses some hazard to public safety .

similar public concerns have been raised around siting of other types of energy facilities such as nuclear power plants , oil import terminals , pipelines , and electric transmission lines .

in evaluating new lng terminal proposals , therefore , policy makers face a full range of facilities and safety hazards associated with u.s. energy supplies , not only lng needs and hazards on their own .

although lng terminal regulations are extensive , and the global industry has decades of experience operating lng facilities , many stakeholders question lng terminal safety .

some of these questions might be resolved through additional research on key lng topics .

lng siting decisions are already underway , however , so any additional research efforts intended to affect the siting process would probably have to be completed quickly .

revising lng safety requirements after completion of a facility could be disruptive of energy supplies .

some cite the shoreham nuclear power plant in the 1980s , which was closed after construction due to new public safety requirements , as an example of the need to resolve safety concerns before capital is invested .

both industry and government analysts project continued growth in the demand for natural gas .

greater lng imports represent one way to address this growth in demand , along with increased north american gas production , conservation , fuel - switching , and the development of renewable energy sources .

one way or another the fundamental gas supply and demand balance must be maintained .

if policy makers encourage lng imports , then the need to foster the other energy options may be diminished — and vice versa .

thus decisions about lng infrastructure could have consequences for a broader array of natural gas supply policies .

under the deepwater port act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-627 ) the secretary of transportation is directed to "authorize and regulate the location , ownership , construction , and operation of deepwater ports" ( 33 u.s.c .

§§ 1501 ( a ) , 1503 ) .

the secretary has delegated this authority to the maritime administration ( marad ) within the department of transportation , and to the coast guard ( uscg ) , within the department of homeland security .

originally , p.l .

93-627 applied only to offshore oil ports and terminals and not lng facilities .

however , the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-295 ) amended p.l .

93-627 to include natural gas facilities , including lng terminals , developed offshore .

as amended , "deepwater ports" are: any fixed or floating manmade structure other than a vessel ... located beyond state seaward boundaries ... intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation , storage , or further handling of oil or natural gas for transportation to any state... ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1502 ( 9a ) ) the deepwater port act sets out a detailed process for offshore facility siting applications .

the act also authorizes regulations addressing potential threats to the environment or human welfare posed by development of offshore lng facilities ( 33 u.s.c .

§§ 1504 , 1508 ; 33 c.f.r .

§ 148 ) .

the act also requires regulations for the designation of safety zones around deepwater ports ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1509 ( d ) ) .

among the amendments to the act is a provision exempting lng terminals from the limitation on the number of "deepwater ports" that can be located in a designated "application area," a provision applicable to oil terminals ( 33 u.s.c .

§§ 1504 ( d ) ( 4 ) , ( i ) ( 4 ) ) .

additionally , a preexisting provision of the act allows the governor of a state adjacent to a proposed offshore lng facility to have that facility license conform to state environmental protection , land and water use , or coastal zone management programs ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1508 ( b ) ) .

the uscg's regulations regarding lng facilities are codified throughout 33 c.f.r. , with major provisions in part 127 .

these regulations detail the requirements for siting applications , which include information about the proposed location , design , construction , and operation ( 33 c.f.r .

§ 148.109 ) .

nepa analysis is often instrumental in siting and safety - related decisions at specific proposed facilities and is facilitated by the minerals management service , the agency responsible for offshore minerals extraction and the outer continental shelf leasing program .

unlike requirements for onshore facilities , the coast guard does not appear to require generally applicable exclusion zones for offshore facilities , but relies instead on case - by - case designation of safety zones .

additional uscg regulations include agency oversight of emergency procedures , security , fire protection , and design and construction standards ( 33 c.f.r .

§§ 127.109 , 127.701-127.711 , 127.601-127.617 , 127.1101-127.1113 , 149.205 ) .

