on november 27 , 2002 , congress created a commission charged with investigating theseptember 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states .

the national commission on terroristattacks upon the united states , also known as the 9 / 11 commission , was to make a full and complete accounting of thecircumstances surrounding the attacks , and the extent of the united states' preparedness for , andimmediate response to , the attacks ; and…investigate and report to the president and congress on itsfindings , conclusions , and recommendations for corrective measures that can be taken to prevent actsof terrorism .

 ( 3 ) the panel's july 22 report was the culmination of a series of hearings and investigations by the paneland its staff into the terrorist attacks .

the report included a wide - ranging series of proposals tochange intelligence agencies of the executive branch and some committee structures within thelegislative branch .

the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations on the appointment process are designed to makeit quicker and more predictable for a relatively small group of nominees .

the proposal is relativelysparse on details , and implementing it would require the senate to flesh out the plan substantially ; however , it is clear that the recommended changes in the senate's confirmation process wouldprovide a certain up - or - down vote by the full chamber on all national security team nomineeswithin a definitive time frame ( 30 days ) after a nomination is made at the start of an administration .

the recommendation of the 9 / 11 commission would deal with only a small subset of thepresidential nominations considered by the senate .

with respect to the offices included in thenational security team , however , it would place substantial new conditions on how the senatecarries out its role in confirming presidential nominees .

while the constitution includes the senatein the confirmation process , it does not spell out how the chamber should fulfill its role of providingadvice and consent to a nomination .

the extent of legislative and executive control of the processhas in many respects remained undetermined .

in response to this constitutional indeterminancy , some have asserted that the senate shouldhave a co - equal role with the president in the process .

the senate's responsibility for confirming presidentialnominees , although fixed firmly in the constitution , remains unsettled in its application .

the senatewas not meant to be a passive participant .

delegates to the philadelphia convention believed thatthe senate would be knowledgeable about nominees and capable of voting wisely .

yet , for the mostpart , it has acted cautiously , uncertain of the scope of its own constitutional power .

the source ofthis uncertainty is not the constitution .

nowhere in that document , or in its history , is there anobligation on the part of the senate to approve a nomination .

on the contrary , the burden should beon the president to select and submit a nominee with acceptable credentials .

 ( 13 ) others have said the senate should play a lesser role , allowing the president greater leewayin his choices for office than is currently the case .

law professor john c. eastman told the senaterules committee on june 5 , 2003 , that ... the appointment power is located in article ii of theconstitution , which defines the powers of the president , not in article i , which defines the powersof the legislature .

as the supreme court itself has noted , by vesting appointment power in articleii , the framers of our constitution intended to place primary responsibility for appointments in thepresident .

the "advice and consent" role for the senate , then , was to be narrowly construed .

 ( 14 ) the practice of the senate , however , has not systematically reflected either of theseperspectives .

historically , much of the regular order of business on the nomination and confirmationof presidential appointments has been regulated not by strict , formal rules , but rather by informalcustoms that can change ( and have changed ) over the years , as the relative balance of power betweenthe president and the senate ebbs and flows .

it is these traditions which form the process , accordingto appointments expert michael j. gerhardt .

these informal arrangements - - those not clearlyrequired or clearly prohibited by the constitution - - have come to define the dynamic in the federalappointments process .

the informal arrangements through which the system operates - - includingsenatorial courtesy ; logrolling ; individual holds , "blue slips" ; consultation between presidents,members of congress , and other interested parties , including judges ; interest group lobbying ; strategic leaking by administrations , senators and interest groups ; manipulation of the press ; themedia's effort to influence the news ; and nominees' campaigning - - are the sum and substance of thefederal appointments process .

studying these arrangements provide even greater illumination thanstudying supreme court decisions or the constitution itself of how the different branches of thefederal government interact on matters of mutual concern .

 ( 15 ) under these informal customs , individual senators have , historically , been deeply involvedin the nomination and confirmation process .

the procedures and traditions that have developed havetended to protect the autonomy of individual senators to choose how to fulfill the advice and consentrole , rather than to dictate the process for all senators .

 ( 16 ) it is this combination - - unwritten senate traditions and the protection of each senator's rights - - that has led critics of the process to call for changes similar to those proposed by the 9 / 11commission .

"[t]he senate's confirmation process is entirely consistent with all of its other norms,traditions and rules .

concern for the rights and prerogatives of individual senators gives rise tonumerous opportunities for obstruction and delay," argued political scientists nolan mccarty androse razaghian .

 ( 17 ) .

one impact of the ability of a senator to filibuster a nominee has been that negotiations overother matters , both with the executive branch and among fellow senators , have been broadened toinclude all matter of senate business , a concept known as linkage .

for example , a senator'sobjections to a particular nominee might be disposed of by permitting that senator to offer anamendment to a bill that is soon to be considered on the senate floor .

taking nominations out ofthis equation could shift the balance of power between the executive and legislative branches .

"the appointments process is deeply contentious , and as legislative policymaking has grownmore difficult in recent decades , the process has increasingly become a venue for pitched battles overthe shape of public policy," wrote appointments expert mackenzie .

he continued: more and more , the contentiousness in the appointmentsprocess is driven not by questions of the fitness of nominees but by policy disagreements .

senatorsvote against nominees , and nominations fail , because the appointments process has become a policybattleground… this is not a new phenomenon , this use of the appointments process to wage policybattles .

in fact , it has always been a characteristic of the appointments process .

 ( 35 ) mackenzie noted that president andrew johnson fought with the senate over several of his nomineesto head the national bank and of roger taney to be secretary of the treasury .

what is different now,he said , is the extent to which those connections are made .

political scientists nolan mccarty and rose razaghian studied more than 100 years ofsenate action on nominations .

they said: "the thrust of our theory is that the supermajoritarianismof the senate in general and the confirmation process in particular gives partisan and ideologicalminorities a strategic opportunity to have an impact on public policy by delaying nominations thatwould pass on a simple majority vote. .

 ( 36 ) for some , the ability to engage in extended debate on ( and effectively block ) measures ormatters is what empowers the senate to deal on equal footing with the president in their fights overboth nominations and legislation .

political scientist rogers argued that "for the fact of the matteris , as i hope to show , that , as the much vaunted separation of powers now exists , unrestricted debatein the senate is the only check upon presidential and party autocracy .

the devices that the framersof the constitution so meticulously set up would be ineffective without the safeguard of senatorialminority action. .

 ( 37 ) some also believe that the senate's opportunity to play a vigorous role in the nomination andconfirmation process is essential to the public's trust in the process .

"nonetheless , the process ofvetting and voting on the president's candidates for high position is an essential balance wheel in ourcomplicated form of government .

it lends legitimacy to the whole structure , and it is worth theoccasional loss of a good person," wrote former judge , and former member of congress , abnermikva .

 ( 38 ) hecontinued: neither branch always chooses good people , as historyshows , and frequently the best people don't get appointed .

learned hand never made it to thesupreme court .

nonetheless , political involvement , including confirmation by the very politicalsenate , offers a reality check on who gets the power to make very important judicial decisions forlife .

the case is a little less compelling for appointments to the executive branch , but it still can bemade .

most of the federal work force come into their positions and are protected in them , by a civilservice system based on meritocracy .

for those relatively few policy makers whose appointmentsrequire senate confirmation , an extra "look see" is justified .

 ( 39 ) others believe that the delaying strategies being employed by some in the senate detract fromthat legitimacy .

 ( 40 ) and some contend that it is not right to use nominations as bargaining chips in legislativenegotiations .

"the senate's constitutional and institutional role of advice and consent is beingsupplanted by informal , extra - constitutional customs that allow individual senators to effectivelyveto the president's nominees - - even if only to gain leverage with the executive branch on anunrelated matter," wrote denning .

 ( 41 ) .

any change to the confirmation process of the kind proposed by the 9 / 11 commission wouldalmost certainly also influence the balance of power between the executive and the legislativebranches .

the ability to block a final vote on a nomination has become a critical element in thesenate's power relationship with the president , both for its action , or inaction , on the nominationitself and , frequently , for a senator or group of senators to gain leverage in negotiations on othermatters .

a vote deadline , for example , could still lead to a defeat , so requiring a vote could lead tomore presidential defeats or to pressure to go along with the president so as to not hand him a defeat .

political scientist burdett loomis observed that trying to change the senate's rules may notbe an effective plan .

"is there any indication that the senate might smooth the way for futurenominees ? .

given the profound changes in the chamber over the past twenty - five years - - the greaterlatitude allowed individual members and the intense partisanship that dominates muchdecision - making - - it seems unlikely that reformers would profit much from attempting to reshapesenate procedures. .

 ( 42 ) instead , he argued , "striving to "govern together" by bridging the separate institutions may bevaluable than seeking to change an institution that has proved highly resistant to structuralreforms. .

 ( 43 ) if the history of the confirmation process is more about practices than rules , perhaps it wouldbe useful to consider informal changes in the dynamics that undergird the process .

instead of settingup timetables for action , this approach would build upon a view that the problem is not procedural,but political .

political scientist christopher j. deering wrote that politics has always been a part of theprocess .

"the relationship between the executive and legislative branches has been and remainsessentially political .

that should not change .

the senate's role in the review of executive personnelis but one example of that political relationship .

the senate's role in the confirmation process wasdesigned not to eliminate politics but to make possible the use of politics as a safeguard .

from theoutset the political motivations of the two branches were to be a protection against tyranny. .

 ( 44 ) "the one enduring characteristic of the process is that it is as deeply and intensely politicalnow as it has always been," ( 45 ) agreed mackenzie .

the process is political , he asserted , becauseits results can have a major impact on policy - making , and therefore , politics .

conflict occurs in the appointment process for a verysimple reason .

appointments matter .

were that not the case , presidential administrations would nothave several dozen white house aides devoting full time to appointment decisions ; senatecommittees would not hold hundreds of hours of confirmation hearings ; interest groups , agencies,political parties and members of the house would not spend their time and resources trying to shapeappointments decisions .

yet they do all these things , and they do them because they think it makesa difference who gets appointed to serve in particular federal offices .

 ( 46 ) as a result , when the process has worked , it frequently was because the two branches ofgovernment found a way to make it work .

"the appointment power operates in a framework ofstudied ambiguity , its limits established for the most part not by court decisions but by imaginativeaccommodations between the executive and legislative branches," wrote separation - of - powersscholar fisher .

 ( 47 ) .

the 9 / 11 commission's proposal provides an occasion for the senate to evaluate the largerquestion of its confirmation process and its role in the presidential appointment process .

adoptionof the recommendation , for example , could open the door to consideration of ever more nominationsthrough expedited procedures .

what would a new process mean for other presidential nominations,particularly those to the judiciary ? .

for several years , the senate has been debating the proper role of the president and senatorsin the nomination and confirmation of the nation's federal judges .

during the clintonadministration , critics charged that the judiciary committee was not acting on all the nominationsit needed to .

during the bush administration , the controversy has been over the use of the filibusterto block a final vote on a judicial nominee .

 ( 48 ) before the 9 / 11 commission released its recommendations , senator arlen specter hadintroduced a resolution that would establish a "protocol" for the confirmation of federal judges .

hisplan ( s.res .

327 ) would establish timetables for action at both the committee andsenate floor stages , and it would effectively prohibit filibusters of judicial nominations .

presidentgeorge w. bush on october 30 , 2002 , proposed a similar plan for the senate's confirmationprocess .

 ( 49 ) s.res .

138 , introduced by senate majority leader bill frist on june 26 , 2003 , would set up a diminishing threshold for invoking cloture on presidential nominations that aresubject to senate approval .

the threshold necessary for invoking cloture would drop each time thesenate voted on a cloture motion on a particular nominee until it reached 51 senators , a majority ofthe chamber .

given the interest already expressed , some senators might want to expand the 9 / 11commission's recommendations to include a broader number of presidential nominees .

the 30-daytimetable would likely have to be adjusted to allow the senate to complete its work on a largernumber of nominations .

on the one hand , this action could put in place a definitive system for the consideration ofpresidential nominees - - it could bring order and predictability to the entire process .

on the otherhand , it might rush the process for some nominees and make it more difficult for senators to defeata nomination they oppose .

existing rules .

instead of , or in addition to,instituting new procedures to expedite action , the senate might exercise more control over threatenedfilibusters against nominations by enforcing more stringently its existing rules .

under currentprocedures , debate on nominations and treaties is in some respects easier to limit than on legislativematters .

first , the motion to proceed to consider a nomination may be offered in a non - debatableform , whereas the motion to proceed to consider legislation is usually debatable .

second , the "twospeech rule" of the senate limits each senator to two speeches per day on any given question .

withrespect to legislative matters , this rule is not a viable deterrent to extended debate , for each newamendment is viewed as a new question on which each senator may speak two more times .

onun - amendable matters , such as nominations , the two speech rule could more effectively be usedas a procedure to limit debate indirectly .

under current interpretations , however , the two - speech rule has proved to be an ineffectivedeterrent against extended debates on nominations because it has been interpreted to apply to thecalendar day .

on each new calendar day every senator is able once again to make two speeches onthe pending nominee .

as a result , since the late 1980's , the senate has rarely sought to enforce thisrule .

a reinterpretation of the rule in its application to nominations could make it more effective .

given such an interpretation , it would be easier for senate leaders to overcome filibustersagainst a nominee by forcing opposing senators to speak at length .

in modern practice , mostfilibusters feature delay by means other than debate ( quorum calls or agreements to turn to otheritems of business ) .

in effect , the threat of a filibuster is treated as though the senate is beingprevented , through extended debate , from reaching a final conclusion on the measure or matter athand .

keeping the senate in continuous executive business session for consideration of anomination could make it more difficult for senators to sustain a true filibuster , and , perhaps , reducethe incidence of filibuster threats .

expiring nominations .

another approach mightbe to place a time limit on a presidential nomination .

while such a requirement might seemcounterintuitive , it would prevent an endless delay in filling the position in question .

if the senatedid not act on a nomination after a defined period of time , say 60 days , it would automatically bereturned to the president .

while the president would have the ability to renominate the individualin question , if he so chose , he could also take the opportunity to reconsider his choice without thepolitically sensitive problem of asking a nominee to step aside .

table 1 .

initial appointments by president george w. bush to top positions at the departments of defense,homeland security , justice , and state , andthe central intelligence agency source: this table was created by [author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government , crs , aug. 18 , 2004. a .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , which created the department of homeland security , was signed into law on 11 / 25 / 02 .

theposition of under secretary of defense for intelligence was created by p.l .

107-314 , sec .

901 ( a ) , enacted 12 / 02 / 02 .

b .

vacancy information for mueller's predecessor , louis j. freeh , is from the fbi's history page , available at http: / / www.fbi.gov / libref / directors / freeh.htm .

c. although the first day the new president submitted nominations to the senate was inauguration day , senate committees held hearings on some topnominations before that time and the senate was therefore ready to confirm them on the same day they were nominated .

d. this position was created by p.l .

107-314 , sec .

901 ( a ) , enacted 12 / 02 / 02 .

e. on jan. 27 , 2003 , president bush announced his intention to designate england , hutchinson , hale , and one other individual as acting officials in theirintended positions .

 ( u.s. president ( george w. bush ) , "digest of other white house announcements," weekly compilation of presidentialdocuments , vol .

39 , jan. 27 , 2003 , p .

145. ) .

these actions were taken under section 1511 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the act .

 ( information received from departmentof homeland security , office of the deputy secretary , via telephone conversation , jan. 28 , 2003. ) .

england , hutchinson , and hale were laterconfirmed as shown .

f. according to dhs sources , brown was appointed under section 1511 ( c ) ( 2 ) of the act , which provides that reconfirmation by the senate is not requiredby the law for "any officer whose agency is transferred to the department pursuant to this act and whose duties following such transfer are germaneto those performed before such transfer. .

 ( information received from department of homeland security , office of legislative affairs , viatelephone conversation , mar .

12 , 2003. ) .

he was previously nominated to be deputy director of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) on 03 / 21 / 02 and confirmed on 08 / 01 / 02 .

g. technically beers was nominated twice .

she was first nominated on 06 / 29 / 01and this nomination was returned to the president on 08 / 03 / 01at thebeginning of a 31-day senate recess under the provisions of senate rule xxxi , paragraph 6 of the standing rules of the senate .

she wasnominated again on 09 / 04 / 01 .

the 31 days of the senate recess are not included in the calculations , in this row , of days elapsed .

table 2 .

appointment information for four william j. clinton appointees who continued in office under presidentgeorge w. bush source: this table was created by [author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government , crs , aug. 18 , 2004. a .

information on the departure date for larson's predecessor , stuart eizenstat , is from office of personnel management ( opm ) records .

the departuredate for tenet's predecessor , john m. deutch , is noted in r. jeffrey smith , "having lifted the cia's veil , deutch sums up: i told you so," thewashington post , dec. 26 , 1996 , p. a25 .

john gordon , who preceded mclaughlin , reportedly took a new position as of 06 / 27 / 00 , but his precisedate of departure from the cia could not be determined ( associated press online , "clinton names new no .

2 at cia , june 29 , 2000 ) .

dempseywas the first person to hold the position of deputy director of central intelligence for community management , which was created by p.l.104-293 , sec .

805 , enacted 10 / 11 / 96 .

b .

the senate adjourned on 07 / 27 / 00 and reconvened on 09 / 05 / 00 .

the 39 days of that recess are not included in the calculations , in this row , of dayselapsed .

c. the senate adjourned on 11 / 13 / 97 at the end of the 1st session of the 105th congress and reconvened on 01 / 27 / 98 .

the 74 days between the 1st and2nd sessions of the 105th congress are not included in the calculations , in this row , of days elapsed .

table 3 .

initial appointments by president william j. clinton to top positions at the departments of defense,justice,and state , and the central intelligence agency source: this table was created by the author with extensive assistance from [author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government , crs .

a .

although the first day the new president submitted nominations to the senate was inauguration day , senate committees held hearings on some topnominations before that time and the senate was therefore ready to confirm them on the same day they were nominated .

b .

the senate adjourned on 08 / 7 / 93 and reconvened on 09 / 07 / 93 .

the 30 days of that recess are not included in the calculations , in this row , of dayselapsed .

c. this position was created by p.l .

103-160 , sec .

903 , enacted 11 / 30 / 93 .

d. freeh's predecessor , william s. sessions , was fired by president clinton on july 19 , 1993 .

ana puga , "clinton fires fbi's sessions , expected to namen.y .

judge," the boston globe , july 20 , 1993 , p. 1. e. wirth was confirmed into the position of counselor at the department of state .

after a reorganization , the name of the position became under secretaryof state for global affairs .

john m. goshko , "state department reorganizes ranks ; as many as 40 deputy assistant secretary job willdisappear," the washington post , feb. 6 , 1993 , p. a8 .

f. this position was created by p.l .

105-277 , sec .

1313 , enacted 10 / 21 / 98 .

g. studeman was a holdover from the previous bush administration .

studeman's predecessor , richard j. kerr , resigned on jan. 14 , 1992 .

elainesciolino , "no .

2 c.i.a .

official quits post," the new york times , jan. 14 , 1992. h. this position was created by p.l .

104-293 , sec .

805 , enacted on 10 / 11 / 96 .

the senate adjourned on 11 / 13 / 97 at the end of the 1st session of the 105thcongress and reconvened on 01 / 27 / 98 .

the 74 days between the 1st and 2nd sessions of the 105th congress are not included in the calculations,in this row , of days elapsed .

