the house and senate judiciary committees reported the 1990 legislation that establishedthe victims of child abuse act and , in general , those committees have exercised jurisdiction overits programs .

in both 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) and 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) , reauthorization of funding forthe court appointed special advocates ( casa ) program and for the training program for judicialpersonnel and practitioners occurred as part of the legislation creating and amending the violenceagainst women act ( vawa ) .

while the 2005 vawa reauthorization extends casa fundingauthorization ( fy2007-fy2011 ) it does not do so for the judicial training program .

neither does the legislation that reauthorizes vawa include reauthorization of thechildren's advocacy centers , although it does include reauthorization of training funds related tothe work done by the centers ( fy2006-fy2010 ) .

past reauthorizations of children's advocacycenters have occurred as part of separate legislation and in different years .

the 1992 amendmentsto the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( p.l .

102-586 ) rewrote and reauthorized theoriginal provisions of the victims of child abuse act to authorize the current children's advocacycenters and related training program .

the 1996 amendments ( p.l .

104-235 ) to the child abuseprevention and treatment act ( capta ) ( which was handled by the committees that are currentlycalled house education and the workforce and senate health , education , labor and pensions ) extended this authorization without any changes to the program .

 ( 8 ) the program's fundingauthorization was expired from fy2001 through fy2003 , although the program continued toreceive funding .

in 2003 , a house floor amendment to the legislation that would become p.l.108-21 ( protect act ) reauthorized funding for the program in fy2004 and fy2005 .

a number of programs , primarily within hhs , have similar or related purposes tothose supported by the victims of child abuse act funding .

both s. 1679 ( senators dewine and rockfeller ) and h.r .

3758 ( representative schiff ) are omnibus child welfare proposals concerned primarily withcourt / child welfare issues .

while a number of their proposals were incorporated into thedeficit reduction act ( discussed above ) , other proposed changes have not yet been actedupon .

both h.r .

3758 and s. 1679 ( like the pew commission onchildren in foster care ) would require courts to develop specific performance measures asa part of receiving funding to enable them to better track their court performance .

 ( development of performance measures by courts is not required by the deficit reductionact as a condition of receiving funds to improve timely and complete decision - making onbehalf of children. ) .

additionally , h.r .

3758 would also require the governmentaccountability office ( gao ) to "conduct a study that compares states" with respect to eachof the following issues: 1 ) legal representation provided to children ; 2 ) children'sparticipation in their own cases ; 3 ) preparation of dependency court judges ; 4 ) case trackingand performance measurement ; and 5 ) statewide collaborative foster care councils .

the finalreport of the study would be due within one year of the legislation's enactment .

with regard to collaboration between the court and child welfare agencies , s. 1679 makes several proposals that were not included in the deficit reductionact .

that bill would require that demonstration of court and child welfare agencycollaboration be a mandatory review item in future child and family service reviews ( cfsrs ) , and it would provide that 2% of funds appropriated for the promoting safe andstable families program ( subpart 2 of title iv - b of the social security act ) be reserved tosupport such collaboration .

finally , s. 1679 would require the creation of amulti - disciplinary commission on child welfare in each state ( jointly chaired by the headof the child welfare agency and the state's chief judge ) .

other selected provisions .

s. 1679 and h.r .

3758 also include provisions related to providing student loanforgiveness for attorneys who work on child abuse and neglect or related cases .

 ( theattorney loan forgiveness provisions of s. 1679 are identical in effect to those of s. 1431 , introduced earlier this session by senator dewine. ) .

in addition , s.1679 would require the state child welfare agency to develop and encourage theimplementation of practice standards for its child welfare attorneys .

separately , h.r .

3576 , an omnibus child welfare measure introduced byrepresentative mcdermott includes a provision that would amend title iv - e of the socialsecurity act to permit state child welfare agencies to seek federal reimbursement for 75%of training costs for abuse and neglect court staff , agency attorneys , and attorneysrepresenting children ( including guardian ad litem or casas ) , as well as those representingparents .

 ( 23 ) .

the full text of the victims of child abuse act is available under "publications" onthe house education and the workforce website .

this compilation includes the law ascurrently authorized , except that it does not include amendments made by the protect act ( p.l .

108-21 ) , which primarily extended funding authorization for children's advocacycenters and related training and technical assistance through fy2004 and fy2005 .

further,it does not indicate that the funding authorization for related training and technical assistancefunds has been extended ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and increased to $7.5 million .

those provisionswere included in the final version ( enrolled ) of h.r .

3402 as freestanding law .

the full text of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( including programauthority for children's justice act grants ) , as currently authorized , the strengthening abuseand neglect court act , and the court improvement project , are available via the u.s.department of health and human services children's bureau website .

 ( the courtimprovement program language would be significantly altered by the deficit reduction actof 2005 if it is enacted. ) .

web links are listed below .

compilation of the victims of child abuse act ( pp .

541-553 ) http: / / edworkforce.house.gov / publications / edcomps / vol6nutrition.pdf .

p.l .

108-21 amendment to the victims of child abuse act not includedin this compilation ( subtitle e , section 381 ) http: / / frwebgate.access.gpo.gov / cgi - bin / getdoc.cgi ? dbname=108_cong_bills&docid=f:s151enr.txt.pdf .

compilation of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) , including program authority for the children's justice act grantshttp: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / programs / cb / laws_policies / cblaws / capta03 / capta_manual.pdf .

text of the strengthening abuse and neglect acthttp: / / frwebgate.access.gpo.gov / cgi - bin / getdoc.cgi ? dbname=106_cong_bills&docid=f:s2272enr.pdf .

compilation of certain social security act programs , including thecourt improvement program ( see section 438 ) http: / / www.acf.dhhs.gov / programs / cb / laws_policies / cblaws / safe2003.pdf .

