on august 1 , 2004 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) issued a terrorism alert forcritical financial institutions in new york , washington , dc and newark , nj .

press reports indicatedthat these institutions employed security guards , and that surveillance by terrorists included thelocation , armament , and activity of those guards .

 ( 1 ) widely deployed among transportation hubs , power plants , andother nationally important facilities , such security guards are viewed by many as both a vital elementof terror deterrence and the first line of response to terrorist attacks .

the bush administration sharesthis view .

in the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and keyassets the administration identifies security guards as "an important source of protection for criticalfacilities. .

 ( 2 ) the nation'sdependence on security guards for critical infrastructure protection gives rise to questions as to thestatus and capability of these guards , and federal efforts to help them combat terrorism .

in 2003 , there were approximately one million security guards ( including airport screeners ) employed in the united states - - compared to 650,000 u.s. police officers .

 ( 3 ) nearly half of these guardswere employed directly by the institutions they served ; the rest , approximately 53% of all guards,worked for contract guard companies providing outsourced guard services .

this report provides background information concerning security guards in the united statesand their role in critical infrastructure protection .

it analyzes trends in the number and deploymentof security guards , including effects of the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) .

it discussesthe wages paid to security guards compared to similar workers , and the relationship between pay andworkforce effectiveness .

the report reviews the qualifications and training of security guards , including background checks , highlighting recent changes related to counter terrorism andstate - to - state differences in qualification requirements .

finally the report discusses policyconsiderations of potential interest to congress .

in considering the role of security guards in u.s. critical infrastructure protection , policyanalysts have focused on several key issues: staffing , pay , background checks , and training .

a fewadditional policy issues , such as counter - terrorism support and contract guard cost - effectiveness,have also received some public attention .

this report addresses critical infrastructure guards as a distinctive group , but crs is awareof no federal or state policy that explicitly makes a similar distinction .

on the contrary , federalcriminal background legislation and state licensing regulations appear to apply uniformly to allguards under their jurisdiction , without consideration of differing guard assignments .

as noted inthis report , uniform requirements for all one million u.s. guards may be excessive for some andinsufficient for others .

questions remain , however , about what is the appropriate role of the federalgovernment with respect to security guards , especially private guards , protecting criticalinfrastructure .

while there appears to have been relatively little congressional debate on this subject,it may become increasingly important as homeland security strategy evolves and the distinctivesecurity requirements of u.s. critical infrastructure become better understood .

if homeland security policy does evolve towards special treatment of critical infrastructureguards , responsible agencies may face a challenge in identifying those guards because ofuncertainties in identifying critical assets .

in april , 2004 , the dhs information analysis andinfrastructure protection directorate ( iaip ) reported that it had compiled the list of 1,700 criticalu.s .

assets referred to earlier in ths report , but confusion among private sector and state governmentpartners about what constituted a critical asset cast doubt on the validity of that list .

 ( 80 ) among electric utilities,for example , there was some question as to why certain assets were considered critical by iaip , sincesome of those assets were not in use and others did not support significant electric loads .

 ( 81 ) according to pressaccounts , subsequent classified briefings with members of congress to review lists of critical assetsin their states have continued to raise concerns about iaip's critical asset identification .

 ( 82 ) without clarity aboutwhich assets are critical , policies directed at critical infrastructure guards may be difficult toimplement .

counter - terrorism funding for critical infrastructure guards may also present a policychallenge because the overwhelming majority of these guards appear to be in the private sector .

thedhs assistant secretary for infrastructure protection recently stated that the department "will notprovide money to the private sector to remediate vulnerabilities. .

 ( 83 ) but as table 1 shows,approximately 87% of all u.s. security guards in 2003 were employed either by a private guardcompany or directly by a private institution .

as one member of congress recently remarked,"private security workers play a vital role ... protecting critical infrastructure , both public and private,from threat of terrorism. .

 ( 84 ) even critical government facilities such as national laboratories,military bases , and courthouses , often rely upon private security guards for counter - terror protection .

if the private sector could be relied upon to make socially warranted counter - terrorisminvestments in guards and training , federal funding for guards might not be an issue .

however , assome analysts have suggested , there are economic reasons why private companies may not makesuch investments .

in homeland security , private markets do notautomatically produce the best result .

to be sure , private firms have some incentive to avoid thedirect financial losses associated with a terrorist attack on their facilities or operations .

in general,however , that incentive is not compelling enough to encourage the appropriate level of security .

 ( 85 ) it is an open question whether private operators of critical infrastructure have hired , trained , andotherwise supported security guards to the degree warranted by the social value of the facilities theyprotect .

at this time , there does not appear to be sufficient information to make such judgments .

furthermore , the overall balance between public and private funding of homeland security is anexpansive topic beyond the scope of this report .

nonetheless , as congress continues its oversightof homeland security , funding for private guards may emerge as a security consideration wherepublic benefits and private resources may not align .

source: state of california , bureau of security and investigative services ( bsis ) .

"power to arresttraining manual. .

west sacramento , ca .

feb. 2002. pp .

2-3 .

