on august 11 , 2006 , revised grazing regulations of the bureau of land management ( blm ) took effect ( 43 c.f.r .

part 4100 ) .

some of the regulations have been enjoined .

the agency also considered related policy changes , but it appears that policy changes are no longer being considered .

the previous revision of grazing regulations culminated in comprehensive changes effective august 21 , 1995 .

the 1995 changes were the result of a several - year process of evaluating ideas and shaping alternatives , and occurred in the midst of a decades - long dispute over the ownership , management , and use of federal rangelands .

the 1995 changes were highly controversial , with criticism from many ranching interests that those new rules weakened grazing privileges and would reduce livestock grazing on federal lands , and from environmental organizations that the changes did not go far enough in protecting public lands .

supporters saw the changes as improving resource and range management and broadening participation in public land decisionmaking .

congress considered many of the 1995 changes as part of legislative proposals or committee oversight .

congress also has examined the development of the 2006 regulatory changes and related policy options through committee oversight .

among the changes made in 1995 , many of which were reexamined by blm during the development of the 2006 regulatory changes , are those that: separated grazing preference from permitted use , so that a permittee's preference for receiving a grazing permit was not tied to a specific amount of grazing based on historic levels ( described as animal unit months , or aums ) ; allowed permittees up to three years of nonuse of their permits ; authorized suspending or canceling a permit if a permittee is convicted of violating certain state or federal environmental laws ; eliminated the express requirement that a permittee be engaged in the livestock business ; replaced the term affected interest with interested public ; allowed conservation use for the term of a grazing permit , thereby excluding livestock grazing from all or a portion of an allotment ; required title of permanent structural improvements to be held in the name of the united states ; required that water rights for livestock grazing be held in the name of the united states , to the extent allowed by state law ; imposed a surcharge on a permittee who allows livestock not owned by the permittee or the permittee's children to graze on public land ; eliminated grazing advisory boards and replaced them with the broader interest resource advisory councils ; and adopted rangeland management standards called fundamentals of rangeland health .

in issuing these changes , the secretary of the interior dropped the most contentious proposal — to increase the grazing fee — due to the rancor this issue generated .

however , dissatisfaction with the 1995 changes among ranching interests led to a lawsuit ultimately decided by the u.s. supreme court .

the regulations , challenged on their face , were upheld by the courts as not exceeding the authority of the secretary , with one exception .

the court struck down the rule pertaining to conservation use for the term of a permit on the grounds that a grazing permit was for grazing and the secretary could more appropriately accomplish conservation use through the land use planning process .

blm took a two - pronged approach to the 2003-2006 iteration of grazing reform on public lands , by issuing changes to grazing regulations and considering changes to grazing policies .

under this sustaining working landscapes initiative , first announced in march 2003 , blm sought to create working landscapes that are both economically productive and environmentally healthy .

changes to grazing regulations and / or policies could affect more than 18,000 grazing permits on 162 million acres of blm land .

the specific regulatory changes that were adopted and the policy alternatives that were considered are discussed under separate headings below .

conflict over livestock grazing on public lands has become common .

critics of the latest reform effort asserted that the 1995 regulations were not in effect long enough to assess their effectiveness and that the policy issues were too vague to assess their potential effects .

they also contended that blm had not justified a need for regulatory and policy changes and that the changes adopted remove important environmental protections and opportunities for public comment .

one concern voiced by environmentalists was that the changes would require more monitoring than would be feasible , thus possibly preventing changes in grazing practices .

another was that blm and the forest service did not develop joint rules , advocated because many blm and forest service lands are similar and adjoining and permittees often have permits for livestock grazing on both agencies' lands .

there was also some disappointment among environmentalists that the reform effort did not encompass certain important issues such as altering grazing fees , controlling noxious weeds , retiring grazing permits , and establishing processes for identifying lands suitable for grazing .

regulatory changes have been supported by some livestock organizations and range professionals as helping both ranchers and the range .

blm asserted that regulatory changes were needed to increase flexibility for grazing managers and permittees , to improve blm's relationship with ranchers , to improve rangeland management and permit administration , to promote conservation , and to comply with court decisions .

according to the agency , the changes are based on lessons learned in implementing the 1995 regulations and thus improve upon those earlier regulations .

further , the final rule recognizes the benefits of grazing , including the economic and social benefits to rural communities and the preservation of open space , according to blm .

blm pursued grazing reform for more than three years after notifying the public in 2003 of its consideration of changes under its sustaining working landscapes initiative .

during that time , evaluations of possible regulatory and policy changes proceeded on separate tracks .

changes to regulations became effective august 11 , 2006 , although some of the changes were subsequently enjoined .

no policy changes were made as a result of this effort , and it appears that there is no longer an initiative to review and revise grazing policies .

many of the key regulatory changes contained in the final rule deal with provisions that took effect in 1995 , during the previous revision of grazing rules .

among them are changes to allow shared title to range improvements , allow private acquisition of water rights , reduce requirements for public involvement , modify the administrative appeals process , broaden the definition of grazing preference , change the timeframe and procedures for remedying rangeland health problems , remove the limit on permit nonuse , and eliminate conservation use grazing permits .

the changes met with mixed reaction .

the revisiting of issues dealt with a decade ago , together with other changes , was generally supported by livestock organizations and some range professionals who see benefits both to the range and those grazing on public land .

by contrast , many environmental organizations and other range experts opposed the changes on the grounds that a need for change had not been demonstrated and the particular changes could harm the environment .

public comment on the proposed regulatory changes , together with the deis assessing their impact , was accepted through march 2 , 2004 .

blm evaluated the comments over many months , before publishing an feis on june 17 , 2005 .

the agency postponed developing a final grazing rule to consider public comment received after the closing date , particularly from the fish and wildlife service .

the blm addressed this comment in an addendum issued march 31 , 2006 .

final grazing regulations were published on july 12 , 2006 , and took effect a month later .

some of the new regulations are not being implemented as a result of lawsuits , primarily changes regarding public participation , sharing title to range improvements , and fundamentals of rangeland health .

blm had expected to focus on final policy changes after the completion of the rulemaking process , but it appears that policy changes are no longer under consideration .

public feedback on possible policy changes had shaped the proposals that were examined and extended the timeframe for considering changes .

key policy issues that were considered related to rcas , conservation partnerships , voluntary allotment restructuring , conservation easement acquisition , and landscape habitat improvement .

