as we have seen , both proprietary and open source software publishers rely upon theintellectual property laws to sustain their chosen development model .

more specifically , the term"intellectual property laws" identifies a number of doctrines , including copyrights , patents and tradesecrets , that provide innovators with proprietary interests in their intangible creations .

 ( 31 ) copyrightprovides authors with exclusive rights in their writings , visual works and other works of authorship ; patents relate to products , processes and other useful inventions ; while trade secret law concernssecret information that is of commercial value .

 ( 32 ) after briefly identifying the principal policyjustifications for the copyright , patent and trade secret law , this report summarizes the basicworkings of these legal disciplines .

conflicts potentially arise between open source standards and intellectual property rights .

 ( 63 ) some observers have expressed concerns that if open source software is incorporated into anotherwise proprietary program , then the terms of the open source license will apply to the entireprogram and defeat intellectual property rights that would otherwise exist .

it is also possible that aparty not bound by the terms of an open source license may raise claims of intellectual propertyinfringement based upon the use of software that others believe to be open source .

finally , questionshave arisen regarding the validity and enforceability of open source licenses .

this report nextreviews these issues .

given the wide recognition that intellectual property and the open source movement are ofgrowing importance in the u.s. computer industry , ( 115 ) the relationship between these fields is thesubject of increasing attention .

the policymakers of the 108th congress have addressed the opensource movement with respect to cybersecurity and other contexts .

should congress choose toaddress this area directly , a variety of approaches are available .

if the current interface betweenintellectual property rights and the open source movement is considered satisfactory , then no actionneed be taken .

indeed , growing awareness that intellectual property and open source softwarelicenses can sometimes conflict may lead to more sophisticated treatment of intellectual property bymembers of the open source community , as well as continued refinement of the governing law in thecourts .

another approach is to provide governmental assistance to the open source movement in identifying intellectual properties that might bear upon a particular open source software product .

for example , the u.s. patent and trademark office could , upon request by a recognized open sourcesoftware publisher or organization , conduct a search of pending patent applications and issuedpatents in order to determine whether these patents might bear upon a particular open sourcesoftware program .

this capability would allow members of the open source community to becomemore fully informed of intellectual property rights .

it should be noted , however , that a number ofpatent research firms already exist that could conduct such a search for a fee , at least with respectto issued patents and published patent applications .

 ( 116 ) more far - reaching legal reforms are also possible .

for example , one recognized source of legal uncertainty for the software industry concerns the enforceability of open source licenses .

 ( 117 ) alegislative statement concerning the status of these licenses in terms of the federal preemptiondoctrine might allow software firms to make decisions concerning research , investment , and othercommercial activities with more confidence .

the allegedly viral nature of open source software presents another source of concern .

one possible legislative response is to allow a proprietary software publisher that discovers its productcontains an open source component a fixed period of time to eliminate the open source component .

if the publisher removes the open source component within the stipulated grace period , then thesoftware would remain proprietary .

any possible legal reform would be well - advised to recognize that the u.s. software industry is increasingly characterized both by rapid innovation and by a distinct community of knowledgeableusers who wish to "opt out" of the intellectual property system .

the possibility of intellectualproperty rights , and their attendant license fees and royalties , may provide a significant incentive forfirms to innovate and to distribute software .

on the other hand , some computer users believe thatthese incentives are unnecessary , and further hope to maintain a non - proprietary environment ofsoftware distribution and development .

 ( 118 ) these two trends have sometimes led to conflicts betweenexclusive intellectual property rights and open source software .

striking a balance betweenpromoting innovation , on one hand , and accommodating the demands of software developers andusers , on the other , forms an important component of contemporary software policy .

