child poverty persists as a social and economic concern in the united states .

in 2007,12.8 million children were considered poor under the official u.s. census bureau definition .

the child poverty rate ( the percent of all children considered poor ) stood at 17.6% — well below the most recent high of 22% in 1993 , but still well above its historic low of 13.8% in 1969 .

in 2007 , 1.8 million more children were counted as poor than in 2000 , when 15.6% of children were poor .

child poverty reflects both family circumstances in which children reside and economic conditions and opportunities in communities where children live .

family living arrangements , indicated by the presence of just one or both parents , greatly affect the chances that a child is poor .

children who are racial or ethnic minorities are at particular risk of being poor .

to avoid poverty , most children need an adult breadwinner .

the economic well - being of children usually depends on how well their parent ( s ) fares in the labor market .

children most at risk of poverty are in families without an earner .

however , some are poor despite the work — even the full - time work — of a parent .

they are among the working poor .

poverty affects children's life chances , their prospects of realizing their full potential , and their ability to successfully transition into adulthood .

by almost any indicator , poor children fare worse than their nonpoor counterparts .

poor children are at greater risk of poor physical health , delayed cognitive development , poor academic achievement , and risky behavior ( particularly among children growing up in poor neighborhoods ) .

poor adolescent girls are more likely to become teenage mothers than their nonpoor counterparts , contributing to a cycle of poverty from one generation to the next .

while income poverty is associated with poor child outcomes , lack of income may account for only part of the reason why poor children face poor future prospects .

other factors are arguably as important , if not more so , than income , per se , in affecting children's life chances .

prolonged or deep income poverty among families with children may signal more chronic problems than merely a lack of income .

income support policies may help alleviate economic distress among such families , helping to provide families' basic needs ; however , without other social supports or other , more fundamental changes in children's family circumstances , children's prospects may remain limited .

numerous programs operate in the u.s. to aid children without a breadwinner , or with one whose earnings are low .

these programs , together , constitute the main threads of this nation's income / social safety net: social insurance programs ( social security and unemployment insurance - ui ) provide payments for children whose parent has paid payroll taxes but is now out of the workforce .

social security benefits are paid to children whose parent ( s ) is dead , disabled , or retired .

unemployment insurance benefits are paid temporarily to some workers who have lost a job ( most state ui programs do not provide dependents' benefits , however ) .

neither program imposes an income test .

benefits are an earned entitlement .

refundable tax credits ( the federal earned income tax credit , or eitc , and the child tax credit ) supplement low earnings of parents .

cash welfare programs make payments to some needy children and their parents .

major welfare programs for children are temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and , for disabled children or children with disabled parents , supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

these programs impose an income test ( and , usually , an assets test ) .

tanf seeks to move parents into the labor market and requires states to condition eligibility ( beyond two months ) on parental work .

noncash welfare programs , such as food stamps , subsidized housing , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) provide in - kind benefits .

these programs also are means - tested .

government is challenged to maintain family self - support through work - based policies to promote parents' work and family economic self - sufficiency , while at the same time maintaining a safety net that prevents children from falling into abject poverty when parents are unable to work or their efforts are insufficient .

in 2007 , 12.8 million children out of a total of 72.8 million lived in families whose pre - tax money income that year fell short of the poverty threshold .

this translates into a child poverty rate of 17.6% .

as a group , children are more likely to be poor than are either the aged ( persons aged 65 or older ) or nonaged adults ( persons 18 to 64 years old ) .

figure 1 compares 2007 poverty rates of children , the aged , and nonaged adults .

it shows that children were 80% more likely to be poor than the aged and that the incidence of poverty among nonaged adults was only slightly higher than that of the aged .

there are some well - known correlates to child poverty .

a child's risk of being poor varies by family structure and size and by race / ethnicity .

further , since children primarily rely on adult workers for income , child poverty also varies by the educational attainment and age ( which is related to work experience ) of the family's head , and ( if present ) spouse .

this section provides a profile of child poverty in 2007 .

shown are child poverty rates by characteristics of the family , child , or family head and spouse .

this perspective answers the question , among children , who are most at risk for being in poor families ? .

this section also provides the composition of child poverty by those characteristics , answering the question who are the poor children ? .

children have been more likely than any other age group in the u.s. to be poor since 1974 , when their poverty rate first topped that of the aged .

in records dating back to 1959 , the incidence of poverty among related children in families has ranged from a peak of 26.9% ( 1959 ) to a low of 13.8% ( 1969 ) .

 ( see figure 13 ) .

in 2007 , the rate was 17.6% .

child poverty rates display both cyclical and longer term trends .

except for the 1961-1962 recession , child poverty rates rose during economic slumps , peaking in the year or two after the end of the recession .

during the years covered by figure 13 , the poverty rate for the aged ( not shown ) fell from 35.2% in 1959 to 9.7% in 2007 .

the framework for federal cash income support policy can be found in the social security act and the internal revenue code .

a two - tier safety net was put into place in the 1935 act .

the first tier , consisting of old - age insurance ( usually thought of as social security ) ( title ii ) and unemployment insurance ( title iii ) aimed to protect families from the economic risks associated with the retirement or unemployment of their workers .

workers earned rights to these social insurance benefits by paying payroll taxes in a covered job .

the second tier made grants to states to help make means - tested payments to specified categories of needy persons not expected to work , namely , the aged ( title i ) , children ( with only one able - bodied parent in the home ) ( title iv ) , and the blind ( title x ) .

added to the social insurance tier over time were survivors' insurance ( 1939 social security act amendments ) , disability insurance ( 1956 amendments ) , and medicare ( 1965 amendments ) health insurance for the elderly .

added to the welfare tier over time was aid for needy persons who were permanently and totally disabled ( 1952 ) , replaced in 1972 by a 100% federal cash program for the aged , blind , and disabled called ssi .

health insurance for low - income aged , blind , and disabled persons and for needy families with children was added in the form of the medicaid program ( 1965 amendments ) .

health insurance for low - income children ineligible for medicaid was added by enactment of the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) ( balanced budget act of 1997 ) .

also , the cash welfare program for needy children was opened up to some unemployed two - parent families ( 1961 ) and , finally ( 1996 ) was replaced by a block grant for temporary assistance .

the social insurance programs are designed to provide benefits when a family loses earnings because its breadwinner is permanently or temporarily out of the labor market ( through death , disability , unemployment ) .

at the outset the welfare programs were restricted to persons not expected to work , but over time , work requirements have been added to the cash welfare program for families with children , and it now emphasizes moving families from welfare to work .

in 1975 , congress enacted a program to explicitly support and supplement the income of working poor parents — the eitc .

this provision of the tax code makes payments from the treasury to parents whose credit exceeds any income tax liability .

in tax year 2005 , the eitc was claimed by 22.8 million tax filers , with credits totaling $42.4 billion .

in addition , child care subsidies have been expanded for families receiving cash welfare by the family support act of 1988 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 , which created child care programs for the working poor , and the 1996 welfare reform law , which consolidated child care funding .

fy2008 appropriations for child care totaled $5 billion ( $2.9 billion for the mandatory child care block grant and $2.1 billion for the discretionary child care and development block grant ) .

finally , the federal child support enforcement program ( begun in 1975 ) has shifted its role from reimbursing federal and state governments for welfare costs to facilitating income transfers to families with children where one parent ( usually the father ) is noncustodial .

the increased role of child support is particularly important in light of the growth of female - headed families .

in fy2006 , child support enforcement offices collected $24 billion: $0.9 billion for tanf cash welfare families , $9.5 billion for former tanf cash welfare families , $3.1 billion for families receiving medicaid ( and no tanf ) , and $11.3 billion for families that never received tanf cash welfare .

although there are numerous government "safety net" programs that aid families with children , the chief component of money income for most families with children is earnings .

the first bars in figures 19 and 20 show what child poverty rates in 2007 would have been if families had no cash income other than earnings .

the rates would have been 21.8% for all related children and 52.4% for related children in female - headed families .

the last bars show the official money income poverty rates , 17.6% for all related children and 43.0% for children being raised by the mother alone .

in succession , the intervening bars show the poverty - reducing contributions of ( 1 ) cash from other family effort ( property income , private pensions , child support and alimony ) , and ( 2 ) government cash transfers ( social insurance , other cash benefits , and cash welfare ) .

in general , the official poverty rates are about 20% lower than market income ( earnings only ) poverty rates .

figures 19 and 20 show only sources of pre - tax money income ( income counted in determining official poverty rates ) .

they exclude noncash aid and tax benefits .

this report examined both the role of work and the role of government income supports as factors affecting the official child poverty rate .

work is the principal means by which families with children support themselves .

child poverty rates are correlated with factors associated with wage rates , such as parent ( s ) ' educational attainment and work experience ; the amount of work done during the year ; and family type , which affects the likelihood that a family will have a second earner .

without family earnings , a child is almost certain to be poor .

however , earnings alone often fail to overcome poverty .

in 2006 , one - third of all poor children lived with at least one adult who was a full - time , full - year worker .

the economy has many jobs that pay low wages .

parents in such jobs may escape poverty only through job advancement that results in higher wages , possibly only by upgrading skills and education while working .

often , it takes work of both parents to move their children and families out of poverty .

this often comes at the cost of arranging child care to permit both parents to work outside of the home .

additionally , work is not always steady , with some parents experiencing spells of joblessness for part of the year .

access to the first tier of the "safety net," social insurance , is restricted to families with a current or previous wage earner .

social insurance benefits are established through work , and are characterized as earned rights .

although these programs are not targeted to the poor per se , these programs — which partially replace earnings because of the death , old age , disability or involuntary unemployment of a worker — have a significant impact on reducing poverty among families with children .

over the past 20 years , the social insurance tier of the safety net has remained relatively static .

the protections of its cash benefit programs have generally been maintained .

however , the social insurance tier has not been revised to take into account changes in the economy , family structure , and work patterns of parents .

in contrast , the second tier of the "safety net," programs targeted to low - income families and persons , has undergone a radical transformation over the past 20 years .

cash welfare for needy families with children has increasingly been tied to a philosophy of mutual obligations — adult recipients have been expected to engage in either work or activities to move them into work .

in the wake of welfare reforms made at the federal and state levels in the mid - 1990s , the cash welfare rolls plummeted , so that children in families receiving cash assistance represent a small and decreasing share of both the overall and poverty child populations .

need - tested assistance increasingly is paid to families only in the form of noncash benefits ( medicaid and food stamps ) whose value is not reflected in the official child poverty statistics .

these programs cast an uneven net of basic support to families .

moreover , when parents receiving need - tested benefits go to work , benefits are often significantly reduced as earnings increase , at times creating a perverse disincentive to work .

for many families with limited earnings capacity , the route toward self - sufficiency can be a steep climb , yielding only small economic gain for additional work effort .

along with the transformation of need - tested benefits have come expansions of refundable tax credits for families with children , particularly the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) .

as a work support , the eitc helps offset the financial disincentives relating to work that poor families have traditionally faced under welfare programs .

for some families with very low earnings , the eitc may supplement up to 40 cents on every dollar a parent earns .

eitc payments ( either advance payments , tax refunds , or reductions in tax liabilities that would otherwise be owed ) are not included in the official poverty statistics .

however , for a single parent with two children , who works full - time , all year at the 2006 federal minimum wage , those earnings combined with food stamps and the eitc are sufficient to lift that family to just above the poverty threshold .

thus , recent changes to taxes and benefits targeted to low - income families have sought to increase the rewards to work .

however , the world of work does not guarantee steady income .

working parents face risks to financially supporting their children , stemming from job loss associated with either cyclical or structural changes in the economy or interrupted periods of work because of their own or a family members' illness .

moreover , there remain a small but not insignificant group of families with children where no parent has an attachment to the labor force .

this creates a series of policy dilemmas which include how to balance protections against economic risk while maintaining a policy that rewards work , and helping children in those families without a worker without undermining the efforts of working parents .

