in early 2005 , the united states began advertizing in mass - circulation urdu - languagenewspapers and on radio and television stations in pakistan's northwest frontier province topromote a rewards program for wanted al qaeda suspects .

in may , al qaeda fugitive abu farajal - libbi , a libyan native wanted in connection with lethal december 2003 attempts to assassinatepresident musharraf , was captured in the northwestern pakistani city of mardan .

informationprovided by libbi reportedly led to the arrest of six suspected al qaeda members , including twoarabs and four pakistanis , and the targeted killing of an alleged al qaeda bomb expert near theafghan border .

musharraf claimed that pakistan had "broken their [al qaeda's] back" with recentarrests .

two months later , in the wake of deadly july bombings in britain and egypt , musharrafagain declared that al qaeda's ability to operate in pakistan had been destroyed .

 ( 7 ) debate over the whereaboutsof fugitive al qaeda founder osama bin laden continues to focus on the rugged afghan - pakistaniborder region: pakistani officials generally insist there is no evidence that bin laden is hiding there,but numerous u.s. officials have suggested otherwise .

in june , director of central intelligence gossclaimed to have "an excellent idea of where [bin laden] is" and suggested that "sanctuaries insovereign states" and "our sense of international obligation" present obstacles to his capture .

 ( 8 ) the pakistani president hasissued contradictory statements on the topic .

efforts to kill or capture al qaeda and taliban militants near the afghanistan - pakistanborder continue to bring mixed results .

an apparently resurgent taliban has suffered majorbattlefield losses in eastern and southern afghanistan during the spring and summer of 2005 , butu.s .

and afghan officials continue to claim that insurgents are able to cross into afghanistan toattack u.s. - led forces before returning to pakistan and , in june , afghan officials were complainingof a "steady stream of terrorists" entering their country from pakistan .

the afghan - pakistani riftdeepened , spurring president bush to make a personal call to musharraf in an effort to smoothrelations between two key u.s. allies in the region .

in july , pakistan reported moving 4,000additional troops to the border region , bringing the total to some 80,000 , and prime minister azizvisited kabul , where he vowed "seamless cooperation" with the afghan government in fightingterrorism and islamic extremism .

still , u.s. officials continue to urge islamabad ( and kabul ) to "domore" to end insurgent operations in the region and some reports indicate that taliban recruiting andtraining continues to take place on pakistani territory without government interference .

 ( 9 ) pakistan's western tribal regions continue to be the site of tensions and sporadic islamicmilitant - related violence .

pakistani military operations in south waziristan wound down in 2004 .

late in that year , the regional pakistani corps commander declared that "peace has been restored inwana," the area where the bulk of combat had taken place .

attention has become focused on thenorth waziristan district , where scores and possibly hundreds of "unwanted foreigners" have foundrefuge .

the islamabad government is using a carrot - and - stick approach , offering economic andinfrastructure development incentives to encourage cooperation from tribal chieftains whilethreatening use of force in those areas where militants are given haven .

yet cooperative triballeaders have come under lethal attack by militants and resistance to islamabad's cooperation withu.s. - led efforts in afghanistan remains widespread .

on july 15 , u.s. forces based in afghanistanexchanged heavy weapons fire with militants just across the border in pakistan , killing 24 of them .

thousands of pakistani tribesmen later denounced the u.s. action and pakistan told the united statesthat border violations would not be tolerated .

 ( 10 ) pakistan continues to struggle with a virulent strain of belligerent islamism that someanalysts say threatens the survival of the country .

in december 2004 , president musharraf called his"biggest fear" the extremism , terrorism , and militancy that has "really polluted society in pakistan. .

he also conceded that some of pakistan's religious schools are part of the problem: "there are many[madrassas] which are involved in militancy and extremism. .

 ( 11 ) major sectarian bombattacks in may again raised questions about the ability of pakistan's security forces to maintain orderin the country's urban centers ( where , not incidentally , the great majority of top al qaeda fugitiveshave been found ) .

positive news did come with july announcements that the islamabad governmentwould reinvigorate its efforts to curtail indigenous terrorism by detaining suspected militants,shuttering the offices of extremist groups , and regulating the activities of the country's thousands ofreligious schools , some of which are involved in the teaching of militancy .

pakistan - u.s. counterterrorism cooperation continues apace .

in november 2004 , thepentagon notified congress of three possible major foreign military sales to pakistan involvingeight p - 3c maritime reconnaissance aircraft , 2,000 tow anti - armor missiles , and six phalanx navalguns .

the deals could be worth up to $1.2 billion for lockheed martin and raytheon , the primecontractors .

the department of defense characterized the p - 3cs and tow missiles as havingsignificant anti - terrorism applications ( a claim that elicited skepticism from some analysts ) , and itasserted that the proposed sales would not affect the military balance in the region .

india's externalaffairs minister later "cautioned the united states" against any decision to sell f - 16 fighter jets topakistan , adding that the "u.s. arms supply to pakistan would have a negative impact on thegoodwill the united states enjoys with india , particularly as a sister democracy. .

 ( 12 ) yet , in march 2005 , thebush administration announced that the united states would resume sales of f - 16 fighters topakistan after a 16-year hiatus ( see crs report rs22148 , combat aircraft sales to south asia ) .

separatist - related violence and terrorism in kashmir has increased in the summer of 2005 .

the india - pakistan peace initiative begun in april 2003 continues , most concretely with a formalcease - fire agreement along the kashmiri line of control ( loc ) and the entire international border ( the cease - fire has held for nearly two years ) .

in april 2005 , a new bus service was launched in thedisputed kashmir region and the indian and pakistan leaders called the bilateral peace process"irreversible. .

however , while new delhi indicates that rates of militant infiltration across the locare down significantly as compared to past years , ongoing separatist - related violence in india'sjammu and kashmir state has claimed scores of lives and indian officials have renewed criticismsthat pakistan has not acted to eliminate the "terrorist infrastructure" on pakistani territory .

in india's northeastern states , decades - old separatist movements continue .

after twoassamese separatist leaders reportedly surrendered in february , united liberation front of assamterrorists conducted a series of coordinated bomb attacks in march , spurring indian security forcesto launch a 2,000-man operation against militants there in april .

in may , new delhi signed a trucewith the national democratic front of bodoland , a leading assamese separatist group designatedas terrorists by the indian government .

moreover , rebels continue to make deadly assaults ongovernment forces in manipur .

 ( 13 ) meanwhile , attacks perpetrated by maoist "naxalites" operating in india ( the two largest organizations being u.s. - designated terrorist groups ) became morenumerous and have cost scores of lives 2005 .

maoist militants are said to have expanded theiroperations into more than half of india's 28 states , spurring some observers to issue dire warningsabout india's deteriorating internal security circumstances .

new delhi vows to bolster thecapabilities of security forces battling the militants .

 ( 14 ) other recent terrorist violence in india included a july incidentin which six militants , including a suicide bomber , were killed in the midst of an unsuccessful attackon the site of a controversial temple that is claimed by both hindus and muslims in the uttar pradeshcity of ayodhya .

ensuing protests by hindu activists led to thousands of arrests .

the culpritsreportedly were linked to the pakistan - based lashkar - e - taiba terrorist group .

 ( 15 ) india - u.s. counterterrorism cooperation appears set to further expand .

in june , the unitedstates and india signed a ten - year defense framework agreement which lists "defeating terrorism andviolent religious extremism" as one of four key shared security interests , and which calls for abolstering of mutual defense capabilities required for such a goal .

 ( 16 ) on august 17 , about 350 small bombs exploded almost simultaneously across bangladesh ,killing at least two people and injuring more than 125 others .

no one claimed responsibility for theattacks , but leaflets produced by the banned militant jamatul mujahideen and calling for islamic lawin bangladesh were found at most sites .

numerous suspects subsequently were arrested , includingmany suspected members of the jamatul mujahideen .

the united states offered law enforcementassistance to dhaka in its ongoing investigation of the blasts .

 ( 17 ) after meeting with u.s.assistant secretary of state christina rocca , on may 12 , 2005 , in dhaka , bangladesh foreignminister m. morshed khan reportedly stated that he was optimistic that bangladesh would receiveamerican assistance for capacity building to improve the law and order situation inbangladesh .

 ( 18 ) it wasalso reported that the two discussed the need to better protect the coastal zone from piracy and tobuild up bangladesh's capacity to face any terrorist challenges .

 ( 19 ) during her visit , roccareportedly urged bangladesh to "go after those who would undermine its long tradition of tolerance,moderation and peace. .

rocca welcomed bangladesh's ban on the jamatul mujahideen and thejagrata muslim janata bangladesh for their alleged role in recent bombings .

 ( 20 ) foreign minister morshedkhan met with secretary of state rice during his visit to washington later in may 2005 .

at thattime , he reiterated bangladesh's commitment to work with the united states in the war against terror.rice described bangladesh as "a democratic force and a voice of moderation. .

 ( 21 ) foreign minister khanreportedly described the u.s. view of bangladesh as "an unavoidable partner" in bridging religiousdivides across the world. .

 ( 22 ) bangladesh recently assumed the chair of the bimstecgrouping comprised of bangladesh , bhutan , india , nepal , burma , sri lanka , and thailand .

the june1 , 2005 bimstec meeting in dhaka reportedly reviewed progress of a joint working group onterrorism which met in delhi in december 2004 .

 ( 23 ) assistant secretary rocca also traveled to nepal during her may 2005 trip to south asia.there is rising concern among some analysts that king gyanendra's february 1 , 2005 takeover hasbroadened the divide between the king and democratic elements in the country and thereby weakenedthe government's ability to fight the maoists .

such a situation favors the maoists as it appears topreclude a unified front against them .

violence has increased in recent months and the death toll ofthe conflict with the maoists is now thought to exceed 11,500 .

india may be increasingly concernedthat the conflict in nepal could spill over into neighboring areas .

maoist tactics are reportedlychanging with increased daytime attacks and increased use of roadblocks and blockades .

in august,kathmandu accused maoist rebels of "executing" 40 captured soldiers in the deadliest incident sincethe king's february power seizure , spurring analysts to again conclude that the government'scounterinsurgency efforts are making little headway .

 ( 24 ) the sri lanka peace process has come under new threat after the august 12 assassinationof foreign minister lakshman kadirgamar , an ethnic tamil known for his vehement anti - rebelstance .

kadirgamar also was one of president kumaratunga's closest allies .

the liberation tigersof tamil eelam ( ltte ) denied playing any role in the murder , but the cease - fire may not hold .

 ( 25 ) the peace process hadalready been stalled with growing instability as divisions within the ltte ranks has devolved intointernecine warfare and targeted assassinations amongst the northern and eastern factions .

theltte leadership has also attempted to apply pressure on both the sri lankan government and thenorwegian - backed sri lanka monitoring mission ( slmm ) by staging isolated attacks on sri lankanunits accompanied by monitors .

the ltte also announced in may 2005 that it is looking atacquiring an air capability , which is in violation of the cease - fire and could be destabilizing due tothe possibility that such capabilities could be used in terrorist suicide - bombings .

divisions withinthe sri lankan government have hampered talks as well , as there are internal disagreements overnegotiating strategies and possible concessions to the ltte in any eventual peace agreement .

theu.s .

administration has voiced continuing support for negotiations and the possibility of peace insri lanka and continues to call on the ltte to disarm and disavow violence .

according to the u.s .

departments of state and defense , pakistan has afforded the unitedstates unprecedented levels of cooperation by allowing the u.s. military to use bases within thecountry , helping to identify and detain extremists , and deploying tens of thousands of its ownsecurity forces to secure the pakistan - afghanistan border .

the state department's country reportson terrorism 2004 characterized pakistan as one of the most important u.s. partners in the war onterrorism .

a revived high - level u.s. - pakistan defense consultative group - - moribund since 1997- - has meet three times since 2001 .

pakistan was designated as a major non - nato ally of theunited states in june 2004 , and top u.s. officials regularly praise pakistan's anti - terrorismefforts .

 ( 109 ) the statedepartment indicates that islamabad has captured more than 600 alleged terrorists and theirsupporters .

several hundred of these have been transferred to u.s. custody , including some topsuspected al qaeda leaders .

 ( 110 ) pakistan also has been ranked third in the world in seizingterrorists' financial assets .

 ( 111 ) in july 2005 , president bush said pakistani presidentmusharraf "has been a good partner in the global war on terrorism and in the ideological struggle thatwe're now engaged in. .

 ( 112 ) in august 2004 , then - state department coordinator for counterterrorism cofer black wasin pakistan for a meeting of the u.s. - pakistan joint working group on counterterrorism and lawenforcement , the first since april 2003 .

in september 2004 , president bush met with presidentmusharraf in new york , where the two leaders reaffirmed their commitment to broaden and deepenthe u.s. - pakistan relationship , and musharraf also visited washington to inaugurate a newcongressional pakistan caucus at present comprised of 65 u.s .

representatives .

in december 2004,musharraf made a brief stopover in washington , where president bush praised the pakistani leaderfor working to combat terrorism , saying that the pakistani army "has been incredibly active and verybrave in southern waziristan. .

four months later , president bush said that the united states is moresecure "because pakistani forces captured more than 100 extremists across the country [in 2004],including operatives who were plotting attacks against the united states. .

top u.s. government andmilitary officials regularly meet with musharraf in islamabad to discuss counterterrorism and forconsultations on regional security .

 ( 113 ) .

as a vast mosaic of ethnicities , languages , cultures , and religions , india can be difficult togovern .

internal instability resulting from diversity is further complicated by colonial legacies suchas international borders that separate members of the same ethnic groups , creating flashpoints forregional dissidence and separatism .

separatist movements in the northwestern jammu and kashmirstate , and in remote and underdeveloped northeast regions , confound new delhi and createinternational tensions by operating out of neighboring pakistan , bangladesh , burma , bhutan , andnepal .

moreover , indigenous maoist rebels continue to operate in eastern states , possibly incollusion with nepali maoists at war with the kathmandu government .

the indian home ministryreported to parliament that a total of 7,458 people were killed in 10,788 incidents of separatist andmaoist "naxalite" violence in india during the year ending october 31 , 2004 .

more than half ofthese deaths and incidents occurred in kashmir .

 ( 156 ) .

bangladesh's political and economic development continues to be hampered by the forces ofcorruption , radicalism , and partisan fighting .

rivalry between the leaders of the nation's two largestpolitical parties has led to an ongoing series of demonstrations , strikes , and increasingly to politicallymotivated violence .

the frustration caused by the combination of poverty , corruption , and the lackof good governance due to a stalemated political process is thought by some to contribute toincreasing radicalization of society and thereby to the recruitment of islamist radicals to the causeof terrorism .

bangladesh's form of moderate islam is increasingly under threat by radical elements .

in early2005 there was increased concern over the rise of islamic extremism in bangladesh .

khaleda zia'sbangladesh national party ( bnp ) has coalition partners in government that are thought to have tiesto radical islamist elements that give cause for concern .

some view the government's coalition withhardline islamist coalition members as promoting the spread of violence .

 ( 188 ) the radicalharkat - ul - jihad - al - islami ( huji ) is thought to have ties to both al qaeda and the islamic oikya jote,which is a coalition partner in the government .

huji is on the united states state department list ofother terrorist organizations and is thought to have been behind an assassination attempt on thenprime minister sheikh hasina in july 2000 .

 ( 189 ) huji also signed the 1998 fatwa by usama bin laden whichdeclared american civilians to be legitimate targets .

 ( 190 ) fundamentalist leader bangla bhai , who promotes islamic revolution in bangladesh , hasbeen accused of having ties to the jamaat - e - islami ( ji ) which is another coalition partner with thebnp government .

bangla bhai fought in afghanistan and is thought to seek to install a taliban - stylegovernment in bangladesh particularly in areas bordering india .

his supporters have reportedlyterrorized communists , leftists , liberal intellectuals , hindus , christians , members of the islamicahmadiyya sect and buddhists in the cause of promoting islamic extremism .

 ( 191 ) the government ofbangladesh was criticized by the awami league for denying the existence of fundamentalistorganizations in bangladesh .

the bangladesh government banned bangla bhai's organization in2005 .

 ( 192 ) political infighting is debilitating to bangladesh .

former prime minister sheik hasina of theawami league survived an assassination attempt in august 2004 when a grenade was thrown at herwhich killed 20 others .

hasina has accused the bnp - jamaat alliance of being involved in theassassination attempt .

 ( 193 ) prime minister khaleda zia has reportedly stated that thereare no islamic fundamentalists in bangladesh .

 ( 194 ) such attacks have undermined political stability in bangladesh.a recent government of india report has found an "alarming rise" in political assassinations inbangladesh and is also concerned with the smuggling of arms to insurgents in india's northeast aswell as the rise of islamic fundamentalism in bangladesh .

 ( 195 ) former state department coordinator for counterterrorism cofer black reportedly stated thathe was concerned over "the potential utilization of bangladesh as a platform for internationalterrorism" when visiting dhaka in september 2004 .

 ( 196 ) media reports in india increasingly are concerned thatbangladesh has the potential to become a "center of extremist wahhabi - oriented terrorism. .

 ( 197 ) harkat - ul - jihad - al - islami ( huji ) reportedly sent a letter to the indian high commission tobangladesh in december 2004 threatening to kill the indian cricket team if they entered bangladesh .

the team planned to play a series of test matches in bangladesh in december including in thechittagong region .

 ( 198 ) one source reported in september that the number of radicalmosques and madrassas in the chittagong hill tracts ( cht ) region of bangladesh had grownconsiderably and that huji continued to maintain several terrorist training camps in the chtregion .

 ( 199 ) anothersource also linked the camps to harkat and indicated that they receive funding from islamic charitieswith ties to al - qaeda .

 ( 200 ) huji is thought to remain active in the area south fromchittagong to cox's bazar and the border with burma .

a report sourced to a former senior indianintelligence official alleges that huji is training burmese rohingya , as well as small groups fromthailand , cambodia , indonesia and brunei .

 ( 201 ) there is concern among analysts that bangladesh might serve as a base from which bothsouth and southeast asian terrorists could regroup .

there have been reports that up to 150 talibanand al qaeda fighters fled to bangladesh from afghanistan in december 2001 aboard the mvmecca , which reportedly sailed from karachi to chittagong .

 ( 202 ) this was evidently notthe beginning of al qaeda connections with bangladesh .

al qaeda had reportedly recruited burmesemuslims , known as the rohingya , from refugee camps in southeastern bangladesh to fight inafghanistan , kashmir and chechnya .

 ( 203 ) an al qaeda affiliate , harkat - ul - jihad - al - islami ( huji ) wasfounded by osama bin laden associate fazlul rahman .

 ( 204 ) huji is also on the state department's list of other terroristorganizations .

 ( 205 ) rahman joined bin laden's world islamic front for the jihad against the jews and the crusadersin 1998 .

 ( 206 ) it hasthe objective of establishing islamic rule in bangladesh .

huji has recruited its members , thought tonumber from several thousand to 15,000 , from the tens of thousands of madrassas in bangladesh,many of which are led by veterans of the "jihad" against the soviets in afghanistan .

the organizationis thought to have at least six camps in bangladesh as well as ties to militants in pakistan .

 ( 207 ) the bangladeshnational party coalition government includes the small islamic oikya jote party which hasconnections to huji .

 ( 208 ) it was reported that french intelligence prompted the arrestof 16 bangladeshis on december 4 , 2003 , in bolivia for allegedly planning to hijack a plane to attackthe united states .

according to reports , they were later released for lack of evidence .

elevenbangladeshis were arrested in saudi arabia on august 14 , 2003 , on suspicion of planning a terroristact .

 ( 209 ) the rohingya solidarity organization ( rso ) is the largest organization representing the over120,000 rohingyas in bangladesh .

 ( 210 ) the number of rohingyas varies depending on the level ofpressure they are under in their homelands in burma .

the rohingya also speak the same languageas bangladeshis from the chittagong area .

these "destitute and stateless people" have proved to bea "fertile ground" for recruitment to various militant islamist groups .

 ( 211 ) the rso hasreportedly received support from the jamaat - e - islami in bangladesh .

afghan instructors are reportedto have been seen in rso camps .

there are also reports , based on information derived from the interrogation of jemaahislamiya ( ji ) leader hambali , who was arrested in thailand in august 2003 , that indicate that he hadmade a decision to shift ji elements to bangladesh in response to recent counter - terrorist activity insoutheast asia .

the decision to move operations west may also be evident in the arrest of 13malaysians and six indonesians , including hambali's brother rusman gunawan , in pakistan inseptember 2003 .

bangladeshis have been among those arrested in pakistan on suspicion of beinglinked to terrorist organizations .

 ( 212 ) some have speculated that ji militants , thought to be frommalaysia and singapore , would not have made it to southeastern bangladesh without some degreeof tacit agreement from the directorate general of forces intelligence of bangladesh which isthought , by some , to have close ties with isi .

 ( 213 ) it is also thought that fazlul rahman's rohingya solidarityorganization , which is based in southeast bangladesh , has also established ties with ji .

 ( 214 ) these reports aredifficult to confirm .

the government of bangladesh has denied that bangladesh has become a haven for islamicmilitants , such as the taliban or al qaeda .

 ( 215 ) the bangladesh government has also denied allegations madeby former indian deputy prime minister advani that bangladesh had aided pakistan's inter - servicesintelligence and al qaeda elements .

 ( 216 ) it has also been reported that the bangladesh rifles and police have captured weapons during anti - terrorist operations in the southeastern border region with burmain august and september 2003 .

 ( 217 ) ( for further information on bangladesh , see crs report rs20489 , bangladesh: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the communist party of nepal ( maoist ) / united peoples front has been identified as another terrorist group by the u.s. department of state .

 ( 219 ) on october 31 , 2003 , the united states government wentfurther and announced that for national security reasons it was freezing maoist terrorist assets .

thesecurity situation in nepal has deteriorated since the collapse of the cease fire between the maoistsand the government on august 27 , 2003 .

the numbers of nepalese killed since august has risensignificantly .

this brings the total number killed since 1996 to 11,500 by some estimates .

indiaremains concerned over linkages between the maoists and leftist extremists in india .

 ( 220 ) the maoists' message frequently calls for the end of "american imperialism" and for the"dirty yankee" to "go home. .

the maoists' chief negotiator and chairman of the "people'sgovernment," baburam bhattarai , reportedly threatened the united states with "another vietnam"if the united states expands its aid to nepal .

 ( 221 ) in september , bhattarai sent a letter to the u.s. ambassadorin kathmandu which called on the united states to stop "interfering" in the internal affairs ofnepal .

 ( 222 ) maoistsclaimed responsibility for killing two off - duty nepalese security guards at the american embassyin 2002 , ( 223 ) and themaoists have made it known that american trekkers are not welcome in maoist - controllednepal .

 ( 224 ) further,the maoists stated on october 22nd that american - backed organizations would be targeted .

rebelleader prachanda is reported to have stated that groups funded by "american imperialists" would notbe allowed to operate in nepal .

 ( 225 ) after the cease fire , the maoists appeared to be shifting from large - scale attacks on policeand army headquarters to adopting new tactics that focused on attacks by smaller cells conductingwidespread assassinations of military , police and party officials .

 ( 226 ) the unpopularity ofthis policy appears to have led the maoists to shift policy again and declare that they would not carryout further political killings or further destroy government infrastructure .

despite this guarantee,attacks continue .

in may 2005 , maoist commander in the parsa district threatened attacks againstamericans and american interests .

 ( 227 ) the maoists' guarantee against terrorist attacks did not extendto projects "run directly by the united states. .

 ( 228 ) the united states agency for international development andsave the children both operate in nepal .

on october 27 , maoist leader prachanda stated that "wewill ensure that no american citizens - - tourists or officials - - except those who come to thebattlefield with the nepal army would be caused any harm by the maoist militia. .

 ( 229 ) ( for further details onthe maoists and nepal , see crs report rl31599 , nepal: background and u.s. relations , by brucevaughn. ) .

the united states department of state continues to designate the liberation tigers of tamileelam ( ltte ) as a foreign terrorist organization in 2005 .

more than 64,000 people are thoughtto have died during this conflict over the last 20 years and the ltte has consistently been one of themost effective and active users of suicide - bomber tactics in the world .

in addition , some analystsclaim to have observed or heard of efforts by the ltte recently to establish an air capability by theacquisition of two cessna - class light aircraft .

if true , this represents a worrisome event , as theltte's past history shows a penchant for adapting other means of transportation such as cars,motorbikes , and naval craft for suicide bomb attacks and it is not far - fetched to assume that the samecould be done with these aircraft .

the black tigers unit , the elite special - operations cadre of theltte , are those charged with carrying out such terrorist operations and it could be appropriate towatch for signs that these cadre members are receiving flight training to further verify any new aircapabilities .

a norwegian - brokered peace process has produced notable successes , though it wassuspended by the ltte in the spring of 2003 due to differences over interim administrationarrangements .

in february 2002 , a permanent cease - fire was reached and generally has beenobserved by both sides .

in september 2002 , the government in colombo and the ltte held theirfirst peace talks in seven years , with the ltte indicating that it was willing to accept autonomyrather than independence for tamil - majority regions .

the two sides agreed in principle to seek asolution through a federal structure .

however , ltte leader prabakaran has stated that there may bea return to fighting .

the period from 2004 to early 2005 has witnessed increasing instability withinthe ranks of both the sinhalese government and the ltte which has led to increasing concern overthe future of the peace process .

in june of 2005 , christina rocca , the assistant secretary for southasian affairs , told a house international relations committee panel that the united states continues to support norway'sfacilitation of a peace settlement in sri lanka .

the cease - fire of 2002 is holding , although violenceis ongoing and the peace process has stalled .

this is due in part to divisions within the sri lankangovernment and the absence of trust between the government and the ltte , which continues to useassassinations and suicide bombers , underscoring their character as an organization wedded toterrorism and justifying their designation as a foreign terrorist organization .

 ( 231 ) the ltte has also , of late , experienced instability and intra - factional disagreements .

inmarch 2004 there was a major rupture within the ltte ranks .

vinayagamoorthi muralitharan , aliascol .

karuna ( who , as special commander , batticaloa - amparai district , was in over - all charge ofthe ltte's military operations in the eastern province ) split with the northern command of theltte headed by the supreme commander of the ltte ( veluppillai prabhakaran ) and took anestimated 6,000 soldiers with him .

col. karuna then called for a separate truce with the government .

factional fighting ensued between karuna's splinter group and the northern faction of the ltte andresulted in prabhakaran's reassertion of control over the eastern areas which karuna had previouslyoperated .

since that time there have been numerous instances of political and military operatives beingkilled by each side as they jockey for power in the east .

the ltte has accused col. karuna andthose loyal to him of cooperating with sri lankan army ( sla ) paramilitaries and special forces inraids and targeted killings of forces under their command , which the sla denies .

karuna has sincewithdrawn to a fortified base in the jungles of eastern sri lanka where they have repelled severalltte attacks .

 ( 232 ) between february and april 2005 there were several recorded instances of serious violations of theceasefire .

first was the death of a high level ltte political officer , e. kousalyane , in early februarywhich was followed by an increase in politically motivated killings of individuals throughout theeastern provinces .

 ( 233 ) in early april there was also a much publicized incident when a sea tiger unit attacked a sri lankannavy vessel carrying a peace monitor , slightly wounding him .

this led to a formal censure of theltte by the ceasefire monitoring group , the sri lanka monitoring mission ( slmm ) , and markeda particularly brazen attack as the sri lankan navy vessel was flying the slmm flag indicating thatmonitors were abroad .

 ( 234 ) figure 2 .

map of south asia adapted by crs from magellan geographix .

boundary representations not authoritative .

figure 3 .

map of pakista .

