the andean - u.s. free trade agreement ( fta ) negotiations began in may 2004 , when theunited states , colombia , peru , and ecuador participated in the first round of talks , with boliviaparticipating as an observer .

after thirteen rounds of talks , however , negotiators failed to reach anagreement .

peru decided to continue negotiating alone with the united states and concluded abilateral agreement in december 2005 .

on january 6 , 2006 , president bush notified the congressof his intention to enter into a free trade agreement with peru .

colombia later continued negotiationswith the united states and this agreement was concluded on february 27 , 2006 .

negotiations withecuador are stalemated .

this report discusses the andean - u.s. fta negotiation process and theevolution from the concept of a single fta into more than one bilateral agreements .

the report alsodiscusses u.s. - andean trade relations and the major trade issues in the negotiations .

given that theprospects of a single andean - u.s. fta now appear low , this report will not be updated .

the united states extends special duty treatment to imports from bolivia , colombia,ecuador , and peru under a regional trade preference program .

this program accounted for over halfof all u.s. imports from the four countries in 2005 .

the program began under the andean trade preference act ( atpa ; title ii of p.l .

102-182 ) ,enacted on december 4 , 1991 .

atpa authorized the president to grant duty - free treatment to certainproducts from the four andean countries that met domestic content and other requirements .

it wasintended to promote economic growth in the andean region and to encourage a shift away fromdependence on illegal drugs by supporting legitimate economic activities .

atpa was originallyauthorized for 10 years and lapsed on december 4 , 2001 .

after atpa had lapsed for months , the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( atpdea ; title xxxi of p.l .

107-210 ) , was enacted on august 6 , 2002 .

atpdea reauthorizedthe atpa preference program and expanded trade preferences to include additional products thatwere excluded under atpa .

the additional products under atpdea included petroleum andpetroleum products , certain footwear , tuna in flexible containers , and certain watches and leatherproducts .

atpdea also authorized the president to grant duty - free treatment to u.s. imports ofcertain apparel articles , if the articles met domestic content rules .

duty - free benefits under atpdeaend on december 31 , 2006 .

in 2005 , a considerable share ( 46% ) of all u.s. imports from the four andean countriesentered duty - free under atpdea , and a smaller share ( 11% ) entered duty - free under atpa .

 ( 23 ) a very small share ( 2% ) entered duty - free under the u.s. generalized system of preferences , which applies to mostdeveloping countries throughout the world .

of the remaining 41% of imports , most entered duty - freeunder normal trade relations , which applies on a nondiscriminatory basis to almost all u.s. tradingpartners .

only 7% of the value of u.s. imports from the four countries was dutiable in 2005 .

thus,compared to the status quo , only a relatively small share of u.s. imports would become duty - freeunder an fta .

that small share , however , might include products that are relativelyimport - sensitive in the united states or disproportionately important to the andean countries .

in 2005 , the united states imported $20.1 billion , or 1% of total u.s. imports , from the fourcountries .

the same year , the united states exported $9.9 billion , or 1% of all u.s. exports , to thefour countries .

colombia accounted for 44% of those u.s. imports and 55% of the u.s. exports ( see table 1 ) .

peru and ecuador split nearly all of the other half of imports and exports , and boliviaaccounted for a very small share .

the leading u.s. import from the region in 2005 ( 35% of imports ) was petroleum oil,principally crude oil from ecuador and colombia .

other leading u.s. imports were jewelry , gold,coal , coffee , articles of copper , and cut flowers .

leading u.s. exports to the region were petroleumproducts , mining equipment , broadcasting equipment , and data processing machines .

table 1 .

u.s. trade with the atpa countries,2005 source: usitc interactive tariff and trade dataweb at http: / / dataweb.usitc.gov .

data are foru.s .

imports for consumption ( customs value ) and domestic exports ( fas value ) .

regional sharesmay not add to 100% due to rounding .

the following highlights some of the more difficult issues in the andean - u.s. ftanegotiations .

 ( 24 ) inaddition to the following , the negotiations also covered other issues such as services trade , electroniccommerce , and government procurement .

trade negotiators identified the difficulties in agricultureand intellectual property rights as the main obstacles in reaching agreement .

andean negotiatorsstated at the time that the united states needed to be more flexible in these areas .

u.s. trade officialssaid that the united states was very interested in reaching agreement in these areas , but that it hadalso been clear in laying out its expectations before the negotiations began .

 ( 25 ) .

the last round of negotiations in which the united states and the three andean countries allparticipated was held in washington on november 14-22 , 2005 .

subsequently , peru and colombiaconcluded bilateral ftas with the united states and talks with ecuador have been postponed severaltimes due to a number of differences .

the main outstanding issues are related to agriculture .

ecuadorian president alfredo palacio has said that he would like to see a trade agreement with theunited states but would not sign a deal that is unfair to ecuador .

he is facing considerable pressurefrom indigenous groups not to enter into an agreement .

thousands of ecuadorean indians have beenprotesting the free trade talks saying that they cannot compete with farm products from the unitedstates .

they believe a trade agreement would put them at a disadvantage with u.s. farmers anddisrupt their ancestral culture .

 ( 39 ) there has been some speculation that the united states will not renew the atpdea in theabsence of a ptpa .

in september 2005 , the house ways and means committee released a reporton a bipartisan congressional trade mission to colombia , ecuador , and peru .

 ( 40 ) the purpose of the tripwas to focus on the ongoing negotiations of the u.s. - andean free trade agreement and to discussinvestment and security issues in the region .

the report states that the current unilateral tradepreferences received by the andean countries set to expire in december 2006 may not be renewed .

it indicates that a "reciprocal , mutually beneficial arrangement must take the place of the unilateralaccess. .

 ( 41 ) a senior us trade official recently said that the u.s. trade agreements with colombia andperu are likely to be treated as separate agreements by the congress , thereby narrowing thepossibility of a stand - alone andean - u.s. fta .

 ( 42 ) under current deadlines in the trade promotion authority act ( tpa ) , expedited legislative procedures apply to implementing bills for trade agreements , if , amongother requirements , the agreements are entered into by june 30 , 2007 .

given the tpa notificationprocedures , the free trade agreements with colombia and peru could be voted on by the congresssometime this summer .

it is not known if or when a u.s. - ecuador fta might be reached .

the narrow passage of cafta - dr ( p.l .

109-53 ) had been viewed as an indicator that anyu.s. - andean fta might also face considerable opposition .

how the bush administration's decisionto negotiate and submit separate ftas with peru and colombia may affect this calculation remainsuncertain .

 ( 43 ) .

