agriculture , as a production - oriented sector , requires energy as an important input to production .

u.s. farm production — whether for crop or animal products — has become increasingly mechanized and requires timely energy supplies at particular stages of the production cycle to achieve optimum yields .

several key points that emerge from this report are: agriculture is reliant on the timely availability of energy , but has been reducing its overall rate of energy consumption ; u.s. agriculture consumes energy both directly as fuel or electricity to power farm activities , and indirectly in the fertilizers and chemicals produced off farm ; energy's share of agricultural production expenses varies widely by activity , production practice , and locality ; at the farm level , direct energy costs are a significant , albeit relatively small component of total production expenses in most activities and production processes ; when combined with indirect energy expenses , total energy costs can play a much larger role in farm net revenues , particularly for major field crop production ; and energy price changes have implications for agricultural choices of crop and activity mix , and cultivation methods , as well as irrigation and post - harvest strategies .

this report provides background on the relationship between energy and agriculture in the united states .

the first section provides background information on current and historical energy use in the u.s. agricultural sector and how this fits into the national energy - use picture .

energy's role in agriculture's overall cost structure is detailed both for present circumstances and for changes over time .

finally , this section examines how agriculture's energy - use pattern varies across activities and regions .

at the farm level , energy use is classified as either direct or indirect .

direct energy use in agriculture is primarily petroleum - based fuels to operate cars , pickups , and trucks as well as machinery for preparing fields , planting and harvesting crops , applying chemicals , and transporting inputs and outputs to and from market .

natural gas , liquid propane , and electricity also are used to power crop dryers and irrigation equipment .

electricity is used largely for lighting , heating , and cooling in homes and barns .

dairies also require electricity for operating milking systems , cooling milk , and supplying hot water for sanitation .

 ( see table 1 for a listing of various direct and indirect energy uses by agriculture. ) .

in addition , oils and lubricants are needed for all types of farm machinery .

indirect energy is consumed off the farm for manufacturing fertilizers and pesticides .

because of measurement difficulties , energy used to produce other inputs for agriculture , such as farm machinery and equipment , is not included in usda's definition of indirect energy .

several provisions of the 2002 farm bill are designed to encourage the production and use of renewable energy sources such as biofuels , wind energy systems , solar energy , and small - scale hydropower systems .

in addition , other federal and state laws provide incentives for renewable energy research and production .

however , agricultural energy production remains very small by any standard .

in 2002 , the combined production of biofuels , wind , and solar energy systems contributed only about 0.5% of total u.s. energy consumption .

none of the current energy provisions in the 2002 farm bill directly address the difficulties confronting the u.s. nitrogen fertilizer production sector due to steadily rising natural gas prices .

certain provisions of pending energy legislation ( s. 2095 ) make partial attempts to address the natural gas shortage ; however , energy legislation has had a difficult time moving through congress .

in late 2003 , energy legislation ( h.r .

6 , h.rept .

108-375 ) stalled in congress , primarily over its high cost and a dispute related to a liability protection provision for mtbe ( ethanol's principal oxygenate competitor ) .

senator domenici introduced a revised version of the bill ( s. 2095 ) on february 12 , 2004 , with a lower estimated cost and without a controversial provision on the fuel additive mtbe .

however , s. 2095 also appears to have stalled .

major non - tax provisions related to agricultural energy use and production in the conference measure and s. 2095 include: renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) — both versions of pending energy legislation include an rfs requiring that 3.1 billion gallons of renewable fuel be used in 2005 , increasing to 5.0 billion gallons by 2012 ( as compared to 2.1 billion gallons used in 2002 ) .

alaska gas pipeline — alaska's north slope currently holds 30 trillion cubic feet of undeveloped proven natural gas reserves , about 18% of total u.s. reserves ( or a little less than one - and - a - half years of u.s. consumption at current rates ) .

both bills presume a public need for the gas and would provide $18 billion in loan guarantees for construction of a natural gas pipeline from alaska to alberta , where it would connect to the existing midwestern pipeline system .

energy efficiency standards — new statutory efficiency standards would be established for several consumer and commercial products and appliances .

for certain other products and appliances , doe would be empowered to set new standards .

for motor vehicles , funding would be authorized for the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) to set corporate average fuel economy ( café ) levels as provided in current law .

energy production on federal lands — to encourage production on federal lands , royalty reductions would be provided for marginal oil and gas wells on public lands and the outer continental shelf .

provisions are also included to increase access to federal lands by energy projects — such as drilling activities , electric transmission lines , and gas pipelines .

it is noteworthy that neither bill includes a provision for a renewable energy portfolio standard ( rps ) .

an rps aims to encourage electricity production from renewable energy resources such as from wind energy systems .

a btu ( british thermal unit ) is a measure of the heat content of a fuel and indicates the amount of energy contained in the fuel .

because energy sources vary by form ( gas , liquid , or solid ) and energy content , the use of btu's allows the adding of various types of energy using a common benchmark ( see table a - 1 ) .

