iran is a country of nearly 80 million people , located in the heart of the persian gulf region .

the united states was an ally of the late shah of iran , mohammad reza pahlavi ( "the shah" ) , who ruled from 1941 until his ouster in february 1979 .

the shah assumed the throne when britain and russia forced his father , reza shah pahlavi ( reza shah ) , from power because of his perceived alignment with germany in world war ii .

reza shah had assumed power in 1921 when , as an officer in iran's only military force , the cossack brigade ( reflecting russian influence in iran in the early 20 th century ) , he launched a coup against the government of the qajar dynasty , which had ruled since 1794 .

reza shah was proclaimed shah in 1925 , founding the pahlavi dynasty .

the qajar dynasty had been in decline for many years before reza shah's takeover .

that dynasty's perceived manipulation by britain and russia had been one of the causes of the 1906 constitutionalist movement , which forced the qajar dynasty to form iran's first majles ( parliament ) in august 1906 and promulgate a constitution in december 1906 .

prior to the qajars , what is now iran was the center of several persian empires and dynasties whose reach shrank steadily over time .

after the 16 th century , iranian empires lost control of bahrain ( 1521 ) , baghdad ( 1638 ) , the caucasus ( 1828 ) , western afghanistan ( 1857 ) , baluchistan ( 1872 ) , and what is now turkmenistan ( 1894 ) .

iran adopted shiite islam under the safavid dynasty ( 1500-1722 ) , which ended a series of turkic and mongol conquests .

the shah was anti - communist , and the united states viewed his government as a bulwark against the expansion of soviet influence in the persian gulf and a counterweight to pro - soviet arab regimes and movements .

israel maintained a representative office in iran during the shah's time and the shah supported a peaceful resolution of the arab - israeli dispute .

in 1951 , under pressure from nationalists in the majles ( parliament ) who gained strength in the 1949 majles elections , he appointed a popular nationalist parliamentarian , dr. mohammad mossadeq , as prime minister .

mossadeq was widely considered left - leaning , and the united states was wary of his drive for nationalization of the oil industry , which had been controlled since 1913 by the anglo - persian oil company .

his followers began an uprising in august 1953 when the shah tried to dismiss him , and the shah fled .

the shah was restored to power in a cia - supported uprising that toppled mossadeq ( "operation ajax" ) on august 19 , 1953 .

the shah tried to modernize iran and orient it toward the west , but in so doing he alienated the shiite clergy and religious iranians .

he incurred broader resentment by using his savak intelligence service to repress dissent .

the shah exiled ayatollah ruhollah khomeini in 1964 because of khomeini's active opposition to what he asserted were the shah's anticlerical policies and forfeiture of iran's sovereignty to the united states .

khomeini fled to and taught in najaf , iraq , a major shiite theological center .

in 1978 , three years after the march 6 , 1975 , algiers accords between the shah and iraq's baathist leaders that temporarily ended mutual hostile actions , iraq expelled khomeini to france , where he continued to agitate for revolution that would establish islamic government in iran .

mass demonstrations and guerrilla activity by pro - khomeini forces caused the shah's government to collapse .

khomeini returned from france on february 1 , 1979 , and , on february 11 , 1979 , he declared an islamic republic of iran .

khomeini's concept of velayat - e - faqih ( rule by a supreme islamic jurisprudent , or "supreme leader" ) was enshrined in the constitution that was adopted in a public referendum in december 1979 ( and amended in 1989 ) .

the constitution provided for the post of supreme leader of the revolution .

the regime based itself on strong opposition to western influence , and relations between the united states and the islamic republic turned openly hostile after the november 4 , 1979 , seizure of the u.s. embassy and its u.s. diplomats by pro - khomeini radicals , which began the so - called hostage crisis that ended in january 1981 with the release of the hostages .

ayatollah khomeini died on june 3 , 1989 , and was succeeded by ayatollah ali khamene'i .

the regime faced serious unrest in its first few years , including a june 1981 bombing at the headquarters of the islamic republican party ( irp ) and the prime minister's office that killed several senior elected and clerical leaders , including then - prime minister javad bahonar , elected president ali raja'i , and irp head and top khomeini disciple ayatollah mohammad hussein beheshti .

the regime used these events , along with the hostage crisis with the united states , to justify purging many of the secular , liberal , and left - wing personalities that had been prominent in the years just after the revolution .

examples included the regime's first prime minister mehdi bazargan ; the pro - moscow tudeh party ( communist ) ; the people's mojahedin organization of iran ( pmoi , see below ) ; and the first elected president , abolhassan bani sadr .

the regime was under economic and military threat during the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war .

some experts attribute the acrimony that has characterized u.s. - iran relations since the islamic revolution to the structure of iran's regime .

although there are some elected leadership posts and diversity of opinion , iran's constitution — adopted in public referenda in 1980 and again in 1989 — reserves paramount decisionmaking authority for a "supreme leader" ( known in iran as "leader of the revolution" ) .

the president and the majles ( unicameral parliament ) are directly elected , and since 2013 , there have been elections for municipal councils that set local development priorities and select mayors .

even within the unelected institutions , factional disputes between those who insist on ideological purity and those considered more pragmatic are evident .

in part because of the preponderant political power of the clerics and the security services , the regime has faced repeated periodic unrest from minorities , intellectuals , students , labor groups , the poor , women , and members of iran's minority groups .

 ( iran's demographics are depicted in a text box below. ) .

u.s. officials in successive administrations have accused iran's regime of widespread corruption , both within the government and among its pillars of support .

in a speech on iran on july 22 , 2018 , secretary of state michael pompeo characterized iran's government as "something that resembles the mafia more than a government. .

he detailed allegations of the abuse of privileges enjoyed by iran's leaders and supporting elites to enrich themselves and their supporters at the expense of the public good .

the state department's september 2018 "outlaw regime" report ( p. 41 ) states that "corruption and mismanagement at the highest levels of the iranian regime have produced years of environmental exploitation and degradation throughout the country. .

u.s. state department reports , including the iran action group's september 2018 "outlaw regime" document , and reports from a u.n. special rapporteur , have long cited iran for a wide range of abuses — aside from its suppression of political opposition — including escalating use of capital punishment , executions of minors , denial of fair public trial , harsh and life - threatening conditions in prison , and unlawful detention and torture .

in a speech on iran on july 22 , 2018 , secretary of state pompeo recited a litany of u.s. accusations of iranian human rights abuses , and stated "america is unafraid to expose human rights violations and support those who are being silenced. .

state department and u.n. special rapporteur reports have noted that the 2013 revisions to the islamic penal code a nd the 2015 revisions to the criminal procedure code made some reforms , including eliminating death sentences for children convicted of drug - related offenses and protecting the rights of the accused .

a "citizen's rights charter," issued december 19 , 2016 , at least nominally protects free expression and is intended to raise public awareness of citizen rights .

it also purportedly commits the government to implement the charter's 120 articles .

in august 2017 , rouhani appointed a woman , former vice president shahindokht molaverdi , to oversee implementation of the charter .

the state department's human rights report for 2018 says that key charter protections for individual rights of freedom to communicate and access information have not been implemented .

a u.n. special rapporteur on iran human rights was reestablished in march 2011 by the u.n. human rights council ( 22 to 7 vote ) , resuming work done by a special rapporteur on iran human rights during 1988-2002 .

the rapporteur appointed in 2016 , asma jahangir , issued two iran reports , the latest of which was dated august 14 , 2017 ( a / 72 / 322 ) , before passing away in february 2018 .

the special rapporteur mandate was extended on march 24 , 2018 and british - pakistani lawyer javaid rehman was appointed in july 2018 .

the u.n. general assembly has insisted that iran cooperate by allowing the special rapporteur to visit iran , but iran has instead only responded to special rapporteur inquiries through agreed "special procedures. .

despite the criticism of its human rights record , on april 29 , 2010 , iran acceded to the u.n. commission on the status of women .

it also sits on the boards of the u.n. development program ( undp ) and unicef .

iran's u.n. dues are about $9 million per year .

iran has an official body , the high council for human rights , headed by former foreign minister mohammad javad larijani ( brother of the majles speaker and the judiciary head ) .

it generally defends the government's actions to outside bodies rather than oversees the government's human rights practices , but larijani , according to the special rapporteur , has questioned the effectiveness of drug - related executions and other government policies .

as part of its efforts to try to compel iran to improve its human rights practices , the united states has imposed sanctions on iranian officials alleged to have committed human rights abuses , and on firms that help iranian authorities censor or monitor the internet .

human rights - related sanctions are analyzed in significant detail in crs report rs20871 , iran sanctions , by kenneth katzman .

the february 11 , 1979 , fall of the shah of iran , who was a key u.s. ally , shattered u.s. - iran relations .

the carter administration's efforts to build a relationship with the new regime in iran ended after the november 4 , 1979 , takeover of the u.s. embassy in tehran by radical pro - khomeini "students in the line of the imam. .

the 66 u.s. diplomats there were held hostage for 444 days , and released pursuant to the january 20 , 1981 "algiers accords. .

their release was completed minutes after president reagan's inauguration on january 20 , 1981 .

the united states broke relations with iran on april 7 , 1980 , two weeks prior to a failed u.s. military attempt to rescue the hostages .

iran has since then pursued policies that successive administrations considered inimical to u.s. interests in the near east region and beyond .

iran's authoritarian political system and human rights abuses have contributed to , but have not necessarily been central to , the u.s. - iran rift , although some observers assert that iran's behavior flows directly from the nature of its regime .

iran has an interest section in washington , dc , under the auspices of the embassy of pakistan , and staffed by iranian americans .

the former iranian embassy closed in april 1980 when the two countries broke diplomatic relations , and remains under the control of the state department .

iran's mission to the united nations in new york runs most of iran's diplomacy inside the united states .

the u.s. interests section in tehran , under the auspices of the embassy of switzerland , has no american personnel .

the following sections analyze some key hallmarks of past u.s. policies toward iran .

as have its predecessors , the trump administration has not publicly taken any policy option "off the table. .

some options , such as sanctions , are being emphasized , while others are being considered or threatened to varying degrees .

successive administrations have debated the degree to which to pursue engagement with iran , and u.s. efforts to engage iran sometimes have not coincided with iranian leadership willingness to engage the united states .

president trump has publicly welcomed engagement with iran's president rouhani , but administration officials have set strict conditions for any significant improvement in u.s. - iran relations .

secretary of state pompeo , in his may 21 , 2018 , speech referenced above , stipulated a list of 12 behavior changes by iran that would be required for a normalization of u.s. - iran relations and to be included in a revised jcpoa .

many of the demands — such as ending support for lebanese hezbollah — would strike at the core of iran's revolution and are unlikely to be met by iran under any circumstances .

at a july 30 , 2018 , press conference , president trump stated he would be willing to meet president rouhani without conditions , presumably during the september 2018 general assembly meetings in new york .

rouhani indicated that the u.s - iran relationship was not conducive to such a meeting , and president trump later stated he would not meet with rouhani during the general assembly meetings , even though president rouhani is probably "an absolutely lovely man. .

in december 2018 , president rouhani stated that the united states directly requested negotiations with iran on eight occasions in 2017 , and "indirectly" requested negotiations on three occasions in 2018 .

he said that iran rebuffed these overtures .

following the u.s. designation of the irgc as an fto and the denial of further sanctions exceptions for the purchases of iranian oil , foreign minister zarif appeared to raise the possibility for some u.s. - iran talks on selected issues .

at an april 24 , 2019 research institute public meeting in new york , zarif offered to negotiate an exchange of iranians held in u.s. jails for some or all of the u.s. - iran nationals held by iran ( see box above ) .

in the context of escalating u.s. - iran tensions in may 2019 , president trump apparently sought to de - escalate by restating his interest in direct talks , stating the following on may 9 , 2019: what they [iranian leaders] should be doing is calling me up , sitting down ; we can make a deal , a fair deal ... but they should call , and if they do , we're open to talk to them .

in late may 2019 , in the course of an official visit to japan , president trump said he would support japanese prime minister shinzo abe's efforts to act as a mediator between the united states and iran .

concurrently , secretary pompeo and other u.s. officials were in contact with leaders of oman , qatar , and switzerland , apparently in an effort to explore the potential for talks with iran .

possibly in connection , foreign ministers and other high - ranking diplomats from iran and oman , qatar , and kuwait exchanged visits .

successive administrations have sought to back up other policy options with a capability to use military force against iran .

prior to the jcpoa , supporters of military action against iran's nuclear program argued that such action could set back iran's nuclear program substantially .

a u.s. ground invasion to remove iran's regime apparently has not been considered at any time .

the obama administration repeatedly stated that "all options are on the table" to prevent iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon .

however , the obama administration asserted that military action would set back iran's nuclear advancement with far less certainty or duration than would a nuclear agreement .

and iranian retaliation could potentially escalate and expand throughout the region , reduce iran's regional isolation , strengthen iran's regime domestically , and raise oil prices .

after the jcpoa was finalized , president obama reiterated the availability of this option should iran violate the agreement .

obama administration officials articulated that u.s. military action against iran might also be used if iran attacked or prepared to attack u.s. allies or attempted to interrupt the free flow of oil or shipping in the gulf or elsewhere .

the trump administration has similarly stated that "all options are open," referring to military action .

the administration's pullout from the jcpoa was accompanied by threats to take unspecified action if iran were to leave the accord and restart banned aspects of its nuclear program .

in the context of significant u.s. - iran tensions in may 2019 that resulted in added u.s. military deployments to the gulf region , the administration has reiterated threats to use force against iran's nuclear program or if iran were to attack u.s. forces or personnel in the region .

yet , as noted , president trump has sought to de - escalate tensions and has told his top officials that the administration does not want conflict with iran .

for more information on the potential for u.s. military action in the context of u.s. - iran tensions , see crs in focus if11212 , u.s. - iran tensions escalate , by kenneth katzman .

whereas the united states has not initiated military action against iranian or iran - backed forces in syria , the administration has publicly supported israel's frequent strikes on iranian and hezbollah infrastructure there .

and , the u.s. navy has conducted operations to interdict iranian weapons shipments to the houthi rebels in yemen .

for detailed information on u.s. military activity in the region that is , in whole or in part , directed against iran and iranian allies , see crs report r44017 , iran's foreign and defense policies , by kenneth katzman .

with regard to presidential authorities , s.j.res .

41 , which passed the senate on september 22 , 2012 , in the 112 th congress , rejects any u.s. policy that relies on "containment" of a potential nuclear iran .

no legislation has been enacted that would limit the president's authority to use military force against iran , but neither has there been legislation authorizing the use of force against iran .

at a senate foreign relations committee hearing on april 10 , 2019 , secretary of state pompeo answered questions on whether the administration considers the use of force against iran as authorized , indicating that he would defer to administration legal experts on that question .

however , he indicated , in response to questions whether the 2001 authorization for force against al qaeda could apply to iran , that iran has harbored members of al qaeda .

the u.s. withdrawal from the jcpoa and reimposition of all u.s. sanctions has major implications .

the table below summarizes sanctions that have been used against iran .

one recurring u.s. policy question has been whether the united states should support efforts within iran to overthrow iran's leadership .

during the 2009 green movement uprising , the obama administration asserted that extensive u.s. support for the uprising would undermine the opposition's position in iran .

president obama did , however , give some public support to the demonstrators , and his 2011 nowruz ( persian new year ) address mentioned specific dissidents and said "young people of iran .. .

i want you to know that i am with you. .

however , in a september 24 , 2013 , general assembly speech , president obama explicitly stated that the united states does not seek to change iran's regime .

the trump administration — in cited statements by secretary pompeo and other u.s. officials — asserts that its policy is to change iran's behavior , not to change its regime .

however , the content of these and other statements by administration officials , in particular secretary pompeo's speech to iranian americans at the reagan library on july 22 , 2018 , suggests support for a regime change outcome .

in his speech on may 21 , 2017 , in saudi arabia , president trump stated that his administration is hoping that iran's government will change to one that the administration considers "just and righteous. .

in testimony before two congressional committees in june 2017 , then - secretary of state rex tillerson said the administration supports a "philosophy of regime change" for iran ( senate appropriations committee ) and that the administration would "work toward support of those elements inside of iran that would lead to a peaceful transition of that government" ( house foreign affairs committee ) .

in his october 13 , 2017 , policy announcement on iran , president trump stated that we stand in total solidarity with the iranian regime's longest - suffering victims: its own people .

the citizens of iran have paid a heavy price for the violence and extremism of their leaders .

the iranian people long to — and they just are longing , to reclaim their country's proud history , its culture , its civilization , its cooperation with its neighbors .

subsequently , president trump issued statements of support for the december 2017-january 2018 protests in iran on twitter and in other formats .

in his may 8 , 2018 , announcement of a u.s. withdrawal from the jcpoa , president trump stated finally , i want to deliver a message to the long - suffering people of iran .

the people of america stand with you... .

but the future of iran belongs to its people .

they are the rightful heirs to a rich culture and an ancient land , and they deserve a nation that does justice to their dreams , honor to their history and glory to god .

in his speech to the heritage foundation on may 21 , 2018 , secretary of state pompeo added that the united states expresses total solidarity with the iranian people .

in his reagan library speech on july 22 , 2018 , pompeo recited a litany of iranian regime human rights abuses and governmental corruption that called into question its legitimacy and , in several passages and answers to questions , clearly expressed the hope that the iranian people will oust the current regime .

the apparent support for a regime change policy was furthered by secretary pompeo's announcement during that speech that the broadcasting board of governors is launching a new full - time persian - language service for television , radio , digital , and social media to help "ordinary iranians inside of iran and around the globe can know that america stands with them. .

yet , there were signs of a possible modification or shift , at least in tone , in the context of escalating u.s. - iran tensions in may 2019 that some assessed as potentially leading to conflict .

during his visit to japan in late may , president trump specifically ruled out a policy of regime change , stating the following on may 27: these are great people — has a chance to be a great country with the same leadership .

we are not looking for regime change .

i just want to make that clear .

we're looking for no nuclear weapons .

at times , some in congress have advocated that the united states adopt a formal policy of overthrow of the regime .

in the 111 th congress , one bill said that it should be u.s. policy to promote the overthrow of the regime ( the iran democratic transition act , s. 3008 ) .

many of iran's leaders , particularly supreme leader khamene'i , continue to articulate a perception that the united states has never accepted the 1979 islamic revolution .

khamene'i and other iranian figures note that the united states provided funding to antiregime groups , mainly promonarchists , during the 1980s .

successive administrations and congresses have sought to at least lay the groundwork for eventual regime change through "democracy promotion" programs and sanctions on iranian human rights abuses .

legislation authorizing democracy promotion in iran was enacted in the 109 th congress .

the iran freedom support act ( p.l .

109-293 , signed september 30 , 2006 ) authorized funds ( no specific dollar amount ) for iran democracy promotion .

several laws and executive orders issued since 2010 are intended to promote internet freedom , and the administration has amended u.s. - iran trade regulations to allow for the sale to iranians of consumer electronics and software that help them communicate .

then - under secretary of state wendy sherman testified on october 14 , 2011 , that some of the democracy promotion funding for iran was used to train iranians to use technologies that circumvent regime internet censorship .

many have argued that u.s. funding for such programs is counterproductive because the support has caused iran to use the support as a justification to accuse the civil society activists of disloyalty .

some civil society activists have refused to participate in u.s. - funded programs , fearing arrest .

the obama administration altered iran democracy promotion programs somewhat toward working with iranians inside iran who are organized around apolitical issues such as health , education , science , and the environment .

the state department , which often uses appropriated funds to support prodemocracy programs run by organizations based in the united states and in europe , refuses to name grantees for security reasons .

the funds shown below have been obligated through drl and the bureau of near eastern affairs in partnership with usaid .

some of the funds have also been used for cultural exchanges , public diplomacy , and broadcasting to iran .

a further indication of the sensitivity of specifying the use of the funds is that , since fy2010 , funds have been provided for iran civil society / democracy promotion as part of a broader "near east regional democracy programs" ( nerd ) .

iran asserts that funding democracy promotion represents a violation of the 1981 "algiers accords" that settled the iran hostage crisis and provide for noninterference in each other's internal affairs .

the george w. bush administration asserted that open funding of iranian prodemocracy activists ( see below ) was a stated effort to change regime behavior , not to overthrow the regime , although some saw the bush administration's efforts as a cover to achieve a regime change objective .

another part of the democracy promotion effort has been the development of iran - specific u.s. broadcasting services to iran .

radio farda ( "tomorrow," in farsi ) began under radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) , in partnership with the voice of america ( voa ) , in 2002 .

the service was established as a successor to a smaller iran broadcasting effort begun with an initial $4 million from the fy1998 commerce / state / justice appropriation ( p.l .

105-119 ) .

it was to be called radio free iran but was never formally given that name by rfe / rl .

based in prague , radio farda broadcasts 24 hours / day , and its budget is over $11 million per year .

no u.s. assistance has been provided to iranian exile - run stations .

as noted above , secretary pompeo has announced a new persian - language channel for iranians through various media , but it is not clear whether this new service will augment existing programs or form an entirely new program .

voa persian service .

the voa established a persian - language service to iran in july 2003 .

it consists of radio broadcasting ( one hour a day of original programming ) ; television ( six hours a day of primetime programming , rebroadcast throughout a 24-hour period ) ; and internet .

the service has come been criticized by observers for losing much of its audience among young , educated , antiregime iranians who are looking for signs of u.s. official support .

the costs for the service are about $20 million per year .

the state department has sought outreach to the iranian population .

in may 2003 , the state department added a persian - language website to its list of foreign - language websites , under the authority of the bureau of international information programs .

the website was announced as a source of information about the united states and its policy toward iran .

in february 14 , 2011 , the state department began persian - language twitter feeds in an effort to connect better with internet users in iran .

since 2006 , the state department has been increasing the presence of persian - speaking u.s. diplomats in u.s. diplomatic missions around iran , in part to help identify and facilitate iranian participation in u.s. democracy - promotion programs .

the iran unit at the u.s. consulate in dubai has been enlarged significantly into a "regional presence" office , and "iran - watcher" positions have been added to u.s. diplomatic facilities in baku , azerbaijan ; istanbul , turkey ; frankfurt , germany ; london ; and ashkabad , turkmenistan , all of which have large expatriate iranian populations and / or proximity to iran .

