average u.s. gasoline prices have risen sharply during 2004 , beginning the year at $1.50 pergallon and peaking at $2.06 in late may .

they subsequently declined to $1.87 in august asinventories increased .

among the factors causing 2004's gasoline price volatility has been a shortage of domesticrefining capacity , which has affected gasoline supply availability , creating a need for substantialimports .

u.s. gasoline imports - - in the form of conventional gasoline , reformulated gasoline , andgasoline components - - currently make up slightly more than 10% of the nation's supply .

potential policy concerns raised by growing reliance on gasoline imports include theavailability of foreign supplies that meet u.s. specifications , the speed at which incremental foreignsupplies can be provided to meet shifting domestic demand , and the delivered price of importedsupplies .

the nation's stressed gasoline supply capacity has attracted recent legislative interest .

in the house , the gasoline price reduction act ( h.r .

4545 ) was brought to thefloor under suspension of the rules ( passage requires a two - thirds vote ) on june 15 , but failed by236-194 .

the bill was intended to increase gasoline availability by limiting the number of fuel blendsrequired to meet clean air standards and by allowing waivers of fuel blend requirements duringsupply disruptions .

this would have made it easier to ship gasoline between markets when neededto balance supply .

on june 16 , the house passed the united states refinery revitalization act ( h.r .

4517 ) by a vote of 239-192 .

this bill would provide incentives to increaserefinery capacity , focusing on areas with closed refineries or those experiencing layoffs or highunemployment .

it would also charge the department of energy ( doe ) with centralizing the processof obtaining environmental permits for new refinery projects , including additions and upgrades .

gasoline demand in the united states continues to grow .

although gasoline comprises about45% of total u.s. petroleum consumption , its incremental growth during the recent past accountsfor virtually all of the increase in total oil demand .

figure 1 shows the trend in u.s. gasoline consumption during the past decade , during whichdemand rose 20% .

growth has persisted in more recent years , although 2004 may see some late - yearslowdown because of higher prices .

between 1999 and 2003 , petroleum consumption increased byhalf a million barrels per day ( mbd ) , rising from 19.5 mbd in 1999 to 20.0 mbd in 2003 .

during thesame time span , gasoline consumption rose by the same amount as demand grew from 8.4 mbd to8.9 mbd .

figure 1 .

u.s .

gasoline demand: 1993 - 2003 source: energy information administration , monthly energy review , june 2004 , table 3.4 .

gasoline use has continued to grow during the first half of 2004 , as almost 9.0 mbd ofgasoline was supplied to consumers , an increase of about 1.9% over the previous year's first half.while there is some preliminary evidence that high pump prices may have begun to retard growthin gasoline demand , it is still too soon to evaluate whether this trend has shifted , and how overallpetroleum demand might track for all of 2004 .

gasoline is manufactured in u.s. refineries and imported from foreign refiners as well .

figure 2 shows data for total u.s. demand and domestic production .

 ( 1 ) the gap between the two setsof figures is filled by imported product made by foreign refiners .

imported supply consists offinished gasoline - - which meets u.s. specifications and is market - ready - - as well as blendingcomponents .

the latter have become an increasingly important part of gasoline supply , since an increasingamount of ethanol - blended gasoline is being consumed in this country .

the trend toward ethanolblends may continue because it is the oxygenate used to replace the additive methyl tertiary butylether ( mtbe ) , which has been banned in new york , california , and connecticut , and is beingphased out in other places .

figure 2 .

u.s .

gasoline production & demand: jan. 2003 - july 2004 source: eia , weekly petroleum status report , june 30 , 2004 , table 10 .

in one form or another , the nation imports slightly more than 10% of the gasoline itconsumes , the unavoidable outcome of growing motor fuel demand and refining capacity which hasnot kept pace .

this supply is necessary to fill the gap between gasoline production and demandshown in figure 2 .

figure 3 shows the imports of gasoline in detail , the total of which is rising in the time - framein this figure .

total imports peaked this summer at about 1.1 mbd ; for the first seven months of2004 , they averaged 900,000 barrels per day .

imports fit into three general categories: conventional gasoline , which comprises about half of the gasoline sold in thenation and conforms to the least stringent environmental standards currently in effect .

the u.s.environmental standards for this fuel include a prohibition on the use of lead , limits on summertimevolatility , and limits on manganese and sulfur content .

reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) is used in major metropolitan areas in 17 statesand the district of columbia which have significant ozone problems .

in april 2004 , epa designatedareas in a total of 32 states and the district as nonattainment areas for a new ozone standard to bephased - in between 2007 and 2021 ( 2 ) .

rfg has several requirements , including the mandate that itcontain sufficient oxygenates to meet a minimum oxygen requirement of 2% by weight .

theoxygenate often added is either the chemical mtbe ( now banned in several states ) or ethanol .

rfg's peak usage is during summer months , when it comprises about 29% of nationaldemand .

gasoline components are imported with increasing frequency , amounting to50% of imports during 2004 .

gasoline is a "cocktail" of hydrocarbons blended at refineries and fuelterminals .

increasingly , cocktail ingredients are available from foreign refiners , and they are beingimported to expand u.s. refinery output .

since finished gasoline is a blended product , refiners cansupplement short capacity by buying foreign components and blending them here in such a way thatu.s .

specifications are met .

as a result of the clean air act requirements and state mandates , many different types ofgasoline are sold in the united states .

in addition to conventional and rfg , there is oxygenated fuel ( higher oxygen content than rfg ) , low volatility conventional gasoline , and a variety of state andlocal blends .

these "boutique fuels" include ethanol blends , california cleaner - burning gasoline ( also used in nevada and arizona ) and a number of other local formulations .

as noted above , the trend toward ethanol blends may continue because it is the oxygenateused to replace the additive mtbe .

ethanol blends cannot be stored or transported by pipeline,because ethanol and gasoline do not mix well and can separate .

the blend must be mixed near thepoint of final consumption .

imported components of the gasoline "cocktail" fit into the increasingly common practiceof local blending for local markets , in that "cocktail" components often come from multiple sourcesand are assembled at terminals and other gasoline distribution points .

for refiners , blending gasolinefrom component parts represents a small incremental supply bonus , since they can purchaseopportunistically those components that might be available on world markets , and manufacture theremainder in their own facilities .

in total , u.s. refiners do not have the capacity to make all thegasoline sold in this country , but they often do have substantial flexibility - - within overall capacityconstraints - - to make hard - to - import components tailored to u.s. specifications which foreignrefiners cannot easily provide .

the trend shown in figure 2 suggests that u.s. refiners are able to produce during an averagemonth a bit more than 8.0 mbd , while demand is trending just under 9.0 mbd this year .

the actualnumbers fluctuate from month to month .

figure 3 shows total gasoline imports averaging about900,000 barrels per day .

 ( 3 ) imports of finished gasoline and components - - which have averaged , respectively , about 500,000barrels per day and 400,000 barrels per day during the past 12 months - - bridge the gap betweenu.s .

refinery production and demand .

without this supplement , there would be a supply shortfall .

figure 3 .

make - up of u.s .

gasoline imports: jan. 2002 - july 2004 source: eia , weekly petroleum status report , august 2 , 2004 , table 9 .

the increasing use of blending components in building up the gasoline pool is seen in the riseof components as a proportion of nationwide gasoline inventories .

figure 4 shows that total gasolinestocks started 2003 at essentially the same level ( 212 million barrels ) that they were at the end ofaugust 2004 ( 206 million barrels ) .

but blending components held in inventory rose from 54 millionbarrels , or 26% of inventory , to 72 million barrels , or 35% of total inventory .

this is a substantialincrease , and shows refiners' demand for stocks of components to meet the need for locally - mixedethanol blends as well as diverse boutique fuels .

currently , one - third of gasoline imports comes from canada and the u.s. virgin islands .

another third comes from argentina , the netherlands , russia , the united kingdom , and venezuela ; the remainder is imported in smaller quantities from a diversity of nations .

figure 5 illustrates trends in overall gasoline imports , as well as various suppliers' sharesof the imported gasoline market .

it also shows how the amounts supplied by each important suppliercan vary from month to month , as well as changes in the overall supply of imports .

canada - - source of much of the nation's hydrocarbon imports - - is the single leading supplierof gasoline on a regular basis .

canada's exports have increased steadily during recent years .

and theu.s .

virgin islands - - location of the very large hovenessa refinery , jointly owned by amerada hessand the venezuelan national oil company petroleos de venezuela ( pdvsa ) - - is also a consistentsource of supply .

but imports from the other major suppliers fluctuate monthly .

even venezuela hasexperienced difficulties in meeting its historic refinery output levels since an oil workers strike inlate 2002 .

venezuelan gasoline exports to the united states have dropped to about 40% of levelsseen prior to 2002's political disruption .

recent efforts to regain u.s. market position by pdvsa ( discussed below ) could produce a supply benefit , although refinery operations are still recoveringfrom the strike .

figure 5 .

average daily gasoline imports by country of origin jan. 2000 - apr .

2004 source: eia , june 2004 .

in addition to canada and the virgin islands , increased gasoline imports now come from theunited kingdom and the netherlands , where refinery utilization is much lower than in the unitedstates ; many other nations with spare refinery capacity are suppliers as well .

a recent enhancement to the supply of imported gasoline has been made by pdvsa , whichhas started shipping the complete cocktail for ethanol blended gasoline ( without the ethanol , whichis blended near the point of sale ) .

pdvsa has planned to export 1 million barrels per month of thishigh - priced component , called rbob , ( 8 ) starting with test cargoes in june .

platts oilgram price report ( 9 ) noted that 720,000barrelswere exported in july , and the extra barrels in the u.s. market have provided extra competition forcomparable cargoes from europe , where distances and shipping costs are greater .

this illustrates thesignificance of the supply of foreign gasoline components , and how they can impact u.s. gasolineprices .

it is likely that high u.s. prices for gasoline and its significant components will continue toattract foreign refiners' attention , perhaps leading them to seek permanent market share .

pdvsa - - which also owns u.s. refiner citgo , affording direct retail market access - - announced that forseptember it planned to export 12 rbob cargoes to the united states , including four or five for thenew york - connecticut ethanol - only blended markets .

 ( 10 ) another example of what may be taking place in off - shore refined product supply is therevitalization of a large refinery in aruba that was recently acquired by valero energy , anindependent refining company with most of its facilities in the united states .

while geographically well - positioned to serve u.s. markets , this facility had an unsuccessfuloperating history .

valero began improving operations quickly and is adding upgrading units so thatgasoline components can be made in increasing quantities from low - quality crudes .

the capacity ofthis refinery is 275,000 barrels per day , a figure which suggests that it could - - when it reachescapacity - - contribute significantly to gulf and east coast gasoline supplies .

imports from aruba areso recent that they are not reflected in doe data ( which lag by a few months ) on product imports bycountry .

dependence on imports to meet over 10% of national gasoline needs has begun to causeconcern that these imports might contribute to 2004's high prices .

while supplies from canada mayhave similar physical characteristics and prices to the output from u.s. refiners - - and offer speedydelivery - - products from refineries farther afield may not .

factors such as the cost and timelinessof incremental supply , physical reliability , and meeting u.s. product specifications can affect priceand supply at the gas pump .

shipping cost may be an additional issue .

gasoline and many other refined products needto be protected from contamination from other oils .

as a result , they must be shipped in cleanvessels .

these product carriers are usually much smaller than crude carriers , and - - not benefittingfrom economies of large scale - - have higher unit costs .

in addition , the clean tanker market isinfluenced by spot charter rates for vessels , making product shipping costs often higher and morevolatile than crude oil .

it is cheaper to ship crude to a local refinery than to transport products anequivalent distance .

 ( 11 ) imported products cost more than those refined domestically simply by virtue of transportcosts .

the higher import costs impact the last units of gasoline supply , providing a price umbrellafor domestic refiners , whose pricing - - like all industrial pricing - - is linked to the cost of the lastincrements of the good involved .

as long as gasoline is imported to meet a sizeable imbalancebetween domestic supply and demand , this situation offers a likelihood of prices which are abovethe cost of domestic manufacture .

this assumes that new domestic refining capacity to replaceimports could produce u.s. - spec gasoline at costs below those of foreign refiners plus producttransport tariffs to the united states .

in addition to price - related considerations , the speed of supply response to price signals fromu.s .

gasoline markets seems less than it might be from a refiner located here .

it may well be thatdistance mutes price signals related to an increase in demand , for example , and refiners abroad maybe slow to receive the message that u.s. consumers desire more gasoline and are currently payingprices which would justify a foreign refiner's manufacturing of u.s. specification fuel .

even if theforeign refiners' response to u.s. prices were instantaneous , it could take as long as a month - - insome cases more - - for the physical supply to arrive here .

manufacturing fuel for the u.s. market may be another source of delayed response to u.s.market signals .

some of the substances called for in satisfying u.s. fuel needs may not be producedin the ordinary course of refinery runs abroad .

and some - - like rbob - - are difficult for manyrefiners to make , calling for a longer set - up time .

lags in getting foreign supply may have contributed to 2004's price increases .

figure 3 shows low imports during late 2003 and early 2004 , which corresponded to a decline in gasolineinventories and consistent price increases seen throughout the first half of 2004 .

is dependence on gasoline imports for more than 10% of the nation's gasoline supplyundesirable ? .

in theory , importing gasoline may have few drawbacks .

it might make little differenceif this fuel were to be supplied from across the border in canada .

the products supplied might beu.s. - specification conventional gasoline or rfg .

what about imports from a refinery operated bya major international oil company in europe or nearby in the caribbean ? .

at what point does foreignrefined product dependence become a policy concern ? .

there is no clear answer , but majorconsiderations in evaluating this question include: availability of supplies meeting u.s. specifications , so that demand can be metwithout the need for waivers that could compromise environmentalprotections .

the speed with which incremental supply might be available , givenjust - in - time gasoline inventories , in order to avoid excessive price volatility .

the delivered price of foreign supplies , and whether they are above theincremental price of domestic output , such that they ultimately contribute to higherprices .

the nation has no apparent defined policy on refined oil product imports , nor is there a policyregarding gasoline prices .

there is a general perception among policymakers that price volatility isundesirable , but there is no consensus on what the price level ought to be .

nor is there consensusabout how the government might deal with market volatility .

similarly , there appears to be generalagreement that spot shortages - - run - outs and lines at gas stations - - are to be avoided .

but there areno guides for policy actions to remedy such situations should they take place , and it could be thatletting market forces make corrections without government involvement would be the better courseof action .

some policy initiatives in the 108th congress are embodied in two house bills focusing onthe proliferation of regional gasoline blends and expanding refinery capacity .

h.r .

4545 , the gasoline price reduction act , centered on the proliferation of special , local boutiquegasoline blends .

the bill failed to get the required two - thirds house vote for passage undersuspension of the rules .

it would have authorized epa during significant supply disruptions to issuewaivers of state provisions requiring boutique fuels .

the boutique fuel requirement is seen aspotentially limiting supply by impeding the movement of fuel between areas ; a shortage in one spotmight not be met with extra fuel from a nearby area because of differing requirements .

the bill alsoproposed capping the number of boutique fuels at the current level .

h.r .

4545 proposed dealing with supply fungibility ; but it did not offer remediesthat could have increased the supply of domestically produced gasoline .

h.r .

4517 , therefinery revitalization act - - which passed the house , but has not seen senate action - - is aimedat facilitating increases in capacity by fast - tracking the environmental review and permitting offacilities in a designated refinery revitalization zone .

the secretary of energy would designate thezones , coordinate environmental reviews , and make final decisions on federal authorizations for newrefineries within the zones .

to the extent that those wishing to construct a new refinery - - or expandan existing facility - - have been hindered by environmental regulation , this measure is intended tooffer some assistance .

these bills articulate at least some components of a gasoline supply policy , dealing withdomestic supply and indirectly with imports , and with fuel specifications that impact the distributionof supply .

both measures have drawn substantial criticism , however , particularly on environmentalgrounds .

for example , with regard to the refining bill , opponents express concern that such ameasure would override state clean air programs .

among its cons , h.r .

4545 raisesconcerns about the overall cost of gasoline , given that many state programs which avoid full - fledgedrfg have been implemented to keep down gasoline costs .

the refining proposals attempt to address the 1 mbd gasoline production shortfall , which ismade up by imports in one form or another .

encouraging growth in domestic refinery capacityimplies a judgment that it is advantageous to have that capacity in the united states , in contrast tooffshore , even if offshore is relatively nearby .

as noted above , domestic production could reducetransportation costs and provide quicker supply response to unanticipated changes in demand .

thiscould shorten the duration of a potentially disruptive price spike resulting from a gasoline supplyshortfall .

refinery proposals under current debate do not address other issues impacting refineryprojects , such as an historic lack of profitability in this industry segment ( 12 ) .

it may well be that thecurrent refining situation - - with imports holding a "price umbrella" over domestic gasolineproduction - - may be a profitable situation for many refiners , many of whom are realizing recordearnings in the first and second quarters of 2004 .

while this year's earnings may be high , one year'sexperience does not outweigh years of low profits .

while a basic change in refiner profitability mightbe suggested , it is too soon for many firms to consider making significant investments in long - livedcapital equipment , whose cost is recouped over many years .

were the prospects for long - term profitability in the refining industry to improve by virtueof a sustainable recovery in refining margins , it is likely that additional investment in added capacitywould be seen .

but it might take several years of high margins before firm managers and theirbankers would become confident enough to make substantial capital commitments .

