proposals to limit senate debate are as old as the senate itself .

over the 216-year history of the body , numerous procedures have been proposed to allow the senate to end discussion and act .

the most important debate - limiting procedure enacted was the adoption in 1917 of the "cloture rule," codified in paragraph 2 of senate rule xxii .

under the current version of this rule , a process for ending debate on a given measure or matter may be set in motion following a super - majority vote of the senate .

since the senate's adoption of the cloture rule in 1917 , proposals have been advanced to repeal or amend it in almost every session of congress .

at times , senators of both political parties , as well as the parties themselves , have debated the merits of the senate's tradition of free and unlimited debate and argued for and against making cloture easier to invoke .

these debates occurred at different times and under different sets of circumstances , for example , as senators attempted to prevent filibusters of civil rights measures , pass consumer protection legislation , or secure the confirmation of judicial or executive branch nominations .

debates on the cloture rule have frequently focused on whether or not the senate must consider amendments to it under the body's existing rules , including rule xxii itself .

this argument rests on the principle that the senate is a "continuing body" which regards its rules as staying in force from one congress to the next .

a contrary argument contends that this principle has the effect of "entrenching" the existing rules against change , a situation which amounts to an unconstitutional limit on the power of the body to set the terms of its own operation .

to overcome these difficulties , senators attempting to change rule xxii have employed various procedural tactics , including seeking to invoke cloture by majority vote , seeking opinions by the vice president acting as presiding officer that the cloture rule itself is unconstitutional , and arguing that the rules do not apply on the first day of a congress .

although many attempts have been made to amend paragraph 2 of rule xxii , only six amendments have been adopted since the cloture rule was enacted in 1917: those undertaken in 1949 , 1959 , 1975 , 1976 , 1979 and 1986 .

each of these changes was made within the framework of the existing or "entrenched" rules of the senate , including rule xxii .

in 1949 , the cloture rule was amended to apply to all "matters," as well as measures , a change which expanded its reach to nominations , most motions to proceed to consider measures and other motions .

a decade later , in 1959 , its reach was further expanded to include debate on motions to proceed to consider changes in the senate rules themselves .

the threshold for invoking cloture was lowered in 1975 from two - thirds present and voting to three fifths of the full senate except on proposals to amend senate rules .

in a change made in 1976 , amendments filed by senators after cloture was invoked were no longer required to be read aloud in the chamber if they were available at least 24 hours in advance .

in 1979 , senators added an overall "consideration cap" to rule xxii to prevent so - called post - cloture filibusters , which occurred when senators continued dilatory parliamentary tactics even after cloture had been invoked .

in 1986 , this "consideration cap" was reduced from 100 hours to 30 hours to meet the demands of a modern senate whose proceedings were televised nationally .

in its current form , which was adopted in 1986 , rule xxii provides that a cloture motion must be signed by 16 senators and presented on the senate floor .

one hour after the senate meets on the second calendar day after a cloture motion has been filed and after a quorum has been ascertained , the presiding officer puts the question , "is it the sense of the senate that the debate shall be brought to a close ? .

the cloture motion is then subject to a yea - and - nay vote .

if three - fifths of senators — 60 if there are no vacancies in the body — vote for the cloture motion , the senate must take final action on the matter on which it has invoked cloture by the end of 30 total hours of additional consideration .

invoking cloture on a proposal to amend the senate's standing rules requires a higher threshold , approval by two - thirds of the senators present and voting , or 67 senators if there are no vacancies and all senators vote .

once cloture has been invoked , the clotured matter remains the pending business of the senate until it is disposed of and no senator may speak for more than one hour .

senators may yield all or part of their allotted hour to a floor manager or floor leader , who may then yield time to other senators .

each floor manager and leader , however , can have no more than two hours in total yielded to him or her .

as with most senate procedures , any of these requirements may be waived by unanimous consent .

after cloture has been successfully invoked , no dilatory amendments or motions are permitted , and all debate and amendments must be germane .

only amendments filed before the cloture vote may be considered , and senators may not call up more than two amendments until every other senator has had an opportunity to do likewise .

printed amendments that have been available for at least 24 hours are not read when called up .

time for votes , quorum calls , and other actions is charged against the 30-hour limit on consideration .

this time limit may be extended by joint leadership motion if three - fifths of all senators vote for a non - debatable motion to do so .

senators who have not used or yielded ten minutes of their hour are guaranteed up to ten minutes to speak .

when all time expires , the senate immediately votes on any pending amendments and then on the underlying matter .

concern by some senators over an inability to halt debate and obtain a confirmation vote on several pending judicial nominations led to a renewed interest in the 108 th congress and the 109 th congress in amending the senate cloture rule .

in the 108 th congress several resolutions were introduced on the subject .

proposals currently under discussion include .

other points raised during discussion of the cloture issue include the following: some argue that a number of senators might view proposed changes to the cloture rule as a diminution of their rights , by making it much more difficult to block confirmation of a nominee .

as a result , if the rules change is adopted , it raises the question whether it would increase pressure to require senate confirmation for more executive branch positions , so as to allow the senate to retain a robust role in the confirmation process .

the rule change proposed by the frist and miller resolutions would apply to all presidential nominations .

some have wondered whether nominations for the courts , the third branch of government , should be treated the same as those to the executive branch or whether the two groups of nominations should have different thresholds for approval or different procedures for stopping debate .

could stronger enforcement of existing rules — such as the two speech rule — and disallowing informal but time consuming practices — such as suggesting the absence of a quorum — permit more efficient action on nominations or other matters ? .

is the greater use of filibusters a sign that traditional checks and balances in the nomination and confirmation system , such as the blue - slip which affords home - state senators a great deal of say in selecting individuals for the federal bench , are no longer working as they were intended or have in the past ? .

