the national commission on terrorists attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11commission ) found that al qaeda terrorists exploited weaknesses in the aviation security system tocarry out the attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

weaknesses in aviation security exploited by the 9 / 11terrorists included a pre - screening process that focused on detecting potential aircraft bombersand not potential hijackers ; lax checkpoint screening and permissive rules regarding small knives ; a lack of in - flight security measures such as air marshals and reinforcedcockpit doors ; an industry - wide strategy of complying with hijackers in a non - confrontationalmanner ; and a lack of protocols and capabilities for executing a coordinated federalaviation administration ( faa ) and military response to multiple hijackings and suicidalhijackers .

the 9 / 11 commission found that underlying these specific weaknesses and vulnerabilitiesin the aviation system was what they termed a failure of imagination among senior policymakers andagencies responsible for intelligence , national defense , and aviation security .

the 9 / 11 commissionconcluded that while suicide hijackings were by no means a far - fetched possibility given al qaeda'spast methods and motives , "... these scenarios were slow to work their way into the thinking ofaviation security experts. .

 ( 1 ) while some agencies were concerned about hijackings and had speculated about various hijackscenarios , there were no specific constructive actions taken to defend against these possible threatsprior to september 11 , 2001 .

furthermore , the likelihood of a suicide hijacking scenario was greatlyunderestimated .

the 9 / 11 commission also concluded that , before september 11 , 2001,congressional oversight of aviation security was lacking while congress focused its aviationoversight activities on airport congestion and passenger service .

regarding congress's aviationrelated activities prior to september 11 , 2001 , the 9 / 11 commission wrote: "heeding calls forimproved air service , congress concentrated its efforts on a 'passenger bill of rights' to improvecapacity , efficiency , and customer satisfaction in the aviation system .

there was no focus onterrorism. .

 ( 2 ) .

in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001 , congress moved quickly to pass the aviation andtransportation security act ( atsa , p.l .

107-71 ; 115 stat .

597 ) .

designed to correct weaknessesin aviation security exploited by the 9 / 11 hijackers as well as other potential vulnerabilities intransportation systems , atsa established the transportation security administration ( tsa ) as anew organization within the department of transportation responsible for security matters in allmodes of transportation .

highlights of atsa included establishing a federal security screener workforce under tsa atairports ; requiring explosive detection screening of all checkedbags ; deploying air marshals on all high risk flights ; and hardening cockpit doors .

atsa also gave the tsa broad authority to assess threats to security in all transportationmodes , primarily focusing on aviation , and implement appropriate security measures .

in this regard,atsa was seen as a comprehensive legislative vehicle for addressing transportation security witha specific emphasis on aviation security .

the following year , the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ; 116 stat .

2135 ) established the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and placed the tsa within this newdepartment .

the act also authorized the arming of airline pilots as an additional measure to protectaircraft against terrorist hijackers .

additional aviation security measures were included in the mostrecent faa reauthorization act , vision 100 - century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l.108-176 ; 117 stat .

2490 ) .

most notably , vision 100 established an aviation security capital fund tohelp pay for placing explosive detection systems ( eds ) "in - line" with baggage conveyers and sortingfacilities in an effort to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of checked baggage screening andexpanded the program to arm pilots to include pilots of all - cargo aircraft .

despite these actions , congressional and administration oversight of aviation security hasidentified several areas of vulnerability that persist .

these include air cargo operations ; generalaviation ; access controls for airport employees ; screener performance ; and possible terrorist attacksusing shoulder - fired missiles .

the 9 / 11 commission also recognized many of these vulnerabilities .

the 9 / 11 commissionconcluded that "[m]ajor vulnerabilities still exist in cargo and general aviation security .

these,together with inadequate screening and access controls , continue to present aviation securitychallenges. .

 ( 3 ) based onthese findings , the 9 / 11 commission made specific recommendations regarding improvements toairport passenger and baggage screening , and air cargo security .

while the commission identifiedpotential threats posed by inadequate access controls to secured areas of airports and general aviationoperations , it did not issue any recommendations pertaining to these risks .

also , while the 9 / 11commission acknowledged concerns raised by previous and current administrations over possibleshoulder - fired missiles attacks against commercial airliners , it did not make any specificrecommendations regarding this threat .

the 9 / 11 commission delineated its recommendations regarding aviation security in a sectiontitled "a layered security system. .

as suggested by this title , the 9 / 11 commission concluded thatthe tsa must implement a multi - layered security system that takes into consideration the full arrayof possible terrorist tactics .

the 9 / 11 commission noted that these various layers of security musteach be effective in their own right and must be coordinated with other layers in a manner thatcreates redundancies to catch possible lapses in any one layer .

this conclusion is consistent withaviation security mandates under atsa and tsa's concept of "concentric rings of security. .

 ( 4 ) since many facets of aviationsecurity have been addressed through legislation and administration actions since the 9 / 11 attacks,the 9 / 11 commission focused its aviation security recommendations on persisting vulnerabilities incommercial aviation .

while not all recommendations offered in the 9 / 11 commission's final report were formallylabeled as such , crs has identified six aviation - specific recommendations .

 ( 5 ) these are: 1 ) enhancingpassenger pre - screening ; 2 ) improving measures to detect explosives on passengers ; 3 ) addressinghuman factors issues at screening checkpoints ; 4 ) expediting deployment of in - line baggagescreening systems ; 5 ) intensifying efforts to identify , track , and screen potentially dangerous cargo ; and 6 ) deploying hardened cargo containers on passenger aircraft .

in addition to these sixaviation - specific recommendations , the 9 / 11 commission also issued an overarchingrecommendation for transportation security policy to set priorities based on risk and implement themost practical and cost effective deterrents assigning appropriate roles and missions to federal , state,and local authorities , as well as private stakeholders .

since the release of the 9 / 11 commission report , congress has given considerable attentionto the recommendations contained in the report .

the senate committee on commerce , science andtransportation held a hearing on the 9 / 11 commission recommendations regarding transportationsecurity on august 16 , 2004 , and the house subcommittee on aviation held a hearing reviewing theaviation security recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission .

the 108th congress passed two major pieces of legislation containing numerous provisionspertaining to aviation security: vision 100 - - century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l.108-176 ) , which was enacted prior to the 9 / 11 commission's final report , and the nationalintelligence reform act ( p.l .

108-458 ; 118 stat .

3638 ) which was enacted , in large part , in responseto the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations. .

before the 9 / 11 commission had completed its report , several aviation security - relatedprovisions were included in vision 100 - century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) which was enacted on december 12 , 2003 .

vision 100 established a redress process for pilots , mechanics or other licensed aviationprofessionals whose certification is denied , suspended , or revoked on the grounds that they pose arisk to aviation security .

vision 100 also requires the federal aviation administration to providea justification to congress when establishing an air defense identification zone ( adiz ) aroundcities where pilots are required to use special communications and operating procedures to enableair traffic controllers to identify potential security threats .

vision 100 also modified existing requirements for security training of airline flight andcabin crew members .

under these provisions , the airlines are responsible for providing mandatorybasic training in security for crews , while the tsa was to develop and provide a voluntary advancedself - defense training program for crew members .

vision 100 also required the department of homeland security to study and report tocongress on the effectiveness of the aviation security system , including the air marshal program,hardening of cockpit doors , and security screening of passengers , checked baggage , and cargo .

thereport was to include recommendations , including legislative recommendations , for improving theeffectiveness of aviation security .

vision 100 also created the aviation security capital fund .

the act authorizes up to $500million per year through fy2007 to be appropriated to this fund and requires that the first $250million in aviation security fee collections be deposited in this fund each year through fy2007 .

theact also provided the undersecretary for border and transportation security with the authority toissue grants to airports for projects to integrate baggage explosive detection systems with baggageconveyer systems ; reconfigure terminal baggage areas as needed to install explosive detectionsystems ; deploy explosive detection systems behind the ticket counter , in baggage sorting areas , orin line with baggage handling systems ; and for other aviation security - related capital improvementprojects .

vision 100 set the federal share of costs for such projects at 90% for large and medium hubairports , and at 95% for all other airports and set guidelines for the allocation of aviation securitycapital fund monies for these projects .

vision 100 also required the implementation of security programs for air charter operatorswho use aircraft weighing more than 12,500 pounds maximum takeoff weight .

vision 100 also required the government accountability office ( gao ) to review theproposed capps ii passenger prescreening system and prevented the tsa from fully implementingthis program until the undersecretary for border and transportation security certified that a varietyof enumerated issues pertaining to civil liberties , privacy , data protection , system security , systemperformance , and system oversight had been adequately addressed .

the tsa has since scrapped thecapps ii program and is developing an alterative prescreening system called "secure flight. .

vison 100 also authorized flight crew members of all - cargo airlines to voluntarily participatein the federal flight deck officer program that trains and deputizes armed pilots to guard aircraftcockpits against hostile attacks .

vision 100 also expanded the program to include other flight crewmembers , such as flight engineers , in addition to pilots .

vision 100 also requires the promulgation of regulations to ensure the security of foreign anddomestic aircraft repair stations .

the act also requires the tsa , in coordination with the faa , tocomplete a security review and audit of foreign repair stations that work on air carrier aircraft andcomponents .

vision 100 also modified the background check requirements for foreign pilots seeking flighttraining in the united states .

the act transferred the duties of conducting these background checksfrom the department of justice to the dhs .

the provisions require flight schools or instructors toprovide notification and identification information for individuals seeking training in smaller aircraft,weighing less than 12,500 pounds , and require background checks be completed before training canbe initiated in larger aircraft .

the legislation authorizes fee collections to offset the costs ofconducting these background checks .

for further discussion see crs report rl32498 ( pdf ) , vision 100: an overview of the centuryof aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) .

the national intelligence reform act ( p.l .

108-458 ) contains numerous provisions relatedto aviation security , many directly addressing the concerns and recommendations of the 9 / 11commission .

the act requires the department of homeland security to develop , prepare , implement , andupdate as needed , a national strategy for transportation security as well as modal - specific securityplans including a plan for aviation security .

the modal security plan for aviation is to include athreat matrix outlining each threat to the united states civil aviation system and the correspondinglayers of security in place to address these threats and a plan for mitigation and reconstitution of theaviation system in the event of a terrorist attack .

the act requires the tsa to issue guidance for the use of biometrics in airport access controlsystems and establish a biometric credential and authentication procedures to identify lawenforcement officers authorized to carry firearms aboard passenger aircraft .

the act authorizes $20million , in addition to any other authorized amounts , for research and development of biometrictechnologies for aviation security .

the act also authorizes $1 million to establish a center ofexcellence in biometric technologies .

the act required the tsa to begin system testing of an advanced passenger prescreeningsystem by january 1 , 2005 .

although the act does not provide a deadline for the completion oftesting the prescreening system , it requires the tsa to begin to assume the role of passengerprescreening and checking passenger names against watch lists no later than 180 days aftercompleting that testing .

the act requires the tsa to establish redress and remedy procedures forpassengers who are delayed or denied boarding because of being falsely identified or targeted by thesystem , and requires the tsa to ensure that the number of such false positives is minimized .

theact also requires the tsa to establish an oversight board and implement safeguards to ensure thesecurity and integrity of the system and address and resolve any privacy concerns .

the act alsorequires that the dhs prescreening of international flights to or from the united states be conductedprior to departure .

the act further requires that individuals seeking faa certificates , such as pilots andmechanics , as well as individuals requesting unescorted access to airport secure areas and airoperations areas be screened against the consolidated and integrated terrorist watch list .

the act alsorequires the tsa to establish a process where air charter and leasing companies can voluntarilysubmit information regarding prospective customers seeking to use aircraft weighing more than12,500 pounds for prescreening .

the act requires the security privacy officer of the department of homeland security toreport on the impact of the automatic selectee and no fly lists on privacy and civil liberties and thedirector of national intelligence , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , thesecretary of state , and the attorney general , to report on the criteria and standards applied in placingthe names of individuals on the consolidated screening watch list .

the act also directs the dhs to give high priority to developing , testing , improving , anddeploying airport checkpoint screening technologies to detect nonmetallic , chemical , biological , andradiological weapons , and explosives on passenger and carry - on items and requires the dhs tocreate a strategic plan for the deployment and use of explosive detection equipment at airportscreening checkpoints .

the act requires the tsa to initiate a pilot program to test advanced airportcheckpoint screening systems at five or more airports by march 31 , 2005 and authorizes $150million per year in fy2005 and fy2006 to carry out this pilot .

the act also requires the tsa tocarry out and report on a human factors study to better understand problems with screenerperformance and take such action as may be necessary to improve the job performance of airportscreening personnel .

the act requires the federal air marshal service to continue operational initiatives to protectthe anonymity of federal air marshals .

the act also provides for training law enforcement officersauthorized to carry firearms on passenger aircraft in inflight counterterrorism and weapons handlingprocedures and in the identification of fraudulent identification documents such as passports andvisas .

the act also encourages the president to pursue international agreements to enable themaximum deployment of federal air marshals on international flights , and authorizes the dhs toprovide air marshal training to foreign law enforcement personnel .

the act authorizes the tsa to take necessary action to expedite the installation and use ofin - line baggage screening equipment at airports .

the act further requires the tsa to establish aschedule to expedite this activity and study cost - sharing options among federal , state , and localgovernments , and the private sector for integrating in - line baggage screening systems .

the actincreases the authorization for the aviation security capital fund by authorizing up to $400 millionper year through fy2007 , in addition to the initial $250 million deposited from aviation security feecollections set forth in vision 100 .

the act directs the tsa to study the application of readily available wireless communicationtechnologies to enable cabin crew members to discreetly notify the pilot in the case of a securitybreach or safety issue occurring in the cabin .

the act requires the faa to begin issuing tamper resistant pilot licences with a photographof the bearer .

the licence is to be capable of accommodating a digital photograph , a biometric , orany other unique identifier considered necessary for identification purposes .

the act requires the tsa to develop and report to congress on standards for determiningappropriate screener staffing levels at airports that provide necessary levels of security and keeppassenger wait times to a minimum .

the dhs is also to study the feasibility of integratingoperations of the screening workforce and other aviation security - related dhs functions tocoordinate these activities and increase their efficiency and effectiveness .

the act also authorizesthe expenditure of $100 million for research and development of improved explosive detectionsystems and directs the tsa to develop a plan and guidelines for implementing these systems .

the act also requires the tsa to prohibit airline passengers from carrying butane lighters andany other objects considered by the tsa to be inappropriate carry - on items .

the act also directs the president to urgently pursue international treaties to limit theavailability , transfer , and proliferation of man - portable air defense systems ( manpadss ) , suchas shoulder - fired missiles , worldwide .

the act further directs the president to continue to pursue international arrangements for the destruction of excess , obsolete , and illicit manpads stockpilesworldwide .

the act requires the president to report on diplomatic efforts to address manpadsnon - proliferation and requires the secretary of state to provide the congress with annual briefingson the status of these efforts .

the act also requires the faa to establish a process for expeditedcertification of airworthiness and safety for missile defense systems that can be mounted oncommercial aircraft .

the act also requires the dhs to provide a report within one year assessing thevulnerability of aircraft to manpads attacks and plans for securing airports and aircraft from thisthreat .

the act requires that a pilot program be established to evaluate the use of blast - resistant cargocontainers .

the act authorizes $2 million to carry out this pilot program .

the act also authorizes$200 million each year through fy2007 for improved air cargo and airport security related to thetransportation of cargo on both passenger aircraft and all - cargo aircraft , and $100 million per yearthrough fy2007 for the research , development , and deployment of technologies to better identify,track , and screen air cargo .

the act establishes a grant program to encourage the development ofadvanced air cargo security technology .

the act also requires the tsa to issue a final rule regardingits proposed regulations for the security of cargo operations for both passenger and all - cargo aircraft .

finally , the act requires the dhs , in coordination with the department of defense and the faa , toreport on the threats posed by international cargo shipments bound for the united states and providean analysis of the potential for establishing secure facilities along established international aviationroutes for the purposes of diverting and securing aircraft believed to pose a security threat .

in addition to the air - cargo security provisions in the national intelligence reform act of2004 , the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2005 ( p.l 108-334 , sec .

513 ) directs the dhs to research , develop , and procure certified systems to inspect and screen air cargoon passenger aircraft at the earliest date possible and amend security directives and procedures to,at a minimum , triple the percentage of cargo inspected on passenger aircraf .

since the 108th congress enacted several major provisions pertaining to aviation security,many directly reflecting the concerns and recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission , there are fewpolicy concerns that were not addressed at all during the 108th congress .

however , two areas wheresome may consider that policy concerns were not adequately addressed through legislation in the108th congress include general aviation security and air cargo security procedures and oversight .

the 9 / 11 commission made brief reference to concerns over the security of general aviationoperations , however it did not make any formal recommendations to address this concern .

duringthe 108th congress , legislation on the security of general aviation operations focused on airport andairspace restrictions and examining ways to alleviate what some believed to be unnecessaryconstraints on certain operations .

for example , a provision in vision 100 required the dhs todevelop and implement a security plan allowing general aviation flights to resume at ronald reaganwashington national airport but set no timetable for carrying out this provision .

in appropriationslanguage , on the other hand , temporary flight restrictions over stadiums and other venues duringmajor outdoor sports events were kept in full force and made permanent .

arguably , the legislationpertaining to general aviation security enacted during the 108th congress was viewed by many as notbeing as cohesive and comprehensive as legislation addressing other aviation security concerns .

some have expressed renewed concerns over the risk posed by general aviation corporate jets,private planes , and helicopters in response to a recent assessment prepared jointly by the federalbureau of investigation ( fbi ) and the dhs and widely reported in the press .

 ( 14 ) some may also argue that comprehensive legislation pertaining to air cargo securityoperations and oversight and expansion of the known - shipper program were not adequatelyaddressed during the 108th congress .

specifically , comprehensive measures that had been passedby the senate in s. 165 ( 108th congress ) were stripped from the final version of thenational intelligence reform bill of 2004 and replaced by language directing the tsa to make finalproposed rulemaking addressing these issues .

this was presumably done because the tsa'sregulatory proposals largely reflected the intent of the proposed legislation .

however , becausecongress did not formally enact several of these specific provisions pertaining to air cargo securityoperations and oversight , the 109th congress may be particularly interested in oversight of the tsa'simplementation of its air cargo security rules and its air cargo strategic plan to ensure that they meetdesired objectives .

