designating funds within appropriations legislation for specified projects or locations has been a way for congress to provide funding for designated communities to build and upgrade water infrastructure systems .

in the past , such legislative action has often been popularly referred to as earmarking .

the future needs for projects to treat municipal wastewater or treat and deliver public drinking water supplies in the united states are large — $298 billion for wastewater treatment and $335 billion for public water systems , according to the most recent estimates reported by states and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

federal funding to assist communities in meeting the goals and requirements of environmental laws has been provided first through programs in the clean water act and also , more recently , through a program in the safe drinking water act .

under the core assistance programs in these acts , congress annually appropriates block amounts which are allocated among states according to specified allotment formulas .

states , then , make assistance awards to individual communities .

since 1972 , congress has provided more than $100 billion for these core programs .

under both laws , federal funds capitalize state revolving funds ( srfs ) , which states then use to make loans to communities for water infrastructure capital projects .

local communities , in turn , repay loans to the state revolving fund , not the federal government .

in fy1989 , congressional appropriators began the practice of supplementing appropriations for the srf programs with designated project grants in the epa appropriations account that funds clean water act and safe drinking water act assistance .

unlike loans under the two srf programs , these grants generally are provided on the basis of 55% - 45% federal - local cost sharing , with no requirement to repay the federal share .

since 1989 , congress has awarded $7.4 billion for these grants , which have increased as a portion of appropriated water infrastructure funds in that account .

notably since fy2000 , appropriators have awarded grants to a larger total number of specified projects ( eg , 46 in fy1995 , compared with 319 in fy2010 ) , resulting in more communities receiving such assistance , but at the same time most of them receiving smaller amounts of funds , on average ( eg , $18.1 million in fy1995 , compared with $585,508 in fy2010 ) .

this report discusses appropriations for epa water infrastructure programs , focusing on congressional special project designations in the account that funds these programs .

because some members of congress , interest groups , and administration officials criticize these types of congressional actions , the practice of congressionally designated special project funds for epa's water infrastructure and other programs was banned in fy2011 , but some policy makers and constituents would like to see it restored .

information on the programmatic history of epa involvement in assisting wastewater treatment and drinking water projects also is provided in two appendixes .

in appropriations legislation , funding for epa clean water and drinking water programs is contained in the measure providing funds for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies .

within the portion of that bill which funds epa , wastewater treatment and drinking water assistance are specified in an account called state and tribal assistance grants ( stag ) .

this appropriations account includes all water infrastructure funds , as well as management grants that assist states in implementing air quality , water quality , and other media - specific environmental programs .

today , the stag account includes appropriations both for the primary clean water act and safe drinking water act assistance programs ( see appendixes a and b for background ) and for congressionally designated special purpose project grants , which many persons have popularly referred to as earmarks , or often as stag grants .

there is no single definition of the term "earmark" that is accepted by all practitioners and observers of the congressional appropriations process , nor has there been a standard practice across all 13 appropriations bills .

while definitions of this practice vary , an earmark generally is considered to be an allocation of resources to specifically targeted beneficiaries .

they may be proposed by the president or may be originated by congress .

in the 110 th congress , a number of budget process reform proposals were debated , including changes to house and senate rules affecting earmarking , leading to congress banning the practice since fy2011 .

although the practice is not currently in use , the focus of this report is funds set aside within the epa stag account during years when it did occur to fund individual water infrastructure projects , locations , or organizations , detailed either in the appropriations act or the joint explanatory statement of its accompanying conference report , and not distinguishing those requested by the executive from those designated by congress .

attention is often drawn to the relatively few projects that received large grant awards by congress , especially over multiple years .

however , the other side of that story is the large number of projects that received relatively small amounts — especially as a percentage of the total cost of water infrastructure projects , which has been very large .

even with the large awards described here for some communities , more than 75% of the projects designated in the epa appropriations legislation received total awards ( either in a single year or over multiple years ) of $2 million or less .

the trend of appropriators to provide smaller awards is reflected in the fact that only a small number of projects received awards of $1 million or more: 27 in fy2008 ( 9.6% of total earmarks ) , 27 again in fy2009 ( 9% of total ) , and 22 in fy2010 ( 6.9% of total ) .

as individual award amounts got smaller , some questioned whether communities might conclude that the cost of receiving such funding — both in terms of political capital spent to seek it and actual resources spent subsequently to secure the grant from epa — exceeds the benefits this congressional practice raised two significant policy issues .

the first is that it alters the process of who decides which water infrastructure projects will receive funding , from state program officials to members of congress ( for those projects not also requested by the executive ) , and how the merits of particular projects may be evaluated .

the second issue , noted above , is that it reduced the amount of funds provided to capitalize state revolving loan programs , thus arguably delaying the time when states will become financially self - sufficient in administering capital programs and potentially prolonging the time when states and communities seek continued federal aid .

some members of congress , interest groups , and administration officials have been critical of including special project grants in this and other appropriations acts .

other members and many local officials view it as an appropriate way to assist communities that would not be served by the legislated programs .

after the moratorium for fy2007 , the practice resumed and continued in fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2010 , although new rules were intended to provide greater transparency by requiring that the sponsors of earmarks be identified in committee reports .

as described above , criticism of congressional earmarking resulted in banning the practice for epa and other federal agencies since fy2011 .

still , some members and interest groups have pressed for rules changes that would relax the current ban .

so far , congress has not modified the prohibition on earmarks , but could choose to do so in the future .

appendix a .

background: federal involvement in wastewater treatment the water pollution control act of 1948 ( p.l .

80-845 ) was the first comprehensive statement of federal interest in clean water programs .

while it contained no federally required goals , limits , or even guidelines , it started the trickle of federal aid to municipal wastewater treatment authorities that grew in subsequent years .

it established a grant program to assist localities with planning and design work and authorized loans for treatment plant construction .

with each of the four successive amending statutes in the 1950s and 1960s , federal assistance to municipal treatment agencies increased .

a construction grant program replaced the loan program ; the amount of authorized funding went up ; the percentage of total costs covered by federal funds was raised ; and the types of project costs deemed grant - eligible expanded .

in the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-500 , popularly known as the clean water act ( cwa ) ) , congress revised the existing federal clean water law , including provisions related to wastewater systems .

in the 1972 law , congress strengthened the federal role in clean water and established the first national standards for sewage treatment .

a number of new conditions were attached to projects constructed with grants ( such as comprehensive planning requirements ) .

in order to assist communities in meeting the ambitious water quality improvement goals of the new law , federal funds increased dramatically , and the federal share was raised from 55% to 75% .

the grant program was reauthorized in 1977 ( p.l .

95-217 ) and again in 1981 ( p.l .

97-117 ) .

efforts began focusing on use of federal funds for projects with clear environmental benefits , out of concern that the program's wide scope was not well focused on key goals .

especially reflected in the 1981 amendments were budgetary pressures and a desire to reduce federal spending .

annual authorizations were reduced from $5 billion to $2.4 billion , the federal share was again set at 55% , and project eligibilities were limited .

the most recent comprehensive cwa amendments were enacted in 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

that legislation authorized $18 billion over nine years for wastewater treatment plant construction , through a combination of the traditional grant program and a new state water pollution control revolving funds ( srf ) program .

under the new program , federal capitalization grants are provided as seed money for state - administered loans to build sewage treatment plants and other water quality projects .

local communities , in turn , repay loans to the state , a process intended by congress to enable a phaseout of federal involvement after states build up a source of capital for future investments .

under the amendments , the srf program was phased in beginning in fy1989 and entirely replaced the previous grant program in fy1991 .

the intention was that states would have greater flexibility to set priorities and administer funding , while federal aid would end after fy1994 .

as a general matter , states and cities supported the program changes and the shift to a loan program that was intended to provide long - term funding for water quality and wastewater construction activities .

however , the change means that local communities now are responsible for 100% of project costs financed under the srf program , rather than 45% under the previous grant program .

congress enacted certain changes to the srf provisions of the cwa in 2014 ( p.l .

113-121 ) .

these amendments addressed several issues , including extending loan repayment terms from 20 years to 30 years , expanding the list of srf - eligible projects to include energy - and water - efficiency , increasing assistance to indian tribes , and imposing "buy american" requirements on srf recipients .

while municipalities have made substantial progress toward meeting the goals and requirements of the act , state water quality reports continue to indicate that discharges from wastewater treatment plants are a significant source of water quality impairments nationwide .

the original authorizations expired in fy1994 , but pressure to extend federal funding by reauthorizing the title vi srf program and by providing appropriations both for srf capitalization grants and earmarked project grants , has continued , in part because estimated funding needs remain large .

thus , congress has continued to appropriate funds , and the anticipated shift to full state responsibility has not yet occurred .

authorizations since 1972 , for both the previous title ii grant program and now for the title vi srf program , totaled $66 billion , while appropriations have totaled $91.3 billion through fy2014 .

appendix b .

background: federal involvement in drinking water in contrast to the 40-plus years of federal support for financing municipal wastewater treatment facilities , congress only recently — in 1996 — established a program under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) to help communities with financing of projects needed to comply with federal drinking water regulations .

funding support for drinking water only occurred more recently for several reasons .

first , until the 1980s , the number of drinking water regulations was fairly small , and public water systems often did not need to make large investments in treatment technologies to meet those regulations .

second and relatedly , good quality drinking water traditionally has been available to many communities at relatively low cost .

by comparison , essentially all communities have had to construct or upgrade sewage treatment facilities to meet the requirements of the cwa .

over time , drinking water circumstances have changed , as communities have grown , and commercial , industrial , agricultural , and residential land - uses have become more concentrated , thus resulting in more contaminants reaching drinking water sources .

moreover , as the number of federal drinking water standards has increased , many communities have found that their water may not be as good as once thought and that additional treatment technologies are required to meet the new standards and protect public health .

between 1986 and 1996 , for example , the number of regulated drinking water contaminants grew from 23 to 83 , and epa and the states expressed concern that many of the nation's 52,000 small community water systems were likely to lack the financial capacity to meet the rising costs of complying with the safe drinking water act .

congress responded to these concerns by enacting the 1996 sdwa amendments ( p.l .

104-182 ) which authorized a drinking water state revolving loan fund ( dwsrf ) program to help systems finance projects needed to comply with sdwa regulations and to protect public health .

 ( for additional background , see crs report rs22037 , drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) : program overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

this program , fashioned after the clean water act srf , authorizes epa to make grants to states to capitalize dwsrfs which states then use to make loans to public water systems .

appropriations for the program were authorized at $599 million for fy1994 and $1 billion annually for fy1995 through fy2003 .

actual appropriations , first provided in fy1997 , have totaled $18.2 billion through fy2014 .

