in general , social security spousal and survivor benefits are paid to the spouses of retired , disabled , or deceased workers covered by social security .

the spousal benefit equals 50% of a retired or disabled worker's benefit and the survivor benefit equals 100% of a deceased worker's benefit .

spousal benefits , which congress created in 1939 , are intended for individuals who are financially dependent on a working spouse .

for this reason , but also because of the costs , social security does not provide both full worker and full spousal benefits to the same individual .

for persons who qualify for both a social security worker benefit ( retirement or disability ) based on their own work history and a social security spousal benefit based on a spouse's work history , the "dual entitlement" rule effectively caps total benefits at the higher of the worker's own benefit or the spousal benefit .

the government pension offset ( gpo ) is analogous in purpose to the "dual entitlement" provision and applies to individuals who qualify for both a pension based on their own non - social security - covered government work and a social security spousal benefit based on a spouse's work in social security - covered employment .

the intent of the dual entitlement rule and the gpo is the same — to reduce the social security spousal benefits of individuals who are not financially dependent on their spouses because they receive their own retired - worker or disabled - worker social security benefits , or their non - social security pension benefits .

in 2015 , approximately 6.4 million state and local government workers ( 28% of all state and local government workers ) were in non - social security - covered positions .

a government worker who does not pay into social security may potentially be affected by the gpo if he or she is entitled to a social security spousal benefit based on a spouse's or ex - spouse's work in social security - covered employment .

generally , employees of the federal government hired before 1984 are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and are not covered by social security ; therefore , they may be subject to the gpo .

most federal workers first hired into federal service after 1983 are covered by the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) , which includes social security coverage .

thus , although fers retirees are not subject to the gpo , they , like all covered workers , may be subject to the social security dual entitlement rule .

as of december 2017 , about 682,933 social security beneficiaries , or about 1% of all beneficiaries , had spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefits reduced by the gpo ( not counting those who were potentially eligible for spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefits but were deterred from filing for them because of their expectation that the gpo would eliminate the spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit ) .

of these persons subject to the gpo , 55% were spouses and 45% were widows and widowers .

about 82% of all affected persons were women .

table 5 provides a breakdown of the affected beneficiaries by state and type of benefit .

in december 2017 , the average non - covered government pension amount for persons affected by the gpo was $2,396 per month ( $2,177 for women and $3,383 for men ) .

the average pre - offset social security spousal benefit at that time was $832 per month ( $899 for women and $529 for men ) .

the average reduction caused by the gpo was $674 per month ( $709 a month for women and $516 for men ) .

the average social security spousal benefit component after application of the gpo was $158 per month ( $190 a month for women and $13 a month for men ) .

among the beneficiaries affected by gpo in december 2017 , 73% of them had their potential social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit fully offset by gpo reduction .

for the average beneficiary who received some social security spousal benefit after gpo reduction ( partially offset ) , the spousal benefit comprised about 40% of the total payment received ( non - covered government pension amount and social security spousal benefit after gpo reduction ) .

in comparison , in 2017 , the dual entitlement rule affected approximately 7.2 million beneficiaries .

about 6.9 million ( 97% ) of all affected beneficiaries were women .

wives made up 43% of all affected , and widows made up 54% .

among dually - entitled workers , the average social security total benefit ( retired worker plus spouse or survivor benefit ) received was $1,261 .

of this amount , $715 was the retired worker component of the benefit .

the spousal benefit component was $546 ( after reduction for dual entitlement ) .

for the average dually entitled worker , therefore , the spousal benefit comprised about 43% of the total social security benefit received .

opponents argue that the gpo is not well understood and that it harms lower - income workers .

defenders of the gpo maintain that it helps ensure that only financially dependent spouses receive the social security spousal benefit , while curtailing what otherwise would be an unfair advantage for government workers who are not covered by social security .

a burgeoning controversy arose in the 108 th congress with the revelation that a growing number of state and local government workers had been making use of a little - known provision of the law that allowed them to escape the application of the gpo if they switched jobs at the very end of their government careers .

that provision granted an exception to the gpo if , on the last day of one's government service , he or she worked in a social security - covered position .

on august 15 , 2002 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report that found that , as of june 2002 , 4,819 individuals in texas and georgia had switched to social security - covered positions to avoid the application of the gpo to their social security spousal benefits .

the gao projected that the cost to the program for these cases could be about $450 million .

on february 11 , 2004 , the house of representatives agreed to senate amendments and passed h.r .

743 , the social security protection act of 2003 , which became p.l .

108-203 .

as discussed below , p.l .

108-203 eliminated the last - day exception clause by requiring those workers switching from non - covered positions to social security - covered positions to work in the covered position for at least 60 months ( five years ) before being exempt from the gpo .

the new gpo provision became effective for social security spousal benefit applications filed after march 31, 2004 .

any current social security beneficiary who is receiving spousal benefits and is exempt from the gpo because they retired from their non - covered position in government under the last - day rule would continue to be exempt from the gpo .

individuals may still be exempt from the gpo if they applied for social security spousal benefits before april 1 , 2004 , and work their last day in a social security - covered position within the same retirement system .

in this case , an individual who received a social security spousal benefit before april 1 , 2004 , could continue to work in a non - covered position and still make use of the last - day rule when he retires from government employment , regardless of when the retirement occurs .

their last day of government service occurred before july 1 , 2004 , and they worked their last day in a social security - covered position within the same retirement system .

in other words , if a worker switched from non - covered government work to social security - covered work for her last day of work within the same retirement system , she is exempt from the gpo , even if she files for social security benefits at a later date .

however , if a worker returns to work in a non - covered position in the same retirement system that she previously retired from and new contributions are made by either the employee or employer to the non - covered pension system , her last - day exemption from the gpo will be revoked and she will be subject to the new 60-month requirement for exemption from the gpo .

their last day of government service occurs on or after july 1 , 2004 , and before march 2 , 2009 , and they work a total of 60 months in a social security - covered position within the same retirement system .

the required 60-month period of social security - covered employment would be reduced by the number of months the worker performed in social security - covered employment under the same retirement system prior to march 2 , 2004 .

however , in no case can the 60-month requirement be reduced to less than one month .

for example , a teacher who is currently working in a non - covered position but who previously worked for 12 months in a social security - covered position under the same retirement system would have the 60-month requirement reduced to 48 months .

the remaining months to be worked ( in this case 48 months ) , must be worked consecutively and after march 2 , 2004 .

thus , if he switched to a covered position in the same retirement system as his prior government work for at least the final 48-month period of his employment and his last day of employment was before march 2 , 2009 , he would be exempt from the gpo .

their last day of government service occurs after march 3 , 2009 , and they work their last 60 months in a social security - covered position within the same retirement system .

all other individuals receiving government pensions based on non - covered employment would be subject to reductions in social security spousal benefits under the gpo .

