congress has expressed significant , ongoing interest in increasing the availability of broadband services throughout the nation , both in expanding the geographic availability of such services ( eg , into rural as well as more urban areas ) , as well as expanding the service choices available to consumers ( e.g , promoting additional service options at reasonable prices ) .

the telephone , cable , and satellite industries , and more recently the electric utilities , all provide broadband services to consumers .

electric utilities have long had the ability to send communications over their powerlines through what is called powerline communications ( plc ) technology , but that capability was used primarily to maintain the operability of the power grid — remote monitoring of the grid and other management functions .

it was not offered as a commercial product because of technical limitations and regulatory limitations under the 1935 public utility holding company act ( puhca ) .

specifically , regarding regulatory limitations , puhca prohibited electric utilities from entering the retail telecommunications market without all of their operations , including the telecommunications component , being regulated by the securities and exchange commission under puhca .

however , in 1996 , driven by the elimination under the telecommunications act of the puhca limitations and the increasing demand for broadband services , electric utilities began exploring ways to turn plc into a commercially viable , consumer service — broadband over powerlines ( bpl ) .

many electric companies are now in the process of upgrading their transmission and distribution systems to provide bpl .

this technology has the potential to play a significant role in increasing the competitive landscape of the electric utility and telecommunications industry , as well as making broadband available to more americans than ever before .

bpl , however , like any technology , has its advantages and disadvantages .

for example , bpl , in general , is less expensive to deploy than the cable and telephone companies' broadband offerings because it does not require upgrades to the actual electric grid and is not limited by certain technical constraints of its competitors .

specifically , the telephone companies' broadband service , digital subscriber line ( dsl ) , is limited to consumers within 18,000 feet of a central office unless expensive remote equipment is placed close to the customer .

cable companies , while not limited by the same distance restrictions as the telephone companies , still must upgrade their cable plant as well as the equipment at their "head end" to provide cable modem service .

finally , internet service delivered via satellite is still primarily a downstream - only service , with a dial - up connection required to send data to the internet .

however , critics of bpl have expressed concern that it will interfere with licensed radio spectrum such as amateur radio , government , and emergency response frequencies .

companies both in the united states and abroad have pilot tested bpl and many are now deploying it commercially .

for example , in 2004 , manassas , va , began testing bpl service and became the first u.s. community with a commercial bpl offering .

the service is now being used by roughly 1,000 of the 12,500 households in the manassas area .

however , in manassas as well as in other areas where bpl is being deployed , there have been some concerns and difficulties .

for example , amateur radio operators have stated their concern that bpl will interfere with their radio signals .

efforts are being made by industry and government to address these concerns while still continuing bpl deployment .

in addition to providing new choices for consumers and increased competition in the broadband market , bpl can provide other benefits , both to the electric utilities and to others .

as tests and commercial deployments continue , the electric utilities can capitalize on their existing relationships with consumers and the ubiquity of their networks .

also , bpl can be sold either as a retail service under the electric utility's brand or as a wholesale service to third - party isps , offering smaller broadband providers another wire to the customer — and electric utilities have expressed interest in providing such open access on a wholesale basis .

concerns among electric utilities and investors about bpl deployment do remain , however .

although the pilot tests and limited commercial deployments have thus far proven successful , the viability of large - scale commercial implementation remains unproven .

also , while name recognition will help the electric utilities as they roll out their service , there is also concern that they may have an unfair competitive advantage over smaller , less established providers .

in this case , however , this may not be a significant concern because of the size of the established broadband providers , the telephone and cable companies .

finally , although bpl is likely to be deployed further out into rural areas than either cable or dsl , it remains to be seen if bpl is as economical to deploy in those areas as policymakers and rural consumers hope .

the fcc opened a rulemaking proceeding on the technical issues related to bpl deployment in february 2004 and adopted a report and order on the proceeding in october 2004 ( see "regulatory activity — federal communications commission," page 6 ) .

congress may wish to monitor how the fcc implements the rules that will guide bpl development and deployment , as well as monitor more general issues surrounding bpl , such as industry and societal issues , regulatory and industry governance issues , and technical issues .

these three categories of issues are discussed in detail at the end of this report ( see " issues for congress " ) .

the fcc has been investigating bpl since 2003 and adopted rules regulating bpl systems in october 2004 ; it is also addressing bpl - related issues in its calea and ip - enabled services proceedings .

in april 2004 , the ntia released phase 1 of a study on the potential for bpl to interfere with radio frequencies used by government users for homeland security , defense , and emergency response .

in that report , initiated by ntia in response to the fcc's noi , the ntia described federal government usage of the 1.7-80 mhz spectrum , identified associated interference concerns , and outlined the studies it planned to conduct to address those concerns .

the report ( 1 ) contains findings on interference risks to radio reception in the immediate vicinity of overhead power lines used by bpl systems ( access bpl only ) ; ( 2 ) suggests means for reducing these risks , and ( 3 ) identifies techniques for mitigating interference should it occur .

one of the most important findings of the report was that existing part 15 compliance measurement procedures for bpl tended to significantly underestimate bpl peak field strength .

such underestimation increases the risk of interference .

according the report , as currently applied to bpl systems , part 15 measurement guidelines do not address the unique characteristics of bpl emissions .

overall , the report concludes that bpl could interfere with licensed radio spectrum , even though under the current part 15 testing parameters , emission levels would be within the limits .

therefore , it was recommended that the compliance measurement procedures be refined .

the ntia stated , however , that refining the compliance measurement procedures should not impede deployment of bpl because the technology can reportedly be deployed within a more narrow range of frequencies that will not cause interference .

for these reasons , the ntia did not recommend that the fcc relax part 15 field strength limits for bpl systems .

instead , ntia recommended new measurement provisions derived from existing guidelines , including using measurement antenna heights near the height of power lines ; measuring at a uniform distance of 10 meters from the bpl device and power lines ; and measuring using a calibrated rod antenna or a loop antenna in connection with appropriate factors relating magnetic and electric field strength levels at frequencies below 30 mhz .

overall , ntia supported the continued development and deployment of bpl and suggested several means by which bpl interference could be prevented or eliminated .

for example , mandatory registration of certain aspects of bpl systems would give radio operators the information needed to advise bpl operators of any anticipated interference problems or suspected actual interference .

ntia also recommended that bpl developers consider , for example , routinely using the minimum output power needed from each bpl device ; avoiding locally used radio frequencies ; using filters and terminations to extinguish bpl signals on power lines where they are not needed ; and carefully selecting bpl signal frequencies to decrease radiation .

issues potentially of interest to congress may be divided into three categories .

industry and societal issues , such as the impact of bpl on competition in broadband services , and the potential for bpl to reach previously unserved and underserved populations .

larger regulatory and industry governance issues , such as how the regulatory classification of bpl might affect other fcc regulations and proceedings ( eg , the appropriate regulatory classification of ip - based services ) and electric utility regulations ( eg , reliability mandates , federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) regulations , and public utility holding company act ( puhca ) exemptions ) .

technical issues , such as how bpl should be implemented to minimize interference with other services ( eg , amateur radio frequencies ) and what effect bpl technology may have on reliability and security of the transmission and distribution systems and homeland security goals ( i.e. , bpl may result in benefits as well as risks ) .

each issue is discussed below .

in january 2007 , representative mike ross introduced h.r .

462 , the emergency amateur radio interference protection act .

this bill would require that within 90 days after the date of enactment , the fcc would be required to conduct "a study of the interference potential of systems for the transmission of broadband internet services over power lines. .

the study would examine — the variation of field strength of bpl service signals with distance from overhead power lines , and a technical justification for the use of any particular distance extrapolation factor ; the depth of adaptive , or 'notch' , filtering for attenuating normally permitted bpl service radiated emission levels that would be necessary and sufficient to protect the reliability of mobile radio communications ; a technical justification for the permitted , radiated emission levels of bpl signals relative to ambient levels of man - made noise from other sources ; and options for new or improved rules related to the transmission of bpl service that , if implemented , may prevent harmful interference to public safety and other radio communications systems .

upon completion , the fcc would be required to submit the study report to the house committee on energy and commerce and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

this bill was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce .

no further action has been taken .

in june 2007 , senator mark pryor introduced s. 1629 , which contains the same study requirements as h.r .

462 .

that bill was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

on august 4 , 2007 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

3221 , the new direction for energy independence , national security , and consumer protection act .

if signed into law , section 9113 ( a ) ( 8 ) would require an assessment by a newly established grid modernization commission to determine , biannually , the progress being made toward modernizing the electric system , including an "assessment of ancillary benefits to other economic sectors or activities beyond the electricity sector , such as potential broadband service over power lines. .

crs report rl33542 , broadband internet regulation and access: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32728 , electric utility regulatory reform: issues for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

american public power association , http: / / www.appanet.org american radio relay league , http: / / www.arrl.org edison electric institute , http: / / www.eei.org federal communications commission , http: / / www.fcc.gov / fcc noi: http: / / hraunfoss.fcc.gov / edocs_public / attachmatch / fcc - 03-100a1.pdf fcc nprm: http: / / hraunfoss.fcc.gov / edocs_public / attachmatch / fcc - 04-29a1.pdf national telecommunications and information administration , http: / / www.ntia.doc.gov / united power line council , http: / / www.uplc.org united telecom council , http: / / www.utc.or .

"how broadband over powerlines works," robert valdes , http: / / computer.howstuffworks.com / bpl.htm / printable ( undated ) .

