even before the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on the united states , the people's republic of chinawas shifting its strategy with respect to its neighboring countries and washington away fromconfrontation and strategic competition toward economic cooperation and a reduction of strategicaggressiveness .

following several crisis points in china's international relations - - including the1989 tiananmen square repression , the 1995 seizure by china of mischief reef in the spratlyislands , the 1995-96 live fire missile exercises in the taiwan strait , the 1997-98 allegations ofchinese espionage , the 1999 nato bombing of the chinese embassy in belgrade , and the 2001 u.s.ep - 3 / chinese fighter aircraft collision incident - - chinese relations with its northeast asianneighbors and with the united states have now become fairly calm and constructive .

why china has turned its focus toward its own "peaceful development" rather than blatantlyasserting what it considers to be its territorial rights and periodically "poking fingers in the eyes ofits neighbors" is a complex question that will be addressed partly below .

it seems clear , however,that beijing has recognized that its attempts to assert sovereignty over disputed islands or the testfiring of missiles near taiwan have proven to be counterproductive .

recent conflicts in iraq andafghanistan , moreover , have demonstrated anew that the united states is the premier global powerand that the u.s. military holds a large technological lead in the conduct of war .

beijing sees a hugecost to an open conflict with the united states .

in the post 9 / 11 environment , moreover , beijing hasbeen able to position itself in a way that puts it on the side of washington in the global antiterrorismcampaign - - despite beijing's concerns over the growing american military presence near thewestern border of china in central asia .

beijing's leaders also recognize that the legitimacy of theirmonopoly on government rests primarily on their ability to deliver a rising standard of living to theirpeople .

this not only requires continued economic growth but stability in the region and undisturbedflows of capital and goods between china and the rest of the world .

the economic rise of china has generated a reorientation of international trade patterns innortheast asia .

for japan , south korea , and taiwan , china has surpassed the united states as theirnumber one trading partner .

as shown in figure 1 , in 1995 , south korea exported more than twiceas much to the united states as it did to china ( $24 billion vs. $10 billion ) .

by 2004 , south koreawas exporting $50 billion to china but $46 billion to the united states .

 ( 2 ) japan still exports more tothe united states than to china , but the trend is moving toward china .

in 1995 , japan exported overthree times more to the united states than to china ( $123 billion vs $29 billion ) , but by 2004,exports to the american market had risen to $130 billion while those to china had risen to $74billion .

with taiwan , the story is similar .

in 1995 , taiwan ( 3 ) exported twice as much to theu.s .

market as it did to the prc ( $29 billion vs $15 billion ) .

by 2004 , taiwan was exporting $35billion to the united states and $34 billion to china .

 ( unlike japan when it was industrializing,china is a major importer. ) .

figure 1 .

exports by south korea , japan , and taiwan to china and theunited states , 1995 and 2004 ( $billion ) the situation with respect to china's exports to south korea , japan , and taiwan is similar .

as shown in figure 2 , china's exports to japan more than tripled between 1995 and 2004 and at $94billion now exceed the $54 billion in u.s. exports to japan .

the united states still exports more totaiwan ( $22 billion ) than does the prc , but china's exports there have quintupled to $17 billion in2004 from $3 billion in 1995 .

likewise , china's exports to south korea have quadrupled since 1995and at $29 billion exceed those from the united states ( $26 billion ) - - barely up from the $25 billionin 1995 .

the pattern of exports from china and the united states to south korea , japan , and taiwanreplicate the import trends - - china is rising while the united states is static as a source of supplyfor these markets .

figure 2 .

prc and u.s. exports to south korea , japan , and taiwan 1995 and 2004 ( $billion ) these shifts in trade flows away from the united states indicate that dependencyrelationships also are turning toward china .

not only are japan , taiwan , and south korea becomingmore dependent on china , but china also is becoming more dependent on these economies forimports and exports .

many of the imports into china , moreover , are intermediate products andcapital goods that are vital to china's industrial sector and economic growth and enable china toexport to the u.s. and other markets .

exports to china , moreover , are important sources ofaggregate demand for countries such as japan - - a nation that has been in and out of recession since1992 .

another indicator of the shifting positions of the united states and china can be seen inforeign direct investment - - fdi or long - term investment in controlling shares of companies .

thisis investment in companies that provide goods and services in which the foreign investor controls10% or more of the shares .

looking first at the aggregate flows from all sources , figure 3 indicatesthat while the united states is still the preferred destination for foreign direct investment , the trendis turning toward china .

in 2003 , china received $54 billion in fdi while the united states received$30 billion .

both the united states and china swamp japan , south korea , and taiwan asdestinations for fdi .

the united states , however , is also a major provider of fdi .

in 2003,americans invested $152 billion abroad while china invested $2 billion in fdi .

in addition , sincethe united states has long been a favored destination for foreign investors , its cumulative stock ofinward fdi as of 2003 was three times that of china ( $1,554 billion vs $501 billion ) .

these aggregate fdi inflows into china play a geopolitical role in that they raise the cost ofinstability both within the prc and between the prc and its neighbors , particularly taiwan .

moreimportant than the total inflows from the world , however , are the flows to china from itsneighboring economies .

of the $53.5 billion realized foreign direct investment in 2003 , $5.1 billioncame from japan , $4.5 billion from south korea , and $3.4 billion from taiwan .

china's largestinvestor , however , was hong kong with $17.7 billion ( some of this was actually chinese moneywhich "round tripped" in order to take advantage of incentives that favor foreign investments ) .

theu.s .

total of $4.2 billion was slightly less than south korea's $4.5 billion but more than taiwan's$3.4 billion .

the general trend of foreign direct investment within northeast asia has been for it toincrease or remain at a fairly substantial level .

the united states is maintaining its rate of directinvestment in china , but that level is just on a par with that of south korea .

figure 3 .

foreign direct investment inflows into the united states , china , japan , south korea , and taiwan , 1995 , 2000-03 for japan , china accounted for $3.1 billion or 8.6% of its total $36.1 billion in direct foreigninvestment in 2003 .

japan still invests more than three times as much in the u.s. market ( $10.6billion in 2003 ) as it does in china , but the trend is striking .

between 1999 and 2003 , japan's foreigndirect investment in the united states dropped by 52% , while its fdi in china rose by 314% .

 ( 4 ) other types of foreign investment are less significant in china than in countries with moredeveloped capital markets .

in 2003 , foreigners put a total of $2.64 billion in non - fdi investmentsin china ( data are not available by country ) .

this included $0.27 million in non - controlling shares,$0.13 million in leasing , $0.01 million in compensation trade , and $2.23 million in processing andassembly .

 ( 5 ) in bank borrowing , as of june 2005 , china had a total of $98.6 billion ( up from $78.5 billionin june 2004 ) loans outstanding from various sources .

of these , japanese banks accounted for $17.4billion - - the largest source except for european banks who had $45.2 billion in claims on china .

u.s. banks had $11.2 billion in loans to china ( up from $6.9 billion in june 2005 ) .

other largenortheast asian borrowers from japan include south korea with $17.0 billion and taiwan with $5.7billion .

 ( 6 ) in northeast asia , therefore , a network of economic interdependence is developing in whichchina , japan , south korea , and taiwan have strong vested interests in the smooth and continuousoperation of the system .

economic integration there is not as extensive as that in the europeanunion or under the north american free trade area ( nafta ) , but it is developing rapidly .

notonly are these economies trading more extensively with each other , but their production processesare becoming vertically integrated .

china acts as the manufacturing platform while neighboringcountries provide investment capital , finance , technology , management skills , and expertise .

figure 4 .

percent of china's exports and imports accounted for byforeign funded enterprises in china , 1988-2003 perhaps more important than the amounts of trade flows and foreign direct investment andloans flowing into china are the economic ramifications of that investment .

currently , more thanhalf of china's exports and imports originate from foreign affiliated enterprises located in itseconomy .

in 2003 , as shown in figure 4 above , 55% of china's exports and 56% of its imports wereaccounted for by foreign funded enterprises .

among provinces and metropolitan areas , guangdong,jiangsu , shanghai , and fujian were particularly significant .

all these are coastal areas with a largeforeign presence .

china's level of technology also has benefitted greatly from foreign investment and importsof machinery and equipment .

although recent data are not available , china's global market shareof high - technology products ( aerospace , pharma - ceuticals , computers and office machinery,communication equipment , and scientific instruments ) has risen from less than 1% in 1980 to 8.7%in 2001 ( see figure 5 ) .

this was considerably less than the 32% for the united states , but exceededthat of germany or south korea .

 ( 7 ) figure 5 .

global high technology market shares 1980-2001 meanwhile , china is using the allure of its rapidly developing economy and trade relationsto create a regional economic sphere revolving around china and with industries vertically integratedacross countries .

the major first thrust has been with the association of south east asiannations ( 8 ) ( asean ) .

china and asean agreed in 2002 to negotiate an asean - china free trade agreement ( asean +1 ) to be implemented between china and the six industrialized asean countries by 2010 and therest by 2015 .

asean also is considering the possibility of expanding this to an east asia freetrade area ( eafta or asean + 3 ) that also would include japan and south korea .

 ( 9 ) japan and south korea alsoare discussing a free trade agreement between them , ( 10 ) and taiwan has sought closer ties with japan and south korea .

taiwan is clearly concerned over what it calls the bandwagon effect - - countries in the region"jumping on the bandwagon" to cement trade ties with china .

east asian countries also are joining forces to protect their currencies and avoid a repeat ofthe 1997-99 asian financial crisis .

in may 2000 , finance ministers from asean plus china , japan,and south korea established the first regional financing arrangement in east asia .

called the chiangmai initiative , this consists of bilateral currency swap arrangements - - mainly from japan , china,and south korea to other participating nations - - during financial crises .

 ( 11 ) another regional financialarrangement is the asia bond fund .

announced on june 2 , 2003 , the fund began with $1 billion incontributions from 11 central banks from the more developed countries of asean plus japan,china , south korea , and australia .

seven additional contributing countries ( including india ) havejoined the fund .

the fund is to invest in sovereign and quasi - sovereign bonds issued by asiangovernments in international markets .

initially restricted to investments by central banks , in thesecond phase , the fund is to be opened to private investors ( such as insurance companies and pensionfunds ) .

the intention is to create greater liquidity , less reliance on dollar - denominated financialassets , deeper regional capital markets , and more stability in the asian financial markets .

 ( 12 ) these financialarrangements are evidence of nascent cooperation and institution building among east asian nations - - with both japan and china playing major roles .

within china , moreover , economic success is affecting decision making and policies in theranks of the chinese communist party ( ccp ) .

the ccp is including more of china's business andother interests both in its membership and policies .

an estimated 30% of china's entrepreneurs ( several million ) are now members of the ccp .

 ( 13 ) these entrepreneurs are not poor peasants ; many are the businesselite .

in addition , numerous party members have , themselves , become involved in businesses orhave strong business interests .

china may still be a one - party state , but that one party is graduallyrecognizing that it must reflect the interests of the people - - including those with business andeconomic interests - - if it intends to remain in power .

 ( 14 ) a further effect of the rapid development of china's economy is its growing appetite for rawmaterials and energy and other accouterments of modern life .

in the market for petroleum , forexample , china's demand already has reached 6.7 million barrels per day , and in 2020 is expectedto climb to 12.0 million barrels per day or about 11 percent of world consumption .

 ( 15 ) similar increases areoccurring in chinese demand for steel , gold , natural gas , and other commodities .

this is pushingup world prices for these items .

one note of caution is that several negative factors are rising in china that could push thecountry into economic chaos or recession .

while economic projections by econometric forecastingfirms ( such as global insight ) foresee continued economic growth in china at around 7 or 8% forthe medium term , ( 16 ) china could encounter a political or security crisis ( eg , over taiwan independence ) , a bankingcrisis , internal unrest , or just a hard landing from its rapid rates of economic expansion that couldderail the optimistic projections that are the conventional wisdom of most china watchers .

from the above discussion , it is apparent that the rise of the prc as an economic powerhousehas brought significant changes in china's relationships with taiwan , japan , and south korea .

theinterests of all four of these governments are being influenced by the rapid development of trade,investment , and financial flows .

these relationships are self - motivating , self - perpetuating , andself - sustaining .

they arise primarily out of the self interests of businesses and operate largelyindependently of government intervention ( except for government regulation , ownership ofenterprises , and financing ) .

many of these economic flows are generated by the forces ofglobalization that are affecting all parts of the world .

within the four strata of interaction ( military,diplomatic , economic , and human ) , economic relations between china and the other states are thewarmest ; human interaction is both warm and cool ; diplomatic relations range from warm to cold,and military relations generally are cold or absolutely frigid .

the chinese economy is growing so fast and becoming so large that other asian countriesare jumping on the bandwagon to ensure that their industries both capture some of the chinesemarket and use the low - cost chinese manufacturing platform to keep their exports competitive inthird country markets .

governments in the region are increasing their economic engagement withchina while hedging their bets by strengthening their own military forces to offset the arms buildupin china .

they are keeping military clashes that do occur - - often related to claims to disputedislands - - from escalating into political crises .

china is increasingly engaging in strategiccooperation , particularly in the global war on terrorism and in using its influence with north koreain hosting the six - party talks .

potential flashpoints , however , still exist - - particularly across thetaiwan strait and with north korea - - and a menacing frown could appear from behind china's"smile diplomacy" once the prc modernizes its military and reaches its goal of becoming amid - level industrialized nation .

throughout northeast asia , however , the costs of disrupting economic and financial activityby a military or other crisis are rising .

this is not to assert that economic activity stops wars , sincetrade between britain and germany certainly did not prevent either world war in the last century .

the situation now , however , is fundamentally different because industrial processes are integratedacross countries ; financial markets are global ; and people are more mobile .

disrupting economicrelations between taiwan and the prc , for example , not only would affect their trade in computers,cell phones , and other final products , but it also would affect the global information technologyindustry and production processes in other countries ( including the united states ) that rely on chinaand taiwan for critical components .

the main concerns with respect to rising chinese economic power and the growing trade andinvestment network in northeast asia seem to be: china's so - called "peaceful rise" is occurring below the radar screen for manypolicymakers .

china seems to be taking advantage of a "distracted america" to build relationshipswith other countries that could have far - reaching effects on u.s. interests andstrategy .

the growth of the chinese economy is so rapid and broad - based that it has thepotential of fundamentally altering national interests among countries .

it already is affectingeconomic relationships both among countries and within industries .

china is displacing the united states as the primary trading partner for manyasian countries .

everyone in asia seems to be jumping on the "chinese bandwagon. .

china'smarket has become so extensive that taiwan , japan , and south korea have all joined thechinese - based economic network rather than try to work against it .

while the u.s. market willalways be a major export destination , japan , south korea , and taiwan have progressively turnedtoward china for imports and exports , and their companies increasingly are dividing theirmanufacturing processes to take advantage of lower costs in china .

the progressively large economic and financial relationships between chinaand its neighbors in northeast asia is altering the cost - benefit calculus of military action that mightcause instability in the region .

the economic costs of instability are rising .

each is being inducedto seek stability , although the prc is adamant in preventing taiwan'sindependence .

china's growing economy provides the resources for beijing to modernize itsmilitary , and it is expected , before too long , to be able to tip the balance of power across the taiwanstrait in its favor .

once that occurs , china may be willing to sacrifice external peaceful relations toaccomplish other national goals - - such as forced reunification with taiwan .

while the economic , political , and military relations in northeast asia occurlargely on separate tracks , the sheer magnitude of the economic flows is affecting relations at otherstrata of interaction .

already , economic interests have induced more cooperation on politicaldisputes between china and japan and south korea .

while economic interests generally do nottrump security interests , they tend to induce countries to seek stability and refrain from taking rashmilitary or political actions that might lead to instability , sanctions , surcharges in internationalfinancial markets , and other penalties - - whether imposed by the market or by foreigngovernments .

american interests in northeast asia are a subset of the comprehensive u.s. interests ofsecurity , prosperity , and value preservation .

these translate into specific u.s. goals of maintainingstability under a favorable balance of power , promoting democracy and access to markets , anddeveloping amicable and cooperative relations with other nations .

in china the ruling communistparty has strong interest in maintaining its hold on power , enabling rapid economic growth,maintaining stability , and exercising sovereignty over what it considers to be its national territory .

japan and south korea seek security and stability in the region , particularly with respect to northkorea and the growing military strength of china , rapid economic growth , open trade and investmentrelations , as well as to maintain their representative governments and systems of political pluralism .

taiwan shares interests in economic security ; it is distinguished by an all consuming focus onmaintaining cross - strait stability .

for the united states , a question is how to promote and protectu.s .

interests while northeast asia undergoes rapid economic change .

during the cold war , the countries of northeast asia and the united states tended to makepolicy decisions relative to security , politics , and economics under a bipolar strategic lens that placedsecurity first in international relations .

in most cases , the overriding question for the west waswhether the policy being considered added to or detracted from the containment of the soviet unionand curtailed the spread of both russian and chinese - style communism .

this colored , for example,efforts to reconstruct post - world war ii japan , to intervene in the korean conflict , to providesupport to the republic of china on taiwan , to escalate the vietnam war , to sometimes wink attrade barriers in japan and south korea in exchange for their support of the u.s. military , and topromote closer trade ties with japan and south korea rather than have them rely on china , theirtraditional trading partner .

during that time , the best predictor of whether a nation had amicablerelations with the united states was the degree to which it opposed communism .

now that the lastremnants of the cold war are disappearing in asia , national policy among countries in northeastasia seems to be evolving more to reflect the practical interests of individual states rather than theirideological bent .

china's deng xiaoping stated it clearly when he said that it doesn't matter if a catis black or white , so long as it catches mice .

for congress , the rise of china presents several geopolitical policy choices .

 ( 66 ) these include whatstrategies the united states should pursue to accomplish long - term interests given that the economicrise of china is likely to continue and what combination of economic , diplomatic , and securitymeasures should be employed to best protect u.s. interests and accomplish particular u.s. policygoals .

the policy choices with respect to northeast asia include whether to: continue current policies of promoting market economies , enablingglobalization , and encouraging democracy while projecting sufficient military power to keep thepeace in the region ; seek to contain china along the same lines of the containment of the formersoviet union ; actively counterbalance the rising economic influence of china and the tradingnetworks it is building by pursuing free trade agreements and closer investment relations with japan,south korea , and taiwan and by strengthening free trade process under the asia pacific economiccooperation ( apec ) forum ; bring china's external trade more into balance , ensure that china adheres toits world trade organization commitments , reduce the foreign exchange resources available tochina's central government , and slow the "bandwagon effect" by which japanese , south korean , andtaiwanese businesses are establishing factories in china with the intention of selling a part of theoutput in the u.s. market ; facilitate the globalization of china in order to strengthen forces of change,create centers of power outside of beijing , and increase representation in beijing by business andinternational interests ; and take into greater account the impact that the rise of china is having on thepolicies of japan , south korea , and taiwan .

status quo .

current u.s. policies toward theeconomic rise of china are based both on "idealism" and "realism. .

the pentagon's militaryplanning , of necessity , tends to be power - and threat - based and realistic .

it considers and preparesfor several scenarios , including the "worst case" in order to provide for the security interests of theunited states .

current policies stress contingent military planning , export controls , strong alliancerelations with japan and south korea , and rising levels of engagement .

other u.s. policies toward china tend to be idealistic .

they are aimed at promoting u.s.ideals of democracy , a liberal market economy , and human rights in china .

many of these policiesare based on the globalization - peace hypothesis ( 67 ) that posits a progression in the political and economicdevelopment of nations that starts from a low - level agrarian economy that becomes globalized andenters a phase of sustained economic development which then leads to the rise of a middle class ( mostly urban ) and to greater internal demands for democracy and representative government .

thehypothesis posits that democratic governments do not fight each other .

therefore , in this view,efforts to establish democracy ultimately lead to more peaceful relations with other nations .

this isone rationale for current u.s. policies of liberalizing trade , facilitating china's membership in theworld trade organization and other international institutions , encouraging communications at alllevels , and engaging beijing on a multitude of fronts .

containing china .

those who focus on the chinathreat often advocate a policy of deterrence and containment - - some have called it"constrainment. .

 ( 68 ) this is analogous to the containment doctrine pursued by the west during the cold war .

whilecontainment usually is couched in terms of military strategy , it also can extend to economic andpolitical issues .

certainly , china's economic rise has provided the resources for it to build a modernizing andmore powerful chinese military .

while the end of the cold war and rapproachment with russia hasreduced greatly the probability of a big - power conflict in asia , the rise of china as a regional nuclearpower , in the minds of some , merely shifts the threat to china .

the prc also looks toward thepacific ocean and sees u.s. forces in south korea , japan , and guam with the seventh fleetsteaming around taiwan and southeast asia .

china is one of the few nations actively arming itselffor a possible military confrontation with the united states .

 ( 69 ) u.s. and japanese militaryplanners are considering the implications of china as a military power and , for example , the mannerin which the two nations could address a possible china - taiwan conflict .

 ( 70 ) discussion of u.s.military strategy with respect to china , however , is beyond the purview of this report .

on the economic side , containing china is like trying to put a genie back into a bottle .

china's economy already has broken loose from most of its moribund communist strictures and hasbecome well integrated into the global economic system .

since the late 1970s , the prc hasdeveloped from an inward - looking , protectionist economy to a world - class trading nation .

ratherthan china being constrained , the prc is using its economic ties and cross border investments toensure that its influence spreads .

china is coopting its neighbors with its trade and manufacturingresources .

taiwan is being forced to cope with the de facto integration of its economy with the prc,and japan , despite historical enmity by the chinese people remnant from world war ii , has littlechoice but to invest in china and incorporate the chinese market into its trade and investmentstrategy .

south korea , despite the legacy of the korean war and china's support of the regime innorth korea , has little choice but to enter the economic game with china .

the united states,likewise , is increasingly dependent on the chinese market as a manufacturing platform , an exportmarket , and as a buyer of u.s. debt securities .

the chinese economy is becoming the center weightof asia .

any economy that does not hook into it runs the risk of being left far out of the action .

measures certainly can be pursued to ensure that china acts in ways consistent with its internationaleconomic obligations , but the prc seems to have moved beyond the point where economiccontainment could be effective .

counterbalancing the rising economic influence ofchina .

there is little doubt that china is using its rising economic and politicalpower backed by its modernizing military to attempt to reduce u.s. influence in its periphery andto establish itself as the central power in the region .

this is not only because beijing has just nowgained the resources to allow the country to flex its muscles with credibility .

a view in japan andtaiwan , particularly among private - sector opinion leaders , is that china is taking advantage of u.s."inattention to asia" to better position itself to become the leader of asia and to wean neighboringcountries from their dependency on washington and move them toward beijing .

those who expressthis view assert that the united states needs to send a strong signal to countries in the region thatwashington is not distracted by the middle east and that it has enduring interests in asia .

 ( 71 ) there are many ways that signals can be sent .

one is through realist channels such asmilitary strength and actual trade and investment flows .

another is through idealist channels suchas diplomatic and political contacts as well as multilateral institution building .

on the realist side,bolstering u.s. alliance relationships and military capability as well as a full discussion of motivesfor u.s. troop reductions ( those in south korea were interpreted by many in asia as indicating alower priority for asia than for iraq ) could be useful .

also , measures to increase u.s. trade andinvestments in the region could help maintain or augment u.s. influence in northeast asia .

if japan , south korea , and china continue to move toward a free trade arrangement amongthemselves and with countries of southeast asia , the united states may consider speeding up theinitiation of discussions of bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) with japan , south korea , andtaiwan .

while such ftas would not slow down the chinese juggernaut , they might ensure thathigher u.s. tariff rates do not divert trade away from the united states and toward the region .

whilethe relatively low levels of u.s. tariff rates ( about 2% ) make trade diversion not a significantproblem , the proliferation of ftas in the region could create shifts in trade flows away from theunited states and toward the region .

of course , ftas involve many more issues , ( 72 ) some negative and somepositive , than just a signal to china .

the united states also may seek to reinvigorate the bogor declaration of the asia pacificeconomic cooperation ( apec ) forum under which 21 economies bordering the pacific ocean areworking cooperatively to reduce barriers to trade and investment ; ease the exchange of goods,services , resources , and technical know - how ; and strengthen economic and technical cooperation .

in the 1994 bogor declaration , the leaders of apec declared their intention to establish free tradeand investment in the region by the year 2010 for industrialized members and 2020 for theothers .

 ( 73 ) in essence,the bogor declaration would create a huge asia - pacific fta that would include both the unitedstates and china .

china's rising economic influence is occurring primarily at the expense of japan .

despitethe fact that japan still has the second largest economy in the world ( third if the european union iscounted as a single economy ( 74 ) ) and has a gross domestic product three times as large as china's,a decade and a half of recession has diminished the rising japanese economic star considerably .

efforts to restart japanese economic growth and to induce tokyo to take a stronger leadership rolecould offset some of china's allure as a regional leader .

bringing china's external trade more intobalance .

the united states could work more with nations of asia and europe tobring china's external trade more into balance .

 ( 75 ) although china claims that it ran a surplus in 2004 of $33billion in its merchandise trade with the world , the united states alone incurred a deficit of $162billion and the european union ( 15 countries ) a deficit of $63 billion with china .

even when takingchina's surplus of $89 billion with hong kong - - much of which is entrepot trade that istrans - shipped to other nations , china's reported trade surplus seems to be understated .

for 2005,preliminary data indicate that china's trade surplus tripled to $102 billion .

 ( 76 ) regardless of the exacttrade figures , more might be done to ensure that china adheres to its world trade organizationcommitments ( especially enforcement of intellectual property rights ) and allows more flexibility inits foreign exchange rate ( to reduce china's trade surplus and the dollar assets available to china'scentral government ) .

a higher value for china's currency also could dampen the lure of the chineseeconomy as a low - cost manufacturing platform that causes a "bandwagon effect" by which japanese,south korean , and taiwanese businesses establish factories in china with the intention of sellinga part of the output in the u.s. market .

these measures may not slow down china's growing tradeand investment network , but it could help to ensure that trade is conducted according to worldstandards .

the current attention on the upward valuation of the chinese yuan is a separate topic that isreceiving considerable attention already .

 ( 77 ) at a time that the u.s. dollar is depreciating in response to theu.s .

current account deficit of around 6% of gdp , the peg of the yuan to the dollar shifts the burdenof adjustment to europe , japan , south korea , and other countries .

what is particularly ironic is thatthe bilateral u.s. trade deficit with china at $162 billion is not subject to the market forces normallyexerted by exchange rate adjustment .

also , since the japanese yen and south korea won already arefloating , the chinese peg to a declining dollar gives chinese exports a relative price advantage notonly in the american market but in japan and south korea as well .

between january 2002 andjanuary 2005 , the dollar depreciated 22% against the japanese yen and 20% against the southkorean won .

since the chinese yuan has been tied to the dollar , it too has depreciated by likeamounts against the yen and won .

this gives chinese exporters an artificial advantage in japaneseand korean markets .

in 2005 , beijing announced that it had dropped its currency peg .

china said it had revaluedthe renminbi by 2.1% from 8.28 yuan to 8.11 yuan per dollar and that its currency would be"referenced" to a basket of currencies and allowed to fluctuate within a 0.3% trading band aroundthe u.s. dollar .

the main components of the reference currency basket consist of the dollar , euro,yen , and korean won , but the relative weights of each were not revealed .

since july 2005 , there hasbeen little further appreciation of the yuan .

facilitate globalization / democracy .

the unitedstates could encourage even more globalization in china in order to foster internal change .

theforces of globalization and economic development in china are causing fundamental shifts in powerand interests .

irrespective of whether the rise of china's business and working class ( as opposed topeasants and the military ) will lead to an end to one - party rule , it is clear that the ruling chinesecommunist party ( ccp ) is being compelled to pay greater attention to business and worker interests .

the ccp has attempted to coopt these interests by allowing businessmen to join the party and byseeking to broaden representation to include all segments of society .

in addition to ceding space in its decision making process to industrial interests , the currentccp leadership is coming into power with experience in the transformation of society that comesfrom development and modernization after opening to the outside world .

the core of chineseleadership has progressed from revolutionaries , to technocrats , to educated administrators andpoliticians .

for these people , the country's dependence on international investment and trade for theeconomic growth needed to maintain the party's legitimacy has become an important considerationin policy making - - including security policy .

still , over the long term , whether this will inducebeijing to pursue policies of stability in security relationships and to open its society even furtherto international forces is yet to be determined .

globalization also is creating stresses with chinese society that could spell trouble forbeijing .

widespread inequality in incomes both between the rich and poor in particular regions andthe gaping gulf in wealth and income between the coastal and inland provinces could cause unrest .

without the recent rapid economic growth , the rising ranks of china's unemployed would have beeneven larger .

these unemployed in combination with a poor social safety net , dangerous workingconditions in many industries , corruption , and religious repression generated about 160 publicprotests per day in 2003 .

 ( 78 ) rapid economic growth in china may lead to more democracy,but it also could lead to civil disorder and repression .

one policy question is how to encouragealternative power bases outside of the chinese communist party and to sympathize with assortedpublic protests without inviting another tiananmen square type of crackdown .

the united statesis steering a fine line between partnership and pressure in supporting democratic forces inchina .

 ( 79 ) in thisendeavor , enlisting more support from japan and south korea could be useful , and the constant flowof information into china on democracy in taiwan ( and hong kong ) can not help but have anaccumulating effect on perceptions across the strait .

third country policies .

the rise of china ishaving decided effects on the policies of japan , south korea , and taiwan .

bilateral relationsbetween these states and china tend to divide into strata with economic relations charging aheadwhile security and political relations lag behind .

the economic and financial activity , however , isaffecting security interests .

in the six - party talks with north korea , for example , the united stateshas had to rely on the good offices of china with pyongyang and to accommodate south korea'spolicy goals , which in some areas , seem to coincide more with those of beijing than those of theunited states .

another example is the movement by east and southeast asian nations to organizeinto a free trade area ( asean + 3 ) that includes china but excludes the united states .

this eastasian community based on a regional trade and financial system already is helping to induce asiannations to invest in local and european currencies as reserves rather than the dollar .

 ( 80 ) this is not to say that u.s. influence is still not great in the region .

china realizes thatforcing asian states to choose between beijing and washington can be counterproductive - - particularly those tied to the united states with security agreements .

since 2001 , therefore , chinesediplomacy has appeared to be less anti - american , ( 81 ) although beijing continues to work toward a multipolar worldless dominated by the united states .

it is apparent to beijing that its national economic and militarypower is still too small to exercise much direct leverage over the united states and nationssupportive of u.s. efforts .

but china appears to be taking advantage of its rising economic clout andgrowing trend toward regionalism to attempt to develop some mechanism to check what it considersto be u.s. hegemony .

 ( 82 ) this could be some sort of asian community or more formal organization .

one observer concludes that regionalism in asia is less a matter of formally organizingseparate nations into something akin to the european union or nato than a matter of integratingcountries on the fringes of china into a vast china market .

 ( 83 ) because of the widedisparity in types of government , levels of economic development , security orientation , and relationswith the united states , the most likely plurilateral institutions for northeast asia seem to befree - trade agreements with china at the center and deeper currency and other financial arrangementscooperation such as the chiang mai initiative and asian bond fund .

a test of the growing influence of china appeared in the plans to hold the first east asiansummit on december 14 , 2005 .

one group of organizing countries led by malaysia ( withsympathies from china ) wanted to limit the membership to asean plus china , japan , and southkorea ( asean + 3 ) .

another group led by singapore , indonesia , vietnam ( with sympathies fromjapan ) wanted to make the gathering more inclusive - - partly to dilute the influence of china .

ultimately , india , australia , and new zealand were added to the attendee list .

the united stateswas not even accorded observer status .

after the summit , china appears to be retreating towardasean + 3 as the east asian structure most conducive to and consistent with its regional goals inasia .

in either the east asian summit or asean + 3 , china appears to be maneuvering to positionitself at the center of any east asian economic and political arrangement that might becomeinstitutionalized while nudging the united states to the periphery .

 ( 84 ) the growing influence of china is also being reflected in issues such as the lifting of theeuropean union's arms embargo on china .

japan has sided with the united states in opposing thelifting of the embargo , but the apparent ease with which beijing garnered initial support in theeuropean union and the silence on the issue from south korea seems to reflect the allure andmagnitude of the chinese market - - in combination with other factors ( such as european pique overthe iraq war and their desire for a more multipolar world ) .

with containment of communism no longer an imperative and the probability of aconventional military attack on homelands diminishing , attitudes in japan and south korea towardu.s .

forces also are changing .

in both countries , public support of the u.s. presence is still strongbut weakening .

the basic alliances are still solid , but some are viewing the role of u.s. forces asless of a bulwark against outside attack and more as a backup safety measure just in case somecountry opts to take a hostile and disruptive action in the region .

 ( 85 ) a serious problem exists in northeast asia that diminishes the ability of the democratic statesin the region to counter beijing's influence .

the problem rests on the basic trust of japan .

in southkorea , in particular , there exists such an overhang of acrimony for japan's 50-year occupation thathardly any bilateral activity seems to go well .

talks on a south korea - japan free trade agreementseem to be stalled ( ostensibly because of agricultural issues ) , and a dispute over possession of anisland has again flared up .

in calls for japan's apologies , in interpreting history in japanesetextbooks , and other such issues , seoul sides squarely with beijing .

the united states could workmore with japan and other countries in the region to resolve historical issues and dampen popularforces of nationalism in order to keep those nations from drifting toward an explosive enmity thatcould be avoided and could threaten u.s. interests .

from one perspective , as long as the nationalisticand emotional outbreaks are kept under control , however , the united states actually could benefit .

in this view , the more the asian nations squabble among themselves , the more they tend to view the united states as a distant , third party whose history of relatively non - imperialistic policies can bewelcome .

international economic relations are like streets - - they go both ways .

while beijing has beentrying to coopt its neighbors , particularly taiwan , by enticing them into the chinese economic andtrading network , japan , south korea , and taiwan have effectively coopted china by making itdependent on their technology , financing , markets , and trade expertise .

the net result of this mutualdependency is that all parties now have much to lose by any crisis - - be it military or financial - - thatwould disrupt economic and financial flows in the region .

economic activity abhors instability .

the"electronic herd" ( 86 ) islikely to stampede at the first whiff of a serious military clash in asia .

stock markets would fall ; bond ratings would suffer ; interest rates would rise ; capital would flee ; and a risk premium wouldbe applied to investments in the region .

all four governments , therefore , seek stability ininternational relations .

without peace , it is difficult for economic engines to churn out wealth , andeven a rumor of war triggers penalties from international financial markets .

it should not besurprising , therefore , for south korea and japan to seek to improve relations with north korea orcarefully constrain their responses to incursions by chinese naval ships into their exclusive economiczones .

it also implies that sanctions or saber rattling that disrupt growing economic relations are notlikely to be welcomed in the region .

in summary , protecting u.s. interests in security , prosperity , and value preservation can beconsistent with the economic rise of china .

the key lies in channeling the burgeoning chineseeconomic clout into paths consistent with u.s. goals in the region .

in these efforts , the forces ofglobalization and economic interdependency among the economies of northeast asia appear to alignroughly with u.s. interests in stability , economic freedom , and the promotion of democracy inchina .

these same forces , however , have created the resources to fund military buildups and havecreated convenient targets for tension ( e.g .

anti - japanese demonstrations in china ) often unrelatedto political issues at hand .

a key for u.s. policy seems to be to pursue policies with a sufficient doseof realism to account for the rising economic , political , and military power of china , while alsomaintaining long - term idealistic goals of fostering more representative government in beijing andinducing countries to pursue peaceful relations , not only because of the u.s. military deterrent , butout of their own self interests .

