while the constitution , as amended by the 25 th amendment , provides that the vice president will succeed to the nation's highest office on the death , resignation , or removal from office of the president , it delegates authority for succession beyond the vice president to congress .

over the past two centuries , congress has exercised its authority in three succession acts , in 1792 , 1886 , and 1947 .

it has also added to , revised , and clarified the succession process by the 20 th amendment , proposed by congress in 1932 and ratified by the states in 1933 , and the 25 th amendment , proposed in 1965 and ratified in 1967 .

the succession act of 1947 ( 61 stat .

380 , 3 u.s.c .

§ 19 ) and the two amendments currently govern succession to the presidency .

despite occasional discussions , presidential succession was widely considered a settled issue prior to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

these events demonstrated the potential for a mass "decapitation" of both the legislative and executive branches of government , and raised questions as to whether current arrangements were adequate to guarantee continuity in congress and the presidency under such circumstances .

with respect to presidential succession , there has been a wide range of discussions in both congress and the public policy community since that time , and members of both houses have introduced legislation addressing this question in the contemporary context .

legislation proposed in the 109 th congress fell into two basic categories: bills to expand the line of succession to incorporate the secretary of homeland security ( dhs ) into the order of succession , and those that sought a more extensive overhaul of succession policies and procedures .

the 109 th congress did not , however , pass a free standing presidential succession bill of either variety ; instead , it incorporated the office of secretary of homeland security into the line of succession in title v of the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-177 , 120 stat .

192 ) .

article ii of the constitution , as originally adopted , provided the most basic building block of succession procedures , stating that: in case of the removal of the president from office , or of his death , resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office , the same shall devolve on the vice president , and the congress may by law provide for the case of removal , death , resignation or inability , both of the president and vice president , declaring what officer shall then act as president , and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed , or a president shall be elected .

this language evolved during the constitutional convention of 1787 .

the two most important early drafts of the constitution neither provided for a vice president nor considered succession to the presidency , and it was only late in the convention proceedings that the office of vice president emerged and the language quoted above was adopted .

while the need for a vice president was debated during the ratification process , the question of succession received little attention , meriting only one reference in the supporting federalist papers: "the vice - president may occasionally become a substitute for the president , in the supreme executive magistracy. .

the events of september 11 , 2001 and the prospect of a "decapitation" of the u.s. government by an act of mass terrorism have led to a reexamination of many previously long - settled elements of presidential succession and continuity of government on the federal level .

a number of proposals to revise the succession act of 1947 were introduced in the 108 th and 109 th congresses .

some of these were in the nature of "housekeeping" legislation ; that is , they proposed to insert the office of secretary of the department of homeland security into the line of succession , as has been done in the past when new cabinet departments are created by congress .

others proposed more complex changes in the legislation .

this growth of concern over succession issues in the wake of 9 / 11 was further reflected in the fact that the senate committees on rules and administration and the judiciary held a joint informational hearing on september 16 , 2003 , and the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on the constitution conducted a hearing on the succession question on october 6 , 2004 .

on both occasions , witnesses offered a wide range of viewpoints and various legislative and other options .

the question of continuity of government in the executive branch has also been addressed by a non - governmental organization , the continuity of government commission , sponsored by the american enterprise institute of washington , d.c. for additional information on the commission and its activities , consult: http: / / www.continuityofgovernment.org / home.html .

succession - related legislative proposals introduced in the 109 th congress fell into two basic categories .

first was "perfecting" legislation that sought to include the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in the existing order of succession , but would not otherwise have provided major changes in the succession act of 1947 .

second were proposals that sought broader changes to the existing law .

both categories are analyzed later in this section .

while both the house and senate considered free - standing bills that provided for inclusion of the secretary of dhs , this action was incorporated into comprehensive legislation to enhance and reauthorize the usa patriot act .

additional succession - related proposals have been offered that have not been introduced as legislation .

they seek particularly to address post - 9 / 11 concerns over the prospect of a "decapitation" of the u.s. government by a terrorist attack or attacks , possibly involving the use of weapons of mass destruction .

one proposal , suggested by john c. fortier at joint senate committee hearings held in september , 2003 , would have congress establish a number of additional federal officers whose specific duties and function would be to be ready to assume the acting presidency if necessary .

fortier envisions that the president would appoint them , subject to senate confirmation , and that obvious candidates would be governors , former presidents , vice presidents , cabinet officers , and members of congress , in other words , private citizens who have had broad experience in government .

they would receive regular briefings , and would also serve as advisors to the president .

a further crucial element is that they would be located outside the washington , d.c. area , in order to be available in the event of a governmental "decapitation. .

fortier further suggested that these officers should be included ahead of cabinet officers "lower in the line of succession. .

although he was not more specific in his testimony , it could be argued that these officers might be inserted after the "big four" , i.e. , the secretaries of state , the treasury , and defense , the attorney general , and , possibly the secretary of homeland security , should that officer be included at that place , as proposed in some pending legislation .

miller baker offered other proposals during his testimony at the september , 2003 , hearings , all of which would require amending the succession act of 1947 .

under one , the president would be empowered to name an unspecified number of state governors as potential successors .

the constitutional mechanism here would be the president's ability to call state militias ( the national guard ) into federal service .

baker argues that , by virtue of their positions as commanders - in - chief of their state contingents of the national guard , governors could , in effect be transformed into federal "officers" by the federalization of the guard .

another proposal by fortier would amend the succession act to establish a series of assistant vice presidents , nominated by the president , and subject to approval by advice and consent of the senate .

these officers would be included in the order of succession at an appropriate place .

they would be classic "stand - by" equipment: their primary function would be to be informed , prepared , and physically safe , ready to serve as acting president , should that be required .

professor akhil amar proposed a similar measure , that the cabinet position of assistant vice president established by law , again , nominated by the president and subject to confirmation by the senate .

in his testimony before the september , 2003 , joint senate committee hearings , he suggested that presidential candidates should announce their choices for this office during the presidential campaign .

this would presumably enhance the electoral legitimacy of the assistant vice president , as voters would be fully aware of the candidates' choices for this potentially important office , and include this in their voting decisions .

a further variant was offered by howard wasserman during his joint senate committee hearing testimony .

he suggested establishment of the cabinet office of first secretary , nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate .

the first secretary's duties would be the same as those of the offices proposed above , with special emphasis on full inclusion and participation in administration policies , "this officer must be in contact with the president and the administration , as an active member of the cabinet , aware of and involved in the creation and execution of public policy. .

finally , fortier proposed a constitutional amendment that would eliminate the requirement that successors be officers of the united states , empowering the president to nominate potential successors beyond the cabinet , subject to advice and consent by the senate .

such an amendment , he argues , would "... eliminate any doubts about placing state governors in the line of succession , and could provide for succession to the presidency itself ( as opposed to the acting presidency ) . .

fortier envisions that these persons would be "eminently qualified" to serve .

as examples , he suggested that president george w. bush might nominate , "... former president george h.w .

bush and former vice president dan quayle , both of whom no longer live in washington , to serve in the line of succession .

similarly , a future democratic president might nominate former vice presidents al gore and walter mondale to serve in the statutory line of succession. .

seemingly a long - settled legislative and constitutional question , the issue of presidential and vice presidential succession in the united states gained a degree of urgency following the events of september 11 , 2001 .

old issues have been revisited , and new questions have been asked in light of concerns over a potentially disastrous "decapitation" of the u.s. government as the result of a terrorist attack , possibly by use of weapons of mass destruction .

the 109 th congress acted to insert the office of secretary of homeland security into the current line of succession — remedying an oversight in the legislation that created the department in 2002 — in title v of the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-177 , 120 stat .

192 ) .

further revisions to current succession legislation , especially substantive changes , are less likely in the short run , however , although the foundations for future consideration have been laid .

in the private sector , the american enterprise institute's continuity of government commission is scheduled to address continuity in the presidency , having completed studies on continuity of the congress .

further , the hearings conducted in september , 2003 by the senate committees on the judiciary and rules and administration and by the house committee on the judiciary's subcommittee on the constitution in october , 2004 , provided a forum for public discussions of current succession provisions , their alleged shortcomings , and a wide range of proposals for change .

in the final analysis , however , it could require strong and consistent support from congressional leadership , the pressure of an aroused public , or a galvanizing event in the form of some disaster , or threat of disaster , to move the question of presidential succession in the post 9 / 11 era to the legislative front burner .

