an american treaty ally since 1954 , thailand was for years praised as an economic and democratic success story .

the u.s. - thai relationship , solidified during the cold war , expanded on the basis of shared perceptions of the two nations' economic and security interests .

thailand is an important trade and investment partner for the united states , and u.s. access to thai military facilities and sustained military - to - military cooperation make thailand an important element of the u.s. strategic presence in the asia - pacific region .

over 50 u.s. government agencies , with regional operations , also are based in thailand .

they implement a wide range of programs , including infectious diseases research , healthcare provision , and law enforcement training .

bangkok's political turmoil over the past decade has harmed the bilateral relationship .

thailand's two military coups , in 2006 and 2014 , triggered u.s. suspension of some forms of assistance .

with bangkok consumed with its own political crises , analysts believe thailand's ability to help with regional initiatives , including those supported by the united states , is severely limited .

this raises opportunity costs given the country's central geographical location , broad - based economy , and relatively advanced infrastructure .

many have hoped that thailand could play a larger role as a partner in the obama administration's strategic rebalance to asia .

thailand's struggles are almost entirely domestic and generally not destabilizing for the region , but because of them bangkok lacks the capacity to be a more productive force .

while thailand has played helpful roles in encouraging myanmar's democratic transition and coordinating talks between the 10-member association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) and china on a code of conduct in the south china sea , it has not claimed as much of a leadership role of asean as it might if its own politics were more stable .

with the prospect that thailand's military may retain power for an extended period , possibly until the royal succession unfolds over several years , u.s. policymakers must judge how stridently to advocate for democratic principles in its relations with bangkok .

in the past , many analysts say thailand has demonstrated a remarkable ability to "muddle through" its crises ; despite periodic bouts of violence and political discord , accommodations have been made to allow thailand's government and economy to move forward .

many experts say this time may be different and that thailand is convulsing through a historic transition .

the current monarch has been in place for over 65 years .

many analysts believe the inevitable royal succession , when it comes , could reshape the role the palace plays within thailand's political structure .

many critical questions about thailand's future remain: without representative government , how will thailand's disenfranchised majority respond ? .

is civil war possible ? .

what are the possible succession scenarios ? .

how could they affect the country's stability ? .

what role will thaksin and his supporters play ? .

will foreign investors shy away from thailand given the uncertainties ? .

will the country continue to lead regional initiatives , including those supported by the united states ? .

how stringently should the united states advocate democratic principles , particularly when doing so may strengthen the sino - thai relationship ? .

if thailand is under a military government for an extended period , what are the implications for u.s. relations with one of its asian treaty allies and for u.s. policy in the region ? .

thai politics , in turmoil for several years , was thrown into crisis when the royal thai military declared martial law on may 20 , 2014 .

two days later , the military ousted the civilian government , and army commander prayuth chan - ocha seized power .

the military dissolved parliament , detained political leaders and academics , imposed a curfew , and restricted media outlets .

former prime minister yingluck shinawatra was placed under house arrest ( she was later released ) .

there was no widespread bloodshed associated with the coup .

however , sporadic violence in the months prior left 28 people dead .

after seizing power , prayuth announced that thailand would be governed by a group of senior military leaders known as the national council for peace and order ( ncpo ) .

the ncpo created a new national legislative assembly ( nla ) and selected the assembly's members .

on august 21 , 2014 , the new body elected prayuth as prime minister .

prayuth has not set a date for a transition to civilian rule , and he has been reluctant to hold popular elections .

after the coup , he said that elections might be held in early 2016 , but later announced they would be would be pushed back to august or september 2016 .

the ncpo also created a constitution drafting committee ( cdc ) to draw up a new constitution .

while the process is ongoing , preliminary version grants immunity to individuals involved in the coup and allows the prime minister to be selected , rather than popularly elected , if he or she receives two - thirds approval of the house .

in april 2015 , prayuth lifted martial law .

soon afterward , however , he invoked article 44 of the interim constitution , granting his government the authority to curb "acts deemed harmful to national peace and stability. .

human rights groups immediately condemned the move as being yet another indication of thailand's "deepening descent into dictatorship. .

in many ways , the military - to - military connection has been the strongest pillar of the u.s. - thai relationship .

in november 2012 , then - u.s. defense secretary leon e. panetta and thai defense minister sukampol suwannathat signed the 2012 joint vision statement for the thai - u.s. defense alliance .

the document celebrated 180 years of cooperation and updated the goals of the alliance , putting a particular emphasis on building regional security partnerships .

however , the recent coups threaten military - to - military relations .

the united states has a statutory obligation to withhold aid to militaries involved in coups against democratically elected governments and , after the 2014 coup , the united states suspended military assistance and training exercises with thailand , chilling relations .

prior to that coup , u.s. military funding to thailand had just recovered to pre - 2006 coup levels , and u.s. military leaders touted the alliance as apolitical and praised the thai armed forces for exhibiting restraint amidst the competing protests and political turmoil .

however , the 2014 coup put the thai army at the center of politics , repudiating years of formal u.s. training about the importance of civilian control of the military .

still , most observers say the strategic value of the alliance remains high .

u.s. access to thailand's military facilities , particularly the strategically located and well - equipped utapao airbase , is considered vital .

utapao has been suggested as a permanent southeast asian humanitarian assistance and disaster relief ( hadr ) hub .

it can receive large aircraft ( including c - 17s and c - 130s ) and is close to a deep seaport ; it also has infrastructure capable of handling command and control systems .

the u.s. military used utapao for refueling efforts during operations in both iraq and afghanistan in the 2000s , as well as for multinational relief efforts after the 2004 indian ocean tsunami and april 2015 nepal earthquake .

thailand hosts the annual cobra gold exercises , the largest multilateral military exercise in asia .

despite the coup , the 2015 exercises proceeded with u.s. participation — albeit at a lower level - and the united states has said it will also proceed with the 2016 exercises .

thailand is home to southeast asia's second - largest economy .

one of the region's more developed and open economies , it has for many years been one of the region's key destinations for foreign direct investment .

according to the world bank , thailand became an upper - middle income economy in 2011 .

in recent years , the thai economy has performed strongly , despite political turmoil .

however , after the 2014 coup , the economy grew by only 0.7% , the slowest annual rate in three years .

the world bank expects economic growth in 2015 of 3.5% .

according to the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , thailand is the 25 th - largest market for u.s. goods exports .

two - way trade with thailand totaled $47.4 billion in 2014 and the overall u.s. trade deficit with thailand was $15.3 billion .

major exports from the united states include integrated circuits , computer parts , semi - conductors , cotton , aircraft parts , electronics , soybeans , and oil .

major imports to the united states include electronics , jewelry , seafood , clothing , furniture , natural rubber , auto parts , and rice .

u.s. companies have substantial investments in thailand .

u.s. foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in thailand was $14.4 billion in 2013 , led by investments in the manufacturing sector .

thailand also receives substantial investment from other countries , notably japan , china , and south korea .

the ustr reports that some of the largest barriers to trade in thailand are high tariff rates in selected industries , particularly in agriculture ; a lack of transparency in customs policy where customs department officials have "significant discretionary authority ; " the use of price controls or import license requirements in some industries ; and poor protection of intellectual property rights .

 ( thailand was on the ustr's priority watch list for intellectual property theft in 2013 and 2014. ) .

however , observers are not only concerned about thailand's trade barriers .

they also are worried about the country's lack of human capital .

thailand's education system is consistently ranked below some other southeast asian nations .

while thailand spends a huge percentage of its gdp on education — a higher percentage than germany does — the results have been disappointing and , according to analysts , this is unlikely to change in the near term , particularly if the country's schools continue to emphasize rote learning and do not attract better teachers .

thailand is not a member of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade negotiations , the obama administration's signature economic initiative in asia .

as prime minister , yingluck shinawatra expressed interest in joining the tpp negotiations in 2012 .

yet thailand has taken no subsequent steps toward joining the talks , and the current military government has made no statements about its position on joining .

the united states and thailand initiated negotiations for a free trade agreement ( fta ) in 2004 .

these talks were suspended following the 2006 military coup , and no new ones have occurred since then .

however , thailand has aggressively pursued ftas with other countries , singing trade agreements with bahrain , china , peru , australia , japan , india , and new zealand .

further deals are possible with south korea , chile , and the european union .

thailand has championed asean regionalism , seeing the asean free trade area ( afta , among asean countries only ) and the planned asean economic community ( aec ) as vehicles for investment - driven integration which will benefit thailand's outward - oriented growth strategy .

however , debates over economic policy have become increasingly contentious in thailand , mirroring the growing political divisions in the country .

as noted above , thaksin pursued large - scale populist measures as prime minister , including subsidizing low - cost health care and transferring substantial revenues from the central government to states and townships .

his sister , yingluck , also implemented populist policies .

while prime minister , her government announced a rice - subsidy plan in 2012 that would buy rice from thai farmers at prices around 50% above market rates and stockpile it before selling it on the open market .

many observers criticized the plan as fiscally unsustainable .

the value of thailand's public debt rose from 41% of gdp in 2011 to 46% in early 2014 , and many observers argue that the 2013 economic slowdown was at least partially caused by the fiscal burden of subsidizing rice farmers .

amidst the political turmoil , yingluck's opponents filed an impeachment charge against her for the policy — the motion was still pending when she was ousted by the constitutional court .

when prayuth came to power , the thai government ended the subsidy .

thailand is important to the region because of its large economy , its working relationships with numerous neighbors , including burma and china , and , until the coups , its relatively long - standing democratic rule .

its years of political turmoil raise concerns among its neighbors that thailand appears increasingly unable to take a leadership role in regional initiatives .

that , many argue , has negative implications for issues such as asean's diplomacy with china over maritime disputes in the south china sea , regional efforts to combat human trafficking , and regional economic integration under a planned asean economic community ( aec ) .

according to some u.s. analysts , southeast asia is a key arena of competition between the united states and china .

they worry that china is gaining more leverage in thailand — particularly given the chill in u.s. - thai relations .

another concern relates to the obama administration's "strategic rebalancing" — or "pivot" — to asia .

without a strong u.s. - thai relationship , analysts warn that it will be increasingly difficult to strengthen treaty alliances and regional multilateral organizations such as asean .

however , according to other analysts , such concerns are overblown .

they argue that the united states and thailand have strong and enduring ties .

thailand , they add , is averse to becoming overly dependent on china .

thailand has endured a persistent separatist insurgency in its muslim - majority southern provinces , which include yala , narathiwat , pattani , and — to a lesser extent — songhkla .

since january 2004 , violence involving insurgents and security forces has left around 6,000 people dead and over 11,000 wounded , according to press reports .

however , since 2013 , levels of violence have declined — a result , according to analysts , of the ncpo's "enhanced counter - insurgency measures," including creating district protection units drawn from local volunteers .

the groups fighting the government generally are poorly understood , and their motives are difficult to characterize .

many analysts believe that the groups are mostly focused on local autonomy , but even the thai government has a poor understanding of the various factions active in the south .

many experts characterize the movement as a confluence of different groups: local separatists , islamic radicals , organized crime , and corrupt police forces .

most regional observers stress that there is has been no convincing evidence of serious jemaah islamiyah ( ji , a regional al qaeda affiliate ) involvement in the attacks in the southern provinces , and that the overall long - term goal of the movement in the south remains the creation of an independent state with islamic governance .

some of the older insurgent organizations , which previously were linked to ji , reportedly have received financial support from foreign islamic groups , and have leaders who have trained in camps in libya and afghanistan .

the insurgency has , at times , heightened tensions between thailand and malaysia , since many of the insurgents' leaders are thought to cross the border fairly easily .

despite these links , foreign elements do not appear to have engaged significantly in the violence .

international observers , along with some members of congress , have criticized thailand's record on human rights .

alleged abuses include: extra - judicial killings , bloody suppression of civilian demonstrations , and the curtailment of the press and non - governmental groups .

also , the thai government has a poor record on combating human trafficking , and its security forces have been accused of human rights violations in the southern provinces throughout the country's various administrations .

for decades , many observers have been concerned about thailand's democracy .

previously , they had reason for optimism .

in 1997 , a new constitution was drafted .

it entrenched the country's democratic institutions , created a system of checks and balances , and provided greater human rights protections .

however , after the 2006 coup , a new constitution was drafted .

according to some , it moved away from the ideals of the 1997 document , raising questions about whether established power centers had truly accepted the democratic system .

those questions have persisted , and the imposition of martial law by the military in 2014 only deepened observers' concerns .

thailand is surrounded by considerably poorer countries , and many economic migrants — particularly from neighboring burma — illegally cross into thailand .

once they arrive , they often are exploited .

many become forced laborers in garment factories and in seafood - related industries .

some work as domestic helpers .

others , including children , are victims of sex trafficking , and they become involved in the country's sex - tourism industry .

in the south , some insurgent groups even recruit children .

according to reports , the children then become foot soldiers , carrying out attacks against thai government facilities .

in 2014 , thailand was downgraded to "tier 3" status — the lowest ranking — in the state department's trafficking in persons ( tip ) report , released in july 2015 .

the country , the report concluded , "does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking. .

according to the report , while thailand has improved its trafficking data collection efforts , the country has not substantially improved its law enforcement capabilities , and corruption remains a major problem .

some observers thought that thailand should have been downgraded earlier .

they noted that thailand had been on the tier 2 watch list for four years , and that the country had received two waivers , delaying the downgrade .

the united states , they alleged , had not dropped thailand to tier 3 status , because u.s. policymakers were worried about angering an ally .

other observers , though , said that thailand should be given more time .

according to them , collecting trafficking data is extremely difficult , especially when there are dramatic regional differences in trafficking patterns , as there are in thailand .

prior to the 2014 report , thailand sought to prevent the downgrade .

the government submitted a report to the state department detailing substantial declines in the numbers of trafficked persons in 2013 and increasing budgets for the government's anti - trafficking efforts .

despite the reported improvements , some ngos said thailand's report considerably understated trafficking of non - thai citizens who have traditionally made up a large proportion of thailand's trafficking victims .

in 2013 and 2014 , media reports alleged that thai government and military personnel were involved in trafficking rohingya migrants , a persecuted muslim minority group in burma .

a report from the reuters news service described direct military involvement in sending tens of thousands of rohingya refugees into trafficking networks .

 ( the report later won a 2013 pulitzer prize for international reporting. ) .

thailand argues that many cross - border issues , including the plight of the rohingya in thailand , involve human smuggling rather than human trafficking .

although there is a distinction ( smuggling involves illegal , but voluntary , cross - border movements ) , undocumented migrants are often vulnerable to trafficking - like exploitation by smugglers .

according to the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , over half a million "stateless" people from 40 different nationalities currently live in thailand .

ethnic minorities , who face discrimination in their home countries , often seek refuge in thailand .

the immigration controls are relatively loose , and the thai authorities have a reputation for being lenient .

recently , north korean asylum - seekers have been heading to thailand — in part because of thailand's relative tolerance , but also because of anti - refugee crackdowns in other countries .

a strong network of international humanitarian organizations exists in thailand to provide assistance to refugees .

the burmese are , by far , the largest refugee group in thailand .

in 2014 , unhcr estimated that around 120,000 burmese refugees lived in nine camps along the thai - burmese border .

about 40,000 of these were not registered with the thai government .

thailand generally has sought to accommodate these refugees .

yet successive thai governments have become increasingly frustrated with the number of asylum seekers within thailand's borders .

the camps , thai officials say , were meant to be temporary , not permanent .

the united states has tried to lessen some of the pressure on thailand , and has resettled more than 73,000 burmese in the united states since 2005 .

these programs were suspended on september 28 , 2006 , under section 508 of the foreign operations appropriations act ( p.l .

109-102 ) and resumed on february 6 , 2008 .

