the bush administration considers coal a major component of its national energy strategy.the administration anticipates a long - term reliance on coal because of its low - cost abundance.numerous issues arise when harnessing this cheap , abundant fuel source .

this report examines someof the major legislative issues related to coal in the 109th congress , including coal and energysecurity , clean air and environmental concerns , funding strategies for technology r&d , loanguarantees for coal gasification projects , and the abandoned mine land program .

energy that is available , reliable , and affordable is a focal point when discussing energysecurity concerns .

 ( 2 ) andcoal will be part of that conversation .

out of the four major fuel sources - - oil , gas , uranium , andcoal - - coal has the largest domestic reserve base , the largest share of u.s. energy production inbtus , and the smallest percent met by imports .

the energy information administration ( eia ) projects that coal imports will continue to be negligible through 2025 , while there will be a growingreliance on foreign sources for other major fuels .

in addition , coal is forecast to be the largest sourceof domestic fuel production in the foreseeable future .

coal supplies 22% of u.s. energy demand but over 50% of the energy used by the electricpower sector ( both utility and non - utility consumers ) .

the electric power sector consumes 90% ofall coal in the united states .

the remaining 10% is used in the industrial and commercial sectorsor used in coke plants .

coal use in the electric power sector has maintained a share greater than 50%for the past two decades .

the eia forecasts electricity consumption to grow by 1.9% per year through 2025 - - from3,481 billion kilowatt hours ( kwh ) to 5,220 billion kwh .

 ( 3 ) the increase in demand is largely to be met by new coal - fired ornatural gas - fired power plants .

the price of each fuel , the capital costs associated with power plantconstruction , and plant efficiencies will determine the competitiveness of each fuel source .

butbecause of limited domestic supply , natural gas supply is unlikely to keep pace with demand .

thiswill lead to increased imports , according to eia forecasts .

per - well reserve additions are expectedto continue to decline over the eia forecast period ( 2004-2025 ) .

eia further forecasts that naturalgas will not displace coal as the dominant fuel supply for power generation despite projectedincreases in liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports , additional domestic supply from the lower 48states , and alaskan natural gas from a newly constructed pipeline .

 ( 4 ) .

by mandating significant reductions in three pollutants emitted by coal - fired electricgenerating units , proposed clear skies legislation could have significant impact on coal productionand distribution , if enacted .

electric utilities are the largest users of coal , and legislation restrictingtheir emissions could affect coal markets in several ways , depending on the specifics of any finallegislation .

the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra , p.l .

95-87 ) , enacted in 1977,established reclamation standards for all coal surface mining operations and for the surface effectsof underground mining .

it also established the abandoned mine land ( aml ) program to promotethe reclamation of sites mined and abandoned prior to the enactment of smcra .

to financereclamation of abandoned mine sites , the legislation established fees on coal production .

thesecollections are divided into federal and state shares ; subject to annual appropriation , aml funds aredistributed annually to states with approved reclamation programs .

since the program's inceptionand through fy2004 , collections have totaled $7.1 billion ; appropriations from the fund have totaled$5.5 billion .

the unappropriated balance in the fund approached $1.7 billion at the end of fy2004.as of the end of fy2004 , roughly $1.1 billion of this sum is credited to the state share accounts , ofwhich nearly $430 million alone is in wyoming's account , because - - even though most of the sitesawaiting cleanup are in the eastern part of the nation - - coal production has shifted westward.consequently , the western states have been making significantly larger contributions to the fund inrecent years .

authorization for collection of aml fees was scheduled to expire at the end of fy2004 andwas extended nine months to the end of june 2005 by the consolidated appropriations act for 2005 ( p.l .

108-447 ) .

subsequently , h.r .

1268 ( p.l .

109-13 ) , a supplemental appropriationsbill for fy2005 , extended aml authorization to the end of fy2005 .

bills have been introduced inthe 109th congress to extend the authorization for fee collections and make changes to the programthat would address concerns about the mechanics of the program , the fee structure , and theunappropriated balances .

legislation reauthorizing aml was introduced in the 108th congress , but did not pass .

inaddition , congress did not adopt in its fy2005 aml appropriation an administration proposal thatwould have refunded , through a significant increase in appropriations , unobligated state balancesover a 10-year period .

in its fy2006 budget request , the administration has made virtually the sameproposal and seeks an additional $58 million to begin returning the unobligated balances .

a billadvancing the bush changes to the aml program , h.r .

2721 , was introduced may 26,2005 .

under the bush plan , unappropriated balances would be returned to states and indian tribesthat had completed reclamation of their priority 1 sites .

these states would no longer receive grantsfrom the aml fund itself , freeing up funds to be targeted to states with sites awaiting cleanup .

it isnot apparent that the administration proposal will receive a different reception in the 109th congressthan in the previous one .

another bill introduced in the 109th congress , h.r .

1600 , is similar to legislationintroduced in the 108th congress , and differs greatly in some respects from the administrationproposal .

the bill would extend authorization of the program through fy2020 , and reduce the feecollected per ton of coal production .

it would maintain the distinction between state and federalshares and would require that 50% of annual contributions be returned to states even if cleanup ofpriority abandoned mine sites had been completed .

states and tribes would be allowed to use themoney for other purposes if cleanup of aml sites had been completed .

both h.r .

2721 and h.r .

1600 would end an allocation of a portion of aml collections to the ruralabandoned mine land program , a program that has received no appropriation since 1995 .

