this report explores the legal issues raised by prescription drug importation .

although this report is intended to focus on legal analysis , policy issues are also addressed because they are closely linked .

for a more complete analysis of policy issues , see crs report rl32511 , importing prescription drugs: objectives , options , and outlook , by [author name scrubbed] .

issues associated with the risks posed by some online pharmacies and prescription drug sales over the internet will no longer be addressed in this report , but are rather addressed in crs report rs21711 , legal issues related to prescription drug sales on the internet , by [author name scrubbed] .

high prescription drug prices have increased consumer interest in purchasing less costly medications abroad by means of either commercial or personal ( consumer ) imports .

meanwhile , congressional legislators have been exploring a variety of legislative solutions to the problems posed by rising drug costs .

during the 108 th congress , the medicare prescription drug benefits bill , h.r .

1 , modified a provision of existing law that authorizes the fda to allow the importation of prescription drugs if the secretary of hhs certifies that implementing such a program is safe and reduces costs , a determination that no secretary has made in the years since a similar certification requirement was established in 2000 .

congress has used the appropriations process to insert provisions prohibiting the use of funds to restrict prescription drug importation .

most recently , p.l .

110 - 329 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , prohibited the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) from using funds to prevent individuals from transporting on their person a 90-day supply of canadian prescription drugs that comply with the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

however , few , if any , prescription drugs from canada will comply with the requirements of the ffdca because such drugs are likely to be unapproved , mislabeled , or improperly dispensed .

as a result , the provisions in these appropriations bills and the final medicare bill appear to have limited effect and ultimately did not change the law with respect to the prohibition against importing prescription drugs from canada and other foreign countries .

the debate about drug importation continues .

on the one hand , some policymakers remain opposed to allowing prescription drugs to be imported from foreign countries .

worried about the risk to consumers , these critics argue that , with its current resources and authority , the fda cannot guarantee the safety or effectiveness of such drugs , which they contend are more susceptible to being mishandled , mislabeled , unapproved , or counterfeited than drugs sold domestically .

legislators and others have also expressed concerns about the safety of imports in general and the ability of the fda to inspect increasing amounts of imported products entering the united states .

in addition , drug manufacturers and other opponents argue that allowing the importation of prescription drugs would stifle investment in the research and development of new drugs .

on the other hand , importation proponents , who claim that importation would result in an increased supply of prescription drugs that could result in significantly lower prices for u.s. consumers , say that safety concerns are overblown and would recede if additional precautions were implemented .

arguing that drug manufacturers are concerned only about their profits , proponents of importation contend that u.s. consumers should not subsidize the cost of research and development and that consumers in other countries should share the burden .

linked to the issue of prescription drug importation is a debate about drug costs .

while some comparisons of u.s. and canadian drug prices conclude that u.s. prices are higher than their canadian counterparts , other studies do not find such discrepancies .

in part , studies may vary depending on which drugs are selected for comparison and whether or not u.s. generic drugs , which tend to be cheaper than canadian brand - name and generic drugs , are considered .

in addition , there is an unresolved debate about whether allowing drug imports would affect drug prices .

supporters argue that drug prices would drop due to competition if imports were allowed , while opponents argue that increased demand for imported drugs and moves by manufacturers to limit supplies of cheaper drugs would cause prices to rise both in the u.s. and abroad and would increase the risk of counterfeit drugs being introduced into the system .

according to a study by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , "the reduction in drug spending from importation would be small," in part because of new costs associated with ensuring the safety of imported drugs and because of the likelihood that manufacturers would alter drug formulations or reduce foreign supplies .

furthermore , there are questions about how much it would cost to implement a safe drug importation program .

the fda has estimated that such a program would cost at least $100 million but that the figure could rise as high as several hundred million dollars , especially if there was an increase in the volume of imported drugs .

in response to concerns about prescription drug imports , a number of congressional legislators have introduced bills that would make changes to existing law in these areas .

bills introduced in the 110 th congress include h.r .

194 , h.r .

380 , h.r .

1218 , h.r .

2638 , h.r .

2900 , h.r .

3161 , h.r .

3580 , s. 242 , s. 251 , s. 554 , and s. 1082 .

current regulation of prescription drug importation consists of a patchwork of federal and state laws in an array of areas .

at the federal level , the fda regulates prescription drugs under the ffdca , which governs , among other things , the safety and efficacy of prescription medications , including the approval , manufacturing , and distribution of such drugs .

it is the ffdca that prohibits the importation — sometimes referred to as "reimportation" — of certain prescription drugs by anyone other than the manufacturer and that requires that prescription drugs may be dispensed only with a valid prescription .

after a change in enforcement policy by cbp , the fda assumed the primary responsibility for determining whether foreign drug imports may legally enter the country .

in addition , the drug enforcement agency ( dea ) administers the controlled substances act , which is a federal statute that establishes criminal and civil sanctions for the unlawful possession , manufacturing , or distribution of certain addictive or dangerous substances , including certain prescription drugs that share these properties , such as narcotics and opiates .

at the state level , state boards of pharmacy regulate pharmacy practice , and state medical boards oversee the practice of medicine .

thus , some of the laws that govern pharmacies and doctors vary from state to state .

finally , although foreign laws are beyond the scope of this report , it is important to note that such laws may also affect the importation of drugs from those countries .

at the federal level , the fda regulates prescription drugs under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , which governs , among other things , the safety and efficacy of prescription medications , including the approval , manufacturing , and distribution of such drugs .

although many states also have their own laws that regulate drug safety , the fda maintains primary responsibility for the premarket approval of prescription drugs , while the dea and cbp have somewhat more limited regulatory authority over such drugs .

the ffdca contains several provisions that apply to prescription drug imports .

first , the statute contains an outright prohibition that forbids anyone other than the manufacturer from importing prescription drugs .

this prohibition affects drugs originally made in the united states .

second , the ffdca contains a number of other provisions relating to drug approvals and labeling that make it nearly impossible for prescription drugs made for foreign markets to comply with the extensive statutory requirements , in part because the fda considers any drugs not made on an fda - inspected production line to be unapproved and therefore illegal .

these provisions generally affect foreign versions of drugs that are approved for domestic sale .

importation of both u.s. - manufactured prescription drugs and unapproved foreign versions of u.s. - approved prescription drugs are discussed in this next section .

that section also discusses the change in cbp policy with regard to the seizure of mail order prescription drugs , the penalties under the ffdca , the fda's personal importation procedures , state plans to import prescription drugs , and businesses that facilitate the importation of prescription drugs .

in addition , this section contains a discussion of other legal areas that may affect prescription drug importation , including antitrust law , trade law , and patent law .

the debate about importing prescription drugs continues .

although the fda maintains that it cannot guarantee the safety or effectiveness of imported drugs , many u.s. consumers , in search of affordable prices , continue to purchase and import such drugs .

as a result , legislators and interest groups have suggested a variety of changes to current law , including encouraging the development of more generic drugs ; negotiating lower drug prices through bulk purchase programs ; increasing prescription drug insurance coverage ; lowering co - pays ; allowing drug imports but restricting ports of entry ; establishing state pilot programs ; allowing only certain drugs to be imported ; educating consumers about the dangers of imported drugs ; allowing drug imports from approved canadian pharmacies only ; regulating credit card companies , search engines , and shipping companies that enable rogue online pharmacy sites to do business ; increasing the number of inspections of foreign drug manufacturers ; and utilizing anti - counterfeiting technologies , such as radio frequency identification technology ( rfid ) , for shipments of prescription drugs .

