this country has long debated how best to meet the needs of the poor .

some argue that income supplements that allow families to participate in the consumer market are the most effective and efficient means for the government to ensure that the basic needs of the poor are met .

others argue that poor people cannot effectively participate in the free market for a variety of reasons beyond income , and , as a result , society has a responsibility to provide them with the goods and services they need to survive .

the social welfare programs run by the federal government have shifted from time to time in their relative emphasis on providing cash welfare versus subsidizing the costs of goods and services .

looking at the changes in welfare and housing programs over time helps to illustrate this tension .

during and after the great depression , the government created a number of programs that provided both cash welfare and subsidized goods and services to the poor .

the social security act of 1935 offered grants to states to help fund cash aid for three groups of needy persons: children ( aid to dependent children ) , aged persons ( old - age assistance ) , and blind persons ( aid to the blind ) .

the housing act of 1937 created a federal construction program both to create jobs and to stimulate the economy , as well as to build low - cost housing for the poor .

by the late 1930s and early 1940s , the federal government was providing surplus food to the poor in select cities .

in 1964 , the food stamp program was enacted both to eliminate surplus food as well as supplement the food needs of the poor .

in 1965 , the medicaid program , which provided access to health care for the poor was created .

by the late 1960s , the children's cash welfare program ( renamed aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) ) had become the target of widespread criticism .

some argued that cash welfare programs for single mothers promoted out - of - wedlock childbirth and dependency while discouraging work .

at the same time , critics attacked federal housing programs , citing rising crime in publicly constructed housing developments and chronic fraud and abuse in their management .

in 1969 , president nixon proposed a radical change to the federal social welfare system , a guaranteed minimum income in the form of a negative income tax .

nixon's plan was not adopted , but some reforms were made to the cash welfare program .

by 1973 , nixon declared a moratorium on all federal housing construction programs .

in their place , a number of programs were developed , the largest being a system of rental subsidies which families could use in the private market .

since the 1970s , federal social welfare policies have not resolved the debate between cash and services .

instead , a hybrid of both has developed and been maintained .

the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) was created in the late 1970s and provides income supplements to working families .

market - based housing vouchers have grown to the point where more people are now served by vouchers than live in public housing .

afdc was abolished in 1996 and replaced by a state block grant called temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) .

this last change , from afdc to tanf , has been one of the most dramatic .

whereas afdc provided ongoing cash payments for poor families , tanf was designed to provide families with a temporary cash benefit while they transitioned into work .

under tanf , states have new flexibility , which , paired with a large reduction in the welfare caseload in the mid - 1990s , has made it possible for them to use their tanf funds to provide a wide range of services including child care and job - search assistance .

spending on services now accounts for a larger portion of tanf spending than does spending on cash benefit payments .

given the array of federal support for both cash aid and goods and services , questions can be raised as to whether the existing programs are well - coordinated for the purposes of effectiveness and efficiency .

this paper explores the overlapping areas of housing assistance and welfare , their areas of alignment and disconnect and proposals that have been made to encourage coordination between them .

the interaction of tanf and direct housing assistance can be assessed in two ways .

first , one can look at how the rules of the two types of programs either complement each other or conflict and the implications that may have for households who receive both benefits .

the conflict in these rules has been discussed both by housing and welfare advocates .

second , one can look at how the provision of services under one program can help further the goals of the other program , regardless of whether a family is participating in both .

both housing research and welfare research have attempted to measure the impact of these programs on family outcomes .

after observing the ways in which federal housing and welfare programs do and do not work together , possible changes may be considered to the programs to help improve their coordination .

several program changes have been considered in past congresses that may be introduced again .

these changes fall into two broad categories: adjusting program rules , and increasing the amount of housing assistance available .

because the populations that are served by hud housing assistance and welfare programs overlap , the pressure to ensure that the programs are well - coordinated will likely continue to face congress .

while several changes have been made in recent years to improve this coordination , the differences inherent in the two sets of programs , such as the high proportion of elderly and disabled households served by housing programs , the different levels of government that administer housing and welfare programs , and the costs associated with providing additional services , may make further changes difficult to enact .

