dot and dhs both have important responsibilities in promoting hazmat transportationsecurity .

presented below is a survey of illustrative dot and dhs activities .

although thisdiscussion presents each of these department's activities under separate headings , it is important toremember that they do consult with each other and seek to coordinate activities .

there are several policy issues associated with the federal role in the security of hazmattransportation .

these include concerns regarding the adequacy or impact of some federal hazmattransportation security efforts , limited inspector resources , routing , and planning and pre - notificationof shipments , and research related to security technology .

the federal role in promoting the security of hazmat transportation is evolving .

there aremany additional measures that could be taken to enhance security , but each of these poses its ownset of benefits and costs that need to be considered within the context of many policy factors , suchas alternative uses of federal and industry resources , likelihood of effectively reducing the risks fromterrorist attacks , and impacts on the operational efficiency and productivity of the surfacetransportation system .

many different approaches and measures intended to improve hazmat transportation securityare being considered .

table 2 outlines several options , some of which are interrelated and overlap,and also summarizes selected advantages and disadvantages of each .

table 2 .

options intended to enhance hazmat transportationsecurity with selected advantages and disadvantages source: congressional research servic .

although there are many opportunities to further strengthen hazmat transportation security,satisfactorily addressing all of the points of vulnerability would be extremely costly .

dependingupon the performance standards and scope of additional federal requirements , hundreds of millionsof dollars or more could be required .

and even after such investments , the hazmat transportationsystem would still be essentially an open system and not secure .

unless the costs of securityenhancement could be recaptured , many companies would be unwilling to pay for additionalinvestments in this area beyond those already implemented , especially in the absence of additionalgovernmental regulation .

furthermore , additional security checks that cause substantial delaysimpose costs on commerce .

on the other hand , those seeking additional investments in security measures to protect thepublic point out that the costs of a well placed attack on an extremely hazardous shipment ( eg , ashipment of a toxic - by - inhalation gas ) would be catastrophic .

there are many options that dhs anddot could pursue to reduce the chances of such an event .

one key challenge is to identify thoseadditional measures that are reasonable ( i.e. , cost effective ) .

the timing of future actions remainsuncertain , but some progress toward this objective is gradually being accomplished .

