social security's financing problems ... are very large and serious .

people are living longer , the first baby - boomers are nearing retirement , and the birth rate is low .

the result is that the worker - to - beneficiary ratio has fallen from 16.5-to - 1 in 1950 to 3.3-to - 1 today .

within 40 years it will be 2-to - 1 .

at this ratio there will not be enough workers to pay scheduled benefits at current tax rates .

as highlighted by the social security administration ( ssa ) , the aging of the ( united states ) population , hastened by the impending retirement of the huge baby - boom generation , has caused policy - makers to question whether the u.s. social security system can meet the demands for retirement benefits in the future .

because the current system largely pays benefits through taxes paid by current workers , the financial health of the system is sensitive to the ratio of dependents to workers — sometimes called the age dependency ratio or support ratio .

trends and projections of dependency ratios , including the relationship between both older ( years 65 and older ) and younger ( under age 20 ) dependents to the working - age population in the united states are considered in the first section of this demographic report .

next , the united states is compared to nine other nations , including the seven other members of the g8 .

in the final section , policy implications of the changing dependent - to - worker ratios are considered in the context of pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) social security systems .

this section summarizes information on trends and projections over time in the ratio of working - age persons to persons in the dependent ages in the united states for the period 1950-2080 .

 figure 3 presents statistics on the number of older persons supported per 100 persons of working age in 2002 in 10 countries .

eight of the countries are members of the g8 , a consultative grouping of leading industrial democracies: canada , france , germany , italy , japan , russia , the united kingdom , and the united states .

in addition , china and india , the two most populous countries globally , are included to highlight that population aging is occurring even in nations that are less industrialized and have "younger" current age structures .

of the 10 countries included in the comparison , italy ranked first , with japan close behind , in terms of the number of older persons being supported per 100 workers in 2002 — 29.6 and 29.5 , respectively .

among the g8 countries , canada and the united states were tied for last place at 20.8 older persons per 100 persons of working age — indicating that the canadian and american "burdens" are less than those of the other g8 countries .

not coincidentally , the proportions of their population aged 65 and older — 13% and 12% respectively in 2000 — are also the lowest of the g8 nations .

in india , with its young age structure , there were only 9.0 older persons per 100 persons of working age .

the total age dependency ratio ( not shown in graph ) is , however , greatest for india among the 10 countries — there are 90.5 dependents ( mostly children ) per 100 persons of working age .

figure 3 also highlights that population aging is a global phenomena — the number of older dependents per 100 persons of working age is projected to increase through 2025 in all 10 of the countries considered here .

the projected increase in japan , where the ratio will reach 51.1 , is especially notable .

italy and germany will each have over 40 older dependents per 100 persons of working age .

increases are also expected in both china and india .

in fact , the old - age dependency ratio in 2025 in china will exceed the level observed in the united states , canada , and russia today .

figure 4 shows the number of child dependents per 100 persons of working ages .

india had the highest child dependency ratio in 2002 at 81.5 .

of the g8 countries considered , the united states was the leader , largely reflecting the fact that the american fertility rate , while currently hovering around the replacement level , has not fallen as far as in the other g8 nations .

for instance , the total fertility rate in italy was 1.2 in 2002 compared to 2.1 in the united states in the same year .

the estimates for india and china , and to a lesser extent the russian federation , are also affected by differential ( higher ) rates of infant and childhood mortality .

unlike the increasing old - age dependency ratios highlighted in figure 3 , the child dependency ratios are projected to fall through 2025 in most of the countries considered .

the notable exception is the united states where it is projected that there will be 47.4 child dependents in 2025 , as there had been in 2002 .

in summary , population aging , which results primarily from declining fertility rates and increasing survival , is a global phenomenon .

today , the united states is the "youngest" of the industrialized g8 nations .

while the proportion of the u.s. population that is aged 65 and older will continue to increase , aging in the united states is still projected to be considerably slower than in any of the other industrialized countries .

in addition to reflecting the fact that the american fertility rate , which is currently hovering around the replacement level , has not fallen ( nor is it projected to ) as far as the other g8 nations , the "u.s. is leading the way in adapting to the changing balance ... by encouraging immigration. .

the ssa estimates that net legal immigration and net other immigration were about 675,000 persons and 400,000 persons , respectively , in 2005 .

for its future projections , ssa assumes the total level of net immigration ( legal and other , combined ) under the intermediate projection to be 1 million persons annually in the 2010s , 950,000 annually in the 2020s , and 900,000 annually in 2030 and each year thereafter through 2080 .

while these comparatively high levels of immigration differentiate the united states from the other g8 nations , they have a small effect on the median age of u.s. residents and on the total dependency ratio as immigrants are mostly young people who have children ( and also higher fertility rates than the u.s. - born population ) .

immigration nudges the worker - elderly ratio a little higher , meaning that there are more people of working age per person age 65 or older .

the more dramatic effect , however , is at the younger ages .

immigration after 2000 is projected to add about 15 million more children under age 18 than there would be without any post - 2000 immigration .

continued immigration will lower the worker - child ratio and increase the child component of the dependency ratio .

most western industrialized nations , including the united states , have systems in place providing significant social security benefits , and virtually all of these plans originated with pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) or quasi - paygo funding schemes .

in the united states , payroll or self - employment tax contributions by current workers ( and their employers ) are transferred to current beneficiaries .

the majority of social security taxes paid by today's workers are not put into a special account to pay for their future benefits .

rather , they are used to pay benefits for persons receiving benefits today , just as the future benefits for today's workers will be paid by future generations of workers .

in general , a low ratio of retirees to workers ( the system's old age dependency ratio ) and a high rate of productivity and real wages would permit a paygo social security system with high benefits or low contributions .

advantages of government - sponsored paygo schemes relative to fully funded systems include the following: the entire working population can be covered relatively easily .

the benefits can serve as social insurance against the ( income ) risks associated with old - age and disability .

benefits can be immediately vested and are fully portable , an important feature for a mobile work force .

administrative costs are usually very low .

given these advantages , paygo systems looked very attractive in the immediate post - world war ii years .

projections of labor force growth , coupled with forecasts of real wage growth , implied a potential total annual return near 5% for a fully mature paygo system .

in contrast , the common view of a funded system involved investing contributions in government securities with a return of 1% or less .

in the aftermath of the great depression , the market for equities seemed far too risky , and many countries lacked private bond markets .

furthermore , most countries instituting a new pension system were unwilling to delay initial benefit payments for several decades , as would have been required under a funded system .

there was a desire to address the immediate problem of high poverty among the elderly , and most countries provided benefits to an older generation of workers which had not contributed fully to the system .

also , to many at that time , a high rate of population growth ( and subsequent work force growth ) seemed inevitable , in which case pay - as - you - go seemed a good way to finance an old age pension program .

the current outlook is much different .

birth rates have fallen considerably while the life expectancy at the older ages has increased significantly , resulting in less favorable old - age dependency ratios ( as shown in figures 1 and 2 ) .

while the old - age dependency ratio had already been increasing since 1950 , the upcoming retirement of the baby - boom generation will accelerate the rate at which it grows .

however , even after the youngest of the baby - boom generation has passed away , the number of older dependents per 100 persons of working age will still continue to increase , albeit at a slower pace than will be experienced during the years in which the baby boomers retire .

concurrent with these demographic trends , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that federal spending for social security , adjusted for inflation , will rise substantially — from $483 billion in 2003 to $2.5 trillion in 2075 .

the projected rise in social security spending is due , in part , to the demographics of an aging society ; cbo estimates that approximately 55% of the higher spending is due to the expected increase in the number of beneficiaries , as the number of new claimants grows and as life expectancy rises .

the remaining 45% of the rise is due to a projected increase in the real value of social security benefit checks .

specifically , they note that , under rules put into effect in 1979 , benefits of newly eligible recipients are based on a formula and earnings records that are adjusted for wage growth .

those adjustments , referred to as wage indexing , are designed to keep the ratio of initial benefits to pre - retirement earnings — that is , replacement rates — approximately the same from one generation of new recipients to the next .

wages tend to rise along with productivity in the economy , at a faster pace than prices and , over the long run , a system pegged to wage growth will gradually afford greater purchasing power .

as both cbo and the government accountability office ( gao ) are warning , current spending policies are likely to be unsustainable .

the policy implication is that , unless there are large offsetting productivity gains in the u.s. economy , contribution rates by current workers ( eg , tax rates ) must markedly rise or benefit levels must fall under social security's paygo system .

alternatively , the structure of the underlying paygo system could be modified such that part or all of the scheme is fully funded .

this , however , raises the same issues that caused most countries to originally select paygo systems: reduction of ( investment ) risk and the need to pay benefits for the current generation of beneficiaries .

