japan and the united states are among the world's largest economic powers .

together they account for over 30% of world domestic product ( 2012 estimate ) .

this economic clout makes the united states and japan powerful forces that influence each other's economies and those of other countries .

economic conditions in the united states and japan also have a significant impact on the rest of the world .

furthermore , the u.s. - japan bilateral economic relationship itself can influence economic conditions in other countries .

the two countries remain very important economic partners , accounting for significant shares of each other's foreign trade and investment , even though their relative significance has declined .

the global financial crisis and economic downturn added another dimension to the relationship as the two countries have grappled with the severe impact of the crisis on their respective economies and simultaneously have worked with their partners in the g - 20 to coordinate a multilateral response .

the impact of the march 11 , 2011 , earthquake and subsequent tsunami and nuclear plant accidents in northern japan added still another factor to the bilateral economic relationship .

the u.s. - japan economic relationship is important to u.s. national interests and to the u.s. congress .

it has been the subject of oversight hearings and trade legislation , and congress plays a critical role in shaping u.s. economic policy toward japan .

the united states and japan have taken perhaps the most important step in years in forging a closer economic relationship .

after many months of internal political debate and changes in political leadership , japan expressed interest on march 15 , 2013 , in joining the negotiations to establish the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade agreement to which the united states is a party .

on april 12 , after a series of informal bilateral discussions with japan , the obama administration stated that it would support japan's participation in the tpp and , with the other 10 tpp participants , it invited japan to join .

on july 23 , 2013 , japan formally became a tpp participant .

congress must approve a tpp trade agreement in which the united states is a party before any u.s. commitments could enter into force .

to help the 113 th congress in fulfilling these and other responsibilities regarding u.s. - japan economic relations , this report explores the significance and state of u.s. - japan economic ties , major issues in the relationship , and the possible options for managing the relationship .

the u.s. and japanese economies remain closely intertwined through trade and capital flows .

many argue that u.s. and japanese political leaders have not always given the u.s. - japan relationship the priority commensurate with its economic importance ; nevertheless , the data and other indicators suggest that the relationship bears attention .

by necessity , the united states and japan have long given their bilateral economic relationship high priority .

for japan the importance of the relationship has been rooted in the emergence of the united states as the world's largest economic power ; japan's dependence on the united states for national security , especially during the cold war ; the dependence of japanese manufacturing industries — autos , consumer electronics , and others — on exports to the united states ; and the reliance of reform - minded japanese political leaders on u.s. pressure , gaiatsu , to press for economic reforms in a political system that strongly protects the status quo .

for the united states , the significance of the economic relationship with japan has been grounded in its reliance on japan as a critical ally ; the emergence of japan in the post - world war ii period as an economic power in east asia and , until recently , the second - largest economy ( now the third - largest economy ) in the world ; the advancing competition from japanese manufacturers in industries , for example autos and steel and high tech industries , including semiconductors and computers , which employ large numbers of u.s. workers ; the rising trade deficits with japan ; japan's emergence as a major source of investment in the united states ; and japanese government policies that have protected vulnerable sectors and assisted exporters , often at the expense of u.s. competitors .

for many years , the bilateral economic relationship was the centerpiece of u.s. and japanese foreign economic agendas , and japanese trade strongly influenced the making of overall u.s. trade policy .

many scholarly and popular books and journals were written on the subject .

one reason for the shift in priorities may be the rise of china as a trade power .

since 2000 , the u.s. bilateral trade deficit with china has exceeded the deficit with japan , and the gap between the two deficits continues to grow .

in 2013 , the u.s. trade deficit with japan was $73.4 billion ; the deficit with china was $318.4 billion .

the growing deficit with china has induced u.s. policymakers to address chinese actions and policies that u.s. companies have asserted are unfair .

these include barriers to u.s. exports , inadequate protection of intellectual property rights , an arguably undervalued exchange rate , and sales of products in the united states at less than fair value .

also , the relative economic decline of japan and its economic problems has meant that japan is not viewed as much as the "competitive threat" that it once was in the 1980s and early 1990s .

for japan , china has emerged both as a major economic competitor and partner in the region requiring more attention .

other possible reasons for the shift in policy priorities might include the following: foreign policy and national security concerns , for example , the increasing instability on the korean peninsula caused by north korea's nuclear ambitions and the territorial disputes with china , have tended to trump commercial concerns in u.s. - japan alliance matters .

the establishment in 1995 of the world trade organization ( wto ) and a restructured dispute settlement body has lessened the scope for u.s. unilateral trade pressures to open japan's market further .

the united states and japan have been forging economic relations with other countries and regions through free trade agreements ( ftas ) , which have reduced the focus on their own bilateral relations .

although the relative significance of the u.s. - japan economic relationship has been diminished somewhat with the rise of china and other emerging economic powers and japan's stagnant economic performance , it remains important to the respective companies and the asia - pacific region as a whole .

as japan and the united states continue to manage their economic relationship , they have several options on how to deepen the relationship .

these options are not necessarily mutually exclusive but could be employed more or less in tandem .

the tpp issue presents opportunities and challenges for the united states and japan .

on the one hand , if successful , it could reinvigorate an economic relationship that has remained steady but stagnant , by forcing the two countries to address long - standing , difficult issues , and allowing them to raise their relationship to a higher level .

on the other hand , failure to do so could indicate that the underlying problems are too fundamental to overcome and could set back the relationship .

it could signify the failure of the united states and / or japan to deal with domestic opposition to a more open trade relationship .

with or without the tpp , the united states and japan could continue to use the wto and its dispute settlement mechanism to resolve issues that come under the wto's aegis .

this option could help to promote stability in the bilateral relationship by containing political friction like that which erupted in the 1980s and 1990s .

in addition , it could lessen the perception that many japanese have had that the united states was acting unilaterally in making its demands on japan to open up its markets and in threatening to limit market access to japanese exporters in retaliation .

the wto provides at the least the semblance of neutrality where both countries could anticipate impartial treatment by their peers .

a potentially major constraint on the use of this option is the limited scope of the wto's coverage and also the lack of progress in the dda negotiations .

a number of long - standing issues in u.s. - japan economic ties pertain to competition policy , that is , how governments use their authority to ensure fair competition among producers .

in addition , except for the completion of the agreement on trade facilitation , the failure of the wto members , to complete the dda round of negotiations may indicate the inability of the 159-member body to expand its coverage , constraining its future relevance .

nevertheless , the united states and japan might continue to use the wto process to resolve those issues that come under its purview .

a second option would be to discuss economic ties through a special framework and / or sector - specific agreements .

these frameworks allow each country to raise and negotiate on issues that are not subject to international rules , such as regulatory policies and competition policies , but nevertheless have caused problems in the bilateral relationship .

in addition , they provide a forum for officials to address issues before they emerge as full - fledged disputes .

however , the record with respect to special frameworks , such as the market - oriented sector - selective ( moss ) talks , and the structural impediments initiative ( sii ) ( see appendix ) is mixed .

while the united states and japan have achieved some successes , a number of issues seem to have lingered over the years , such as government regulatory practices .

similarly , the record of sector - specific discussions , such as on autos and auto parts trade and construction services , reflects only partial success .

the current economic harmonization initiative ( ehi ) appears dormant for the time - being , and its relevance may be overtaken if japan joins the tpp .

for the united states and japan , managing their economic relationship has meant cooperating in areas of mutual agreement and addressing problems in a manner that meets the national interest of each country while maintaining the integrity of the alliance .

while the two countries have succeeded in doing this , by and large , trade frictions became heated at times , making relations difficult .

the united states dominated the economic relationship with japan for many years after world war ii .

the united states was by far the largest economy in the world , and japan was dependent on the united states for national security .

the united states set the agenda , and the issues on the agenda were driven by the u.s. demands for japan to reform its economic and trade policies , eliminate industrial policies , and boost domestic consumption .

sometimes these efforts led u.s. policymakers to force japan to curb exports of certain products , such as cars , to the united states and / or to remove barriers to u.s. exports and investment .

until recently , the united states and japan , largely at the initiative of the united states , had used special bilateral frameworks and agreements to conduct their government - to - government economic relations .

some of these mechanisms were designed to address trade and investment barriers in japan that were product - specific — for example , semiconductors and autos — and others were designed to address "generic" barriers that affected many sectors , such as the japanese retail distribution system .

the reagan administration introduced the first multi - sector negotiating framework — the market - oriented sector - specific ( moss ) talks — with japan in march 1985 .

the process resulted from discussions between president reagan and prime minister nakasone to find a way to deal with trade issues that had been clouding the relationship for some time .

the initial set of negotiations covered four sectors: telecommunications ; medical equipment and pharmaceuticals ; forestry products ; and electronics .

the two countries added auto parts later .

the sectors were selected because of the potential for u.s. companies to increase exports to the japanese market if the barriers were removed .

they were also sectors in which multiple japanese government barriers to imports existed .

the united states and japan reached agreement in all of the moss sectors .

a 1988 general accounting office ( gao ) study concluded that u.s. exports in each of the selected sectors except auto parts increased , but that improved market access does not necessarily guarantee huge increases in exports .

macroeconomic trends and other factors also play a role that could trump market access .

in march 1989 , president george h. w. bush with prime minister uno launched the structural impediments initiative ( sii ) that targeted a broad range of japanese macroeconomic policies and practices and structural factors that served as nontariff trade barriers and that prevented u.s. exporters and investors from penetrating or increasing their presence in the japanese market .

the sii was a pioneering effort in that u.s. negotiators targeted japanese barriers that were cited by not only american exporters and investors , but also by japanese academics , business leaders , and politicians .

in so doing , the u.s. side sought to increase the possibility of a successful outcome if it had a domestic constituency in japan that would be working to achieve the same goal .

in addition , the targeted policies and practices were ones that were fundamental to japanese economic life and had not been subject to bilateral negotiation .

these targets were japan's high savings - low investment imbalance , to which many economists attribute its perennial current account surpluses ; the japanese retail distribution system , particularly its large - retail store law that favored small "mom and pop" enterprises at the expense of larger operations , such as toys r us ; land use policies that inhibited the market entry of new firms and kept land prices high ; the keiretsu business conglomerates that both japanese and u.s. experts blamed as a barrier to the entry of new japanese and foreign firms to the japanese market ; exclusionary business practices , such as the formation of cartels to limit competition ; and business pricing practices under which japanese companies would sell products at a premium in japan so that they could undersell their competitors in the u.s. market .

the sii also included u.s. policies and practices , such as the low u.s. savings rate , which japanese negotiators asserted was a cause of u.s. trade deficits .

this element was an attempt to make the format more balanced .

however , it was generally understood that the real focus of the sii was japanese barriers .

the sii process operated throughout the four years of the george h. w. bush administration .

u.s. and japanese negotiators met periodically and reported annually on progress made in resolving the offensive policies and practices .

the results of the sii process are mixed .

on the one hand , it focused attention of policymakers of both sides on fundamental causes of problems that cut across many sectors and economic activities .

the sii is also credited with placing enough pressure on japan to change its large - retail store law .

some observers also argued that by selecting policies and practices that many japanese themselves wanted changed , the united states lessened the unilateral thrust of previous negotiations .

on the other hand , many of the problems that had plagued the u.s. - japan relationship before the sii remain , such as the trade imbalances .

the clinton administration negotiated its own bilateral framework with japan .

the "united states - japan framework for a new economic partnership" borrowed elements from the moss and the sii processes by including some sector - specific goals along with overall structural and macroeconomic issues .

these goals were included in five "baskets. .

this framework departed from the others in several important ways .

it obligated the president and the prime minister to meet at least twice a year to review progress under the framework .

at the insistence of the clinton administration , "objective criteria" were to use to determine whether japan was fulfilling its obligations under the framework .

this element proved highly controversial , and the two countries never agreed on the role the "objective criteria" would play or , for that matter , what they would be .

the united states argued the criteria were to be targets japan was to meet while japan did not want to be bound by such criteria and argued that the criteria were to be guidelines .

the differences over "objective criteria" reached the summit level and strained u.s. - japan relations .

the united states and japan reached agreements in most of the areas , including medical equipment procurement , intellectual property rights protection , financial services , insurance , and flat glass , among others , but not without some acrimony .

for example , the united states was on the brink of imposing tariff - sanctions on japan , and both countries were poised to take one another to the wto before they reached agreement on japanese imports of autos and auto parts .

u.s. - japanese trade friction reached its peak during the period of that framework that roughly corresponds to the first clinton administration .

the friction was due in part to the long - running frustration that u.s. exporters and investors were experiencing with the same obstacles that previous agreements were supposed to have addressed .

the "results - oriented" strategy was intended to provide a clear indicator of whether japan had removed the barriers .

but japan resisted such objective indicators , because , it argued , the problems in u.s. - japan trade stemmed from private sector practices and not government policies .

the framework raised the issues to the summit level to ensure that both sides took the issues seriously .

by doing so , however , the framework increased the risk that failure to achieve results would sour the entire relationship .

with the completion of the auto and auto parts agreement in 1995 , most trade issues in the framework had been completed .

the clinton administration closed the books on the framework .

in its place , it got japan to agree in june 1997 to another , more loosely shaped format , the enhanced initiative on deregulation and competition policy ( the enhanced initiative ) .

this format did not have the results - oriented elements of the previous framework .

it was a mechanism for exchanging views on some of the fundamental aspects of the japanese economy that limited competition and were likely preventing japan from emerging from the economic malaise that had set in .

these issues had not received as much attention in previous negotiations .

the united states focused on getting japan to change regulations and competition policies affecting telecommunications , medical devices and pharmaceuticals , and financial services , as well as more generic issues such as competition policy and regulation transparency .

on june 30 , 2001 , president bush and then - prime minister koizumi announced the formation of the "u.s. - japan economic partnership for growth" ( the economic partnership ) .

in so doing , the bush administration continued a tradition of creating special frameworks as mechanisms for discussing bilateral economic issues with japan , a unique approach in u.s. trade policy .

the enhanced initiative marked a turning point in the overall u.s. - japan relationship as economic relations became less prominent .

while negotiators continued to meet to exchange views and monitor progress under the initiative and previous agreements , the issues did not have the importance at the summit level they once had .

national security issues had become more dominant in the bilateral relationship .

the economic partnership consisted of several initiatives or dialogues to include participation from subcabinet - level leaders from both governments and participation from members of the business communities and other nongovernment sectors from both countries .

the u.s. - japan subcabinet economic dialogue provided overall direction for the economic partnership .

other elements of the economic partnership included the regulatory reform and competition policy initiative ( with working groups on telecommunications , information technologies , energy , and medical devices and pharmaceuticals , plus a cross - sectoral working group ) ; the financial dialogue , which examined such issues as banking reform ; the investment initiative , which discussed requirements to improve the investment climate in japan ; and the trade forum , which operated to resolve sector - specific trade issues , to catch potential problems before they got worse , and to monitor sector - specific agreements already in effect .

each one of these elements contributed to an annual report to the president and the prime minister in which participants record progress and make recommendations for the coming year .

in november 2010 , president obama and then - prime minister kan established the united states - japan economic harmonization initiative ( ehi ) , a framework similar to its predecessors , to discuss these complex issues .

in 2011 under the ehi , the two sides held several working - level and ad hoc meetings and a high - level meeting at the deputy ustr / deputy minister for foreign affairs level .

no meetings under the ehi have taken place since 2011as the tpp has become the de facto framework for addressing bilateral trade issues .

in addition , the united states and japan are using the dispute settlement mechanism in the world trade organization ( wto ) more frequently to resolve bilateral issues .

in so doing , the united states and japan have helped to depoliticize their trade disagreements , leaving it to panel members selected from trading partner nations to adjudicate the disputes .

furthermore , the wto has provided a forum in which japan has felt comfortable challenging u.s. trade practices .

increased reliance on the wto has reflected a major shift in japan's strategy in dealing with the united states in trade .

in 1995 , japan filed a dispute with the wto as a counter - complaint against a u.s. complaint against japan on the sale of autos and auto parts ( discussed above ) .

the two countries reached a resolution outside the wto , but it was the first time that japan had challenged the united states rather than acceding to u.s. demands .

japan was emboldened to shift its strategy in 1997 when the wto ruled against the united states on its complaint against japan regarding the marketing of kodak and fuji film in japan .

