on november 15 , 2002 , secretary of defense donald rumsfeld issued a memorandum tosenior staff regarding the implementation of the new base realignment and closure ( brac ) roundauthorized by congress in 2001 .

 ( 2 ) he emphasized that , as part of the department of defense'stransformation initiative , "new force structures must be accompanied by a new base structure," andadded that "brac 2005 should be the means by which we reconfigure our current infrastructure[bases] into one in which operational capacity maximizes both war fighting capability andefficiency. .

 ( 3 ) he , then,directed that the process begin immediately .

it was , in effect , the formal launching of dod's 2005base closure implementation process .

 ( 4 ) the secretary of defense also revealed in his memo a particularly important brac 2005objective , namely examining and implementing opportunities for greater joint activity as a meansof achieving a more efficient base structure .

he explained that prior brac rounds had analyzedfunctions on a unique service - to - service approach and , therefore , did not benefit from jointexamination of functions that cross services .

it would appear , for example , that dod's network ofresearch laboratories , medical facilities , maintenance depots , and testing and evaluation facilities willbecome prime candidates for consolidation in the next round .

in respect to the selection process , secretary rumsfeld declared that dod would not makeany binding closure or realignment decisions prior to the submission of its final recommendationsto the new brac commission in may 2005 .

it should be noted , however , that his statement leftopen the possibility ( if not likelihood ) of dod conducting internal , non - binding deliberations .

to underscore the importance of the new brac round , secretary rumsfeld has created twooffice of the secretary of defense - level groups to oversee and operate the brac 2005 process .

first of these is the infrastructure executive council ( iec ) , chaired by the deputy secretary .

itserves as the policy - making and oversight body for the entire process .

the second , subordinategroup is the infrastructure steering group ( isg ) , chaired by the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , testing , and logistics ) .

it will be responsible for the detailed direction necessary toconduct the brac 2005 analyses .

 ( 5 ) .

in implementing the 2005 round , dod's first three requirements are ( 1 ) to develop a forcestructure plan , ( 2 ) to conduct a comprehensive inventory of military installations , and ( 3 ) toestablish criteria for selecting bases for closure or realignment .

in mid - january 2003 , two senior members of the house armed services committee ( representative gene taylor and representative joel hefley ) expressed the desire to either changeor repeal the new base closure law ( p.l .

107-107 ) .

 ( 6 ) several months later , on may 6 , representative hefley , chairmanof the house armed services readiness subcommittee , announced he would be receptive to apostponement , but would not offer an amendment .

 ( 7 ) on may 9 , 2003 , the readiness subcommittee approved its part of the defense authorizationbill ( h.r .

1588 ) , in which it adopted an amendment by representative taylor to repealthe 2005 round .

a few days later , however , the full house armed services committee voted torestore the 2005 closings .

the chairman , representative duncan hunter , argued that killing thebase - closing round would only lead to a veto by the president and make the committeeirrelevant .

 ( 8 ) on may 21 , 2003 , the white house threatened to veto any bill if it included languagedelaying or cancelling dod's ability to conduct another round of closures .

 ( 9 ) on may 22 , 2003 , the house passed its defense authorization bill , including a provision thatwould exempt half of domestic bases from being closed .

the bill , also , would require thedepartment of defense to maintain a sufficient number of bases to handle a surge in military forcesin the event of a future crisis .

in final conference action in early november 2003 , the "exemption"initiative failed , while the "surge" initiative succeeded ( h.rept .

108-354 ) .

 ( 10 ) also , on may 22 , 2003 , the senate passed its defense bill ( s. 1050 ) .

it did notcontain any significant domestic base closure language , but did provide authority to create acommission to review overseas bases .

in later conference action , however , the overseas basesinitiative was dropped .

 ( 11 ) the issue , nevertheless , remained alive .

on november 4 , 2003,the military construction appropriations act for fy2004 ( section 128 ) provided for a commissionof eight members to review overseas bases .

it further stipulated that appointment of the membersmust be made no later than 45 days after enactment of the act .

 ( 12 ) on june 4 , 2003 , senator byron dorgan offered an amendment to repeal the authority for anew base closure round in 2005 .

he said he could not think of a worse time to consider such a step .

senator trent lott , a co - sponsor of the amendment , concurred .

he explained that "at this time , wehave not properly assessed our needs .

we are at war .

it sends a terrible signal , and it is bad for theeconomy. .

he later suggested that , perhaps , delaying the next round to 2006 might be worthconsidering. .

 ( 13 ) inopposition , senator saxby chambliss said that "putting off the brac 2005 round now will onlyprolong the anxiety in our communities surrounding our military installations. .

 ( 14 ) in the final vote , theamendment was defeated 42 to 53 - - a margin that many might regard as surprisingly close .

in contrast , letters sent to the committees by pentagon officials strenuously argued that dodwas overburdened with an infrastructure that was simply no longer needed to support the size of theu.s .

forces .

the secretary of defense stressed that "brac provides the opportunity to configureour infrastructure to maximize capability and efficiency. .

 ( 15 ) on july 1 , 2003 , dod officials issued a memo reorganizing its installations and environmentoffice in anticipation of the impending 2005 base realignment and closure round .

it created a newbrac directorate that would identify which bases to eliminate .

in the past , dod has acceded tothe individual services' recommendations on closures .

in the new round , it appears the office of thesecretary of defense is poised to exercise a much greater degree of control .

 ( 16 ) the house defense appropriations bill for 2004 included a provision that would closeroosevelt roads naval station , puerto rico's largest employer .

several members of congressinsisted that without the live - fire bombing range on vieques island , there was little military valuein retaining the military base .

 ( 17 ) the senate's appropriations bill did not contain language forclosing the base .

under section 8132 of the department of defense appropriations act for fy2004 ( p.l.108-87 ) , the secretary of the navy was directed to close the naval station roosevelt roads not laterthan six months after its enactment , which occurred on september 30 , 2003 .

virtually all themilitary activity at the naval station has ceased , and military units and functions have beentransferred to other installations located in the southeastern continental united states .

the act also required that the closure be carried out in accordance with the procedures andauthorities contained in the relevant defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 , ascurrently amended .

on december 23 , 2003 , the pentagon issued its initial criteria for selecting bases for closureand realignment , sending it to the federal register for public comment as required by law .

 ( 18 ) dod stated that it wouldtake into consideration military installations' current and future capabilities , cost and manpower,location availability , economic impact on communities , ability to support personnel , andenvironmental impact .

in addition , the president was required to certify that there was need for anew brac round and that there would be an annual net savings by the end of fy2011 .

on august 16 , 2004 , the president announced that the pentagon would redistribute itsoverseas bases as a means of achieving a more agile and flexible force .

the initiative , as part of aglobal posture review , came after three years of study and consultation .

in his statement , thepresident made it clear he would retain a significant military presence overseas , but that he alsointended to bring home about 60,000 to 70,000 uniformed personnel and about 100,000 familymembers and civilian employees over the next ten years .

 ( 44 ) opponents of the 2005 base realignment and closure plan have seized on the president'sannouncement , arguing that roughly one - third of the soldiers overseas will be returning home andthat , given the circumstances , it would be premature to close domestic facilities .

key members ofcongress , most notably senators kay bailey hutchison and dianne feinstein ( chair and rankingmember of the senate appropriations' subcommittee on military construction ) , expressed theirconcerns in this regard .

on april 8 , 2003 , these two senators sponsored a bill ( s. 949 ) to create abipartisan overseas basing commission ( obc ) .

 ( 45 ) its purpose was "to assess the adequacy of the u.s. militaryfootprint overseas , consider the feasibility and advisability of closing any current u.s. installations,and provide to congress recommendations for a comprehensive overseas basing strategy that meetsthe current and projected needs of the united states. .

 ( 46 ) on april 29 , 2003 , the sponsors explained: "if we reduce our overseas presence , we needstatewide bases to station returning troops .

it is senseless to close bases on u.s. soil in 2005 onlyto determine a few years later that we made a costly , irrevocable mistake. .

 ( 47 ) the two members ofcongress also said that the new commission would last for one year , include eight congressionallyappointed members , and be completed for the opening of the 2005 brac process .

 ( 48 ) in a july 10 , 2003 statement , the white house threatened not to cooperate with an overseasbasing commission , saying that it was already looking at current and future force structure andbasing needs .

a congressional commission looking over dod's shoulders , it argued , wasunnecessary .

in spite of white house opposition , however , the obc became law when presidentgeorge bush signed the fiscal year 2004 military construction appropriations act on november22 , 2003 ( p.l .

108-132 ) .

the overseas basing commission was originally scheduled to report its findings bydecember 31 , 2004 .

as a result of delays in forming the obc , its deadline was extended to august31 , 2005 - - with a preliminary draft issued by the end of march .

on november 9 , 2004 , the obc held a hearing in which john hamre , former deputysecretary of defense , said that dod had not thought enough about how realigning forces abroadcould be used strategically to shape the international environment in the coming decades .

he notedthat the kinds of changes to the u.s. military posture dod was contemplating at this time weredriven primarily by operational expediency , rather than strategy .

"the problem," he emphasized , "isthat in order to be sustainable over the long - term , u.s. bases overseas must be part of an overallpolitical , diplomatic , and strategic framework. .

he did not feel that the administration hadestablished "an enduring framework for the new bases dod was contemplating. .

 ( 49 ) six months later , on may 5 , 2005 , the obc unveiled its preliminary report regarding thepentagon's global basing plans .

according to early press accounts , the commission is concerned thatthe pentagon is pursuing global change too rapidly , and that it is providing insufficient support inseveral other important aspects: such as adequate airlift and sealift , the need for heavy forces ineurope , and "quality of life" issues .

 ( 50 ) .

the timeline below identifies the key actions involving the 2005 base closure andrealignment round .

the most important decisions are those of the president and congress , whichhave the opportunity , in each of two cases , to completely shut down the overall brac process ( seebold text ) .

table 3 .

the 2005 brac timelin .

