u.s. support for plan colombia began in 2000 , when congress passed legislation providing$1.3 billion in interdiction and development assistance ( p.l .

106-246 ) for colombia and six regionalneighbors .

 ( 2 ) funding foraci from fy2000 through fy2004 totals $3.5 billion .

for fy2005 , congress appropriated anadditional $731 million .

aci is managed by the state department's bureau of international narcoticscontrol and law enforcement affairs ( incle ) .

the objectives are to eliminate the cultivation andproduction of cocaine and opium , build andean law enforcement infrastructure , arrest and prosecutetraffickers , and seize their assets .

the countries considered a part of the aci include bolivia , brazil,colombia , ecuador , panama , peru and venezuela , ( 3 ) with most funding allocated for programs in colombia .

funds aredivided between programs that support eradication and interdiction efforts , as well as those focusedon alternative crop development and democratic institution building .

on the interdiction side,programs train and support national police and military forces , provide communications andintelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host country aerial eradicationaircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities .

on the alternativedevelopment side , funds support development programs in coca growing areas , includinginfrastructure development , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops .

it alsoincludes assisting internally displaced persons , promoting the rule of law , and expanding judicialcapabilities .

incle also manages the interregional aviation support program , referred to as the airwing , that operates a fleet of 164 fixed - and rotary - wing aircraft supporting overflight drug cropimagery and aerial eradication programs in colombia , bolivia , and peru .

fy2005 funding isestimated at $70 million , of which approximately $45 million was allocated for programs in theandean region .

the request for fy2005 maintained funding at $70 million , of which approximately$45 million is proposed for colombia .

aci also funds the air bridge denial program that iscurrently operational in colombia , and temporarily suspended in peru , after an accidental shootingdown of a civilian aircraft carrying u.s. missionaries in 2001 .

after the incident , in which twoamericans died , the program in both countries was suspended until enhanced safeguards weredeveloped .

the program in colombia resumed in august 2003 .

the program supports an aircraftfleet , pilot training , and logistical and intelligence support .

the program tracks aircraft suspectedof being involved in drug trafficking , and forces them to land for inspection .

if the aircraft isrepeatedly unresponsive , it may be shot down , at the direction of the commander of the colombianair force .

the resumption of a program in peru is still pending the development of safetyenhancements .

the fy2005 request was for $21 million , and congress approved $11.2 million .

the andean counterdrug initiative was designed to provide assistance to seven countries inthe broadly defined andean region: bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , andvenezuela .

the region is important to the united states because it includes three major drugproducing countries ( colombia , bolivia , and peru ) where virtually all the world's cocaine andsignificant quantities of high quality heroin destined for the united states are produced .

it alsoincludes two major oil producing countries ( venezuela and ecuador ) , members of the organizationof petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , which supply significant quantities of oil to the unitedstates .

while the seven countries have diverse trading relationships , the united states is the majortrading partner for all of them .

for the five traditional andean countries ( colombia , venezuela,ecuador , peru , and bolivia ) , the andes mountain range that runs through south america posesgeographical obstacles to intra - state and inter - state integration , but the countries are linked togetherin the andean community economic integration pact .

the aci countries are some of the mostheavily populated in latin america , including first ( brazil ) , third ( colombia ) , fifth ( peru ) , sixth ( venezuela ) and eighth ( ecuador ) most populous .

although colombia and venezuela have largelyeuropean - indian mixed race ( mestizo ) populations , bolivia , peru , and ecuador have significantindigenous populations .

 ( see appendices at the end of this report for funding tables. ) .

figure 1 .

andean counterdrug initiative countrie .

 table 1 .

fy2003 andean counterdrug initiative and relatedprograms ; allocations by purpose and functional account ( $ millions ) source: u.s. state department , congressional budget justifications , foreign operations fiscalyear 2004 , fiscal year 2005 .

prepared by crs , march 29 , 2004. a. aci is managed by the state department's bureau on international narcotics control and lawenforcement .

b .

includes supplemental funding of $54 million: $34 million for aci and $20 million from fmf,which could be transferred to aci .

in addition , the administration used $17.1 million infmf for programs in colombia .

 table 2 .

fy2004 andean counterdrug initiative and relatedprograms ; by purpose and functional account ( $ millions ) source: u.s. department of state , congressional budget justification , foreign operations fiscalyear 2006 .

prepared by crs , may 10 , 2005. a. aci is managed by the state department's bureau on international narcotics control and lawenforcement .

 table 3 .

fy2005 andean counterdrug initiative and relatedprograms ; estimate by purpose and functional account ( $ millions ) source: u.s. state department , congressional budget justification , foreign operations , fiscalyear 2006 .

prepared by crs , may 10 , 2005 .

note: for fy2005 , congress appropriated $1 million each for guatemala and nicaragua from theaci account .

a. aci is managed by the state department's bureau on international narcotics control and lawenforcement .

b .

total for aci does not include $21 million for the air bridge denial program .

 table 4 .

fy2000 to fy2005 aci and dodfunding ( $ millions ) source: u.s. state department , congressional budget justifications , foreign operations fy2003,fy2004 , fy2005 , fy2006 .

prepared by crs , may 10 , 2005. a .

includes $300.60 provided in p.l .

106-246 plan colombia legislation for counterdrug activitiesin the andean region .

figures for fy2001-fy2004 are for colombia alone .

amount forfy2003 includes supplemental funding of $34 million .

b. dod estimate .

