it has been noted that "[t]he potential for overlapping and potentially conflicting regulatory scope between federal statutes is common , especially in the heavily regulated area of environmental protection. .

this potential has received attention in connection with implementation of the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ) and the federal water pollution control act ( clean water act , cwa ) .

fifra requires the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate the sale and use of pesticides in the united states through registration and labeling .

the cwa is the principal federal law governing pollution in the nation's surface waters .

pesticides used to control weeds , insects , and other pests receive public attention because of potential impacts on humans and the environment .

depending on the chemical , possible health effects from overexposure to pesticides include cancer , reproductive or nervous - system disorders , and acute toxicity .

similar effects are possible in the aquatic environment .

recent studies suggest that some pesticides can disrupt endocrine systems and affect reproduction by interfering with natural hormones .

however , many pesticides and their breakdown products do not have standards or guidelines , and current standards and guidelines do not yet account for exposure to mixtures and seasonal pulses of high concentrations .

effects of pesticides on aquatic life are a concern , because intensive surveys done by the u.s. geological survey found that more than one - half of streams sampled had concentrations of at least one pesticide that exceeded an epa guideline for the protection of aquatic life .

whereas most toxicity and exposure assessments of pesticides are based on controlled experiments with a single contaminant , sampling by the u.s. geological survey found that most contamination of waterbodies occurs as pesticide mixtures .

for the more than 30 years since congress enacted fifra and the clean water act , there had been little apparent direct conflict between them .

epa's operating principle during that time had been that pesticides used according to the requirements of fifra do not require regulatory consideration under the cwa .

epa had never required cwa permits for use of fifra - approved materials , and epa rules did not specifically address the issue .

however , epa's interpretation and operating practice regarding the relationship between the two laws have recently been challenged in several arenas .

federal courts have been one of two battlegrounds so far where the potential conflict between the regulatory scope of these two laws has been waged .

epa regulatory proceedings have been the second battleground area .

congressional action adds a third testing of the issues .

at issue is how fifra - approved pesticides that are sprayed over or into waters are regulated and , specifically , whether the fifra regulatory regime is sufficient alone to ensure protection of water quality or whether such pesticide application requires approval under a cwa permit .

the issue arose initially over challenges to some routine practices in the west ( weed control in irrigation ditches and spraying for silvicultural pest control on u.s. forest service lands ) .

it subsequently drew more attention in connection with efforts by public health officials throughout the country to combat mosquito - borne illnesses such as west nile virus .

the litigation created uncertainty over whether application of pesticides and herbicides to waterbodies requires a water discharge permit .

epa tried to promulgate policy to clarify the relationship of the two laws and to address conflicts resulting from several judicial rulings , ultimately in a regulation issued in 2006 .

that rule was challenged by multiple parties , and in 2009 , a federal appellate court vacated the rule .

a related issue of interest to many pesticide applicators , but not yet addressed by epa policy or rule , concerns pesticides that unintentionally impact waterbodies through drift or migration from nearby land , such as a field of crops .

this report provides background on the conflict over interpretation and implementation of fifra and the clean water act .

a brief discussion of the two laws is followed by a review of the major litigation of interest .

epa's efforts to clarify its policy in this area , its 2006 rule , and the 2009 federal court ruling are discussed , as well as possible options for epa and congress to further address the fifra - cwa issues .

in 2011 epa issued a general cwa permit ( the pesticide general permit , or pgp ) in response to the court ruling ; the permit was renewed in 2016 .

despite epa's efforts to streamline the permit and its applicability , the permit is controversial .

congress has for some time considered legislation to nullify the court's ruling , but no measure has been enacted .

fifra is a regulatory statute governing the licensing , distribution , sale , and use of pesticides , including insecticides , fungicides , rodenticides , and other designated classes of chemicals .

its objective is to protect human health and the environment from unreasonable adverse effects of pesticides .

to that end , it establishes a nationally uniform pesticide labeling system requiring the registration of all pesticides and herbicides sold in the united states , and requiring users to comply with conditions of use included on the national label .

a fifra label encompasses the terms on which a chemical is registered , and its requirements become part of fifra's regulatory scheme .

in registering the chemical , epa makes a finding that the chemical "when used in accordance with widespread and commonly recognized practice ... will not generally cause unreasonable adverse effects on the environment" ( 7 u.s.c .

§136a ( c ) ( 5 ) ( d ) ) .

epa reviews scientific data submitted by pesticide manufacturers on toxicity and behavior in the environment to evaluate risks and exposure associated with the pesticide product's use and takes into account the costs and benefits of various pesticide uses .

if a registration is granted , the agency specifies the approved uses and conditions of use , which the registrant must explain on the product label .

epa may classify and register a pesticide product for general use or for restricted use ( those judged to be more dangerous to the applicator or to the environment which can only be applied by or under the direct supervision of a person who has been trained and certified ) .

fifra preempts state , local , and tribal regulations stricter than or different from epa rules with respect to labeling requirements , but allows states and localities to adopt more restrictive conditions with regard to sale and use .

use of a pesticide product in a manner not consistent with its label is prohibited , and the law provides civil and criminal penalties for violations .

under fifra , epa generally enforces the law's requirements .

however , the law also gives states with adequate enforcement procedures , laws , and regulations primary authority for enforcing fifra provisions related to pesticide use .

the objective of the cwa is to "restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters. .

to that end , it creates a comprehensive regulatory scheme to control the discharge of waste and pollutants ; the discharge of pollutants into waters of the united states without a permit violates the act .

the permit requirement is at the heart of the act's compliance and enforcement strategy .

several aspects of these core requirements in the law are important to evaluating whether the cwa applies to specific activities , including whether there is a discharge from a point source ( a discrete conveyance such as a pipe , ditch , container , vessel , or other floating craft ) , whether the discharge is made into waters of the united states , and whether the material discharged is a pollutant ; all of these terms are defined in the act .

especially key in the current context is whether pesticides are pollutants under the act .

this issue has been central to much of the judicial and regulatory debate over whether the two laws , cwa and fifra , are complementary or in conflict .

cwa section 502 ( 6 ) ( 33 u.s.c .

§1362 ( 6 ) ) defines pollutant thus: the term "pollutant" means dredged spoil , solid waste , incinerator residue , sewage , garbage , sewage sludge , munitions , chemical wastes , biological materials , radioactive materials , heat , wrecked or discarded equipment , rock , sand , cellar dirt and industrial , municipal , and agricultural waste discharged into water .

section 402 of the act establishes the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permitting requirement , which regulates the lawful discharge of pollutants .

the act defines "discharge of a pollutant" to mean "any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source" ( cwa §502 ( 12 ) ; 33 u.s.c .

§1362 ( 12 ) ) .

discharges are permitted if they are authorized under a npdes permit that meets cwa requirements , including protecting the receiving waters .

npdes permits specify limits on what pollutants may be discharged and in what amounts .

they also include monitoring and reporting requirements .

they are either individual case - by - case permits or general permits applicable to similar categories of activities and similar waste discharges .

under the cwa , qualified states issue npdes permits to regulated sources and enforce permits , and the law allows states to adopt water quality requirements more stringent than federal rules .

as of 2015 , 46 states have been delegated authority to administer the permit program ; epa issues discharge permits in the remaining states .

the npdes permit is the act's principal enforcement tool .

epa may issue a compliance order or bring a civil suit in u.s. district court against persons who violate the terms of a permit , and stiffer penalties are authorized for criminal violations of the act .

as a practical matter , the majority of actions taken to enforce the law are undertaken by states , both because states issue the majority of permits to dischargers and because the federal government lacks the resources for day - to - day monitoring and enforcement .

in addition , individuals may bring a citizen suit in u.s. district court against persons who violate the terms of a cwa - authorized permit or who discharge without a valid permit .

fifra does not authorize citizen suits .

throughout the united states , pesticides often are applied in , onto , or near waterbodies to control weeds and insects .

whether those pesticides are adversely affecting water quality has not been a disputed issue until recently .

epa's long - standing practice and interpretation of the laws was that a cwa permit is not required when pesticide application is done in a manner consistent with fifra and its regulations .

but that interpretation was challenged in several lawsuits brought since the late 1990s that have been decided since 2001 .

five federal court cases testing the relationship between fifra and the cwa have drawn the most attention , three in the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit in the west , concerning pesticide applications by agricultural and natural resource managers , and two in the second circuit court of appeals in the east , involving the use of pesticides by government and public health authorities for mosquito control .

these cases have been brought principally under the citizen suit provisions of the cwa .

two of the ninth circuit decisions have held that cwa permits are required for at least some activity involving the point source discharge of fifra - regulated pesticides over or into waters of the united states , and the third held that a permit was not required because the specific pesticide was not a chemical waste .

the second circuit ruled in two cases ; most recently , it ruled that trucks and helicopters that discharge pesticides are point sources , but it deferred requiring permits until epa issues a cwa general permit , which is discussed below .

the rulings by the ninth circuit in the talent and fo rsgren cases and possible endorsement by other courts greatly alarmed a range of stakeholders in the regulated community , including forestry , agriculture , and pesticide applicators , as well as municipal and public health officials concerned with the need to control mosquitoes and other vectors associated with diseases such as west nile virus and malaria .

they feared that cwa permit requirements would be extended to agricultural and other activities that have not traditionally been regulated under the cwa .

they argue that if permits tailored to particular circumstances are deemed necessary , such requirements would present significant costs , operational difficulties , and delays to applicators .

they also would put pressure on limited federal and state cwa permitting resources .

in their view , requiring permits will not be environmentally helpful , but the expense and long delays of permitting proceedings will hamper programs that are needed for controlling pests that threaten public health and crops .

in response , epa issued interpretive guidance documents and in 2005 proposed a rulemaking to formalize its long - standing position on cwa - fifra issues .

a final rule was promulgated in november 2006 but was vacated by a federal court in 2009 , as described next .

congressional interest in these issues became apparent after the first federal appeals court ruling in the 2001 headwaters v. talent ruling .

two congressional hearings focused on implications of the cases for pesticide use generally and for local governments' efforts to control mosquito - borne illnesses such as west nile virus .

also , a hearing also was held on legislation introduced in the 109 th congress to clarify the scope of the cwa regarding the use of fifra - approved pesticides , fire retardants , and biological control organisms .

the first of these hearings was in october 2002 , when a house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee held a fact - finding hearing on the issues .

the subcommittee's particular concern derived in part from the fact that one of the key practices used to manage stormwater runoff , which is regulated under the clean water act , is to collect and hold it in retention ponds , basins , drainage ditches , etc .

such practices can be at odds with the public health objective of controlling insect - breeding habitat by eliminating or draining sources of standing water .

stormwater management practices typically allow collected water to drain slowly , while public health efforts would prefer that it be removed quickly .

another way to address the public health concerns is to spray pesticides on stormwater management structures and other areas of standing waters .

the question for this subcommittee was the uncertainty raised by the litigation over the cwa - fifra issues for communities , industries , and others needing to maintain stormwater control systems .

an epa official , while acknowledging that the issue of cwa jurisdiction over pesticide spraying is "new territory" for the agency , said that epa believed there is no inherent conflict between protecting water quality and preventing mosquito - borne disease .

at the hearing , some members and witnesses urged epa to provide guidance to resolve uncertainties raised by the court rulings .

the second hearing , held by a house government reform subcommittee in october 2004 , examined challenges to controlling west nile virus .

during the hearing , some members and witnesses expressed the view that epa's july 2003 interim guidance , while helpful in clarifying epa's position , failed to resolve all legal uncertainty , since it would not bind nonfederal entities or bar citizen lawsuits .

witnesses said that epa's guidance was a nonbinding legal document that would not deter filing of citizen lawsuits seeking to impose a permit requirement .

supporters of this view urged epa to settle the legal questions through a formal rulemaking to revise cwa rules .

an epa official said that even if epa were to promulgate a rule ( as it subsequently did ) , states would still have the discretion to continue to require non - npdes permits , and a formal rule would not preclude citizen lawsuits from seeking to force localities to file for permits .

epa acknowledged these same points in the 2005 guidance .

others at this hearing agreed on the need for a formal rulemaking , but recommended that in doing so , epa should reverse the interpretation detailed in the guidance , not codify it .

in the 108 th congress , senate appropriators included report language calling on epa to finalize the interim guidance by december 2004 and to clarify the long - standing distinction between agriculture and silviculture activities that do and do not require cwa permits .

in 2003 , a number of house and senate members urged the bush administration to support supreme court review of the forsgren case , but ultimately the administration did not endorse industry's request for a review , and the court did not grant certiorari .

some members of congress also submitted comments in support of the july 2003 interim guidance document and the january 2005 regulatory proposal .

as described above , in january 2009 , the sixth circuit u.s. court of appeals rejected epa's rationale for its 2006 rule that attempted to specify circumstances in which pesticides applied to waters of the united states do not require npdes permits .

the court appeared to leave little room for epa to fashion a new rule consistent with the agency's long - standing view that fifra - compliant applications do not require cwa permits .

agriculture industry groups were fearful that the court's ruling would lead to permit requirements for each pesticide application , placing significant burdens on industry and epa .

accordingly , several industry groups ( the american farm bureau federation , american forest and paper association , and croplife america , the trade organization for agriculture and pest management ) petitioned for a rehearing of the case by the full sixth circuit court , but the rehearing request was rejected .

the federal government did not seek a rehearing of the case .

instead , the government petitioned the court for a two - year stay of the order vacating the exemption , to give epa time to work with states and the regulated community to develop a general permit for pesticide applications covered by the decision .

state water pollution agencies supported the government's request for the two - year delay , which the court granted .

the two basic types of npdes permits are individual permits that are tailored for a specific discharger , and general permits covering categories of point sources that have common elements and that discharge the same types of wastes .

general permits allow the permitting authority to allocate resources efficiently , especially when there is potentially a large number of permittees , and to provide timely permit coverage .

both individual and general permits are enforceable by the permitting authority and by private citizens ( in federal court ) .

epa uses its authority to issue npdes general permits frequently , such as a general permit to cover discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels ( vessel general permit , or vgp ) that applies to approximately 69,000 vessels .

typically , dischargers seeking coverage under a general permit are required to submit a notice of intent to be covered by the permit , but this can be modified .

for example , in the vgp , epa provided automatic coverage for about 20,000 of the covered vessels .

still , even with general permits , development and implementation issues arise , including how epa specifies applicable discharge limits based on technology available to treat pollutant constituents found in the discharge ( i.e. , effluent limits ) , and limits that are protective of the designated uses of the impacted water ( i.e. , water quality - based effluent limits ) , as required by the cwa .

epa issued the pesticide general permit on october 31 , 2011 , as required by the federal court .

epa estimated that the universe of activities affected by the court's ruling is approximately 5.6 million applications annually , which are performed by 365,000 applicators , including mosquito and other flying insect pest control , aquatic weed and algae control , aquatic nuisance animal control , and forest canopy pest control .

the permit covers about 500 different pesticide active ingredients that are contained in approximately 3,700 product labels .

the permit applies to a variety of entities , including agricultural interests involved in crop and timber tract production , forest nurseries , and operating irrigation systems ; pesticide and agricultural chemical manufacturing ; mosquito or other vector control districts and commercial applicators that service them ; utilities ( eg , electric power , natural gas , water supply and wastewater ) ; and government agencies and departments engaged in air and water resource management and conservation .

it requires all operators to minimize pesticide discharges to waters by practices such as using the lowest effect amount of pesticide product that is optimal for controlling the target pest .

it also requires operators to prepare pesticide discharge management plans to document their pest management practices .

permittees must monitor for observable adverse effects in the treatment area and where the pesticides are discharged to u.s. waters .

the permit does not cover agricultural stormwater runoff or irrigation return flow , as these discharges are statutorily exempt from cwa permitting , and it also does not cover terrestrial application to control pests on agricultural crops or forest floors ( i.e. , it would not apply to pesticide applications that do not result in a discharge to u.s. waters ) .

the epa general permit applies in states and areas where epa is the npdes permitting authority , but it is being used as a model for other states to develop their own general permits .

the 2011 permit included endangered species act ( esa ) provisions , following consultation with the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) fisheries service .

as a result , coverage under the permit was available only for discharges not likely to adversely affect species that are listed as endangered or threatened under the esa .

with expiration of the 2011 pesticide general permit ( pgp ) on october 31 , 2016 , epa renewed the permit for another five years on october 25 .

the renewed permit has the same applicability , conditions , and requirements as the 2011 permit .

in a regulatory first , epa added electronic notification by persons seeking or terminating coverage and for filing annual reports required by the permit .

the new permit also adds a provision that requires a permit applicant to consider the adverse effects of spraying on certain species identified as potentially at risk , but not formally listed , under the esa .

the 2016 permit is effective in the same states , the district of columbia , u.s. territories , indian lands , and federal facilities as the 2011 permit ; states will issue their own npdes permits for pesticide discharges in the other states , either by adopting epa's general permit or adapting it to suit their conditions .

one issue that epa could address separately , in addition to the general npdes permit , is pesticide drift , that is , pesticide particles and droplets that migrate from the application area , which can affect people's health and the environment , as well as damage nearby crops .

the federal register notice accompanying the 2006 rule had noted that , at the time , epa was awaiting advice from a workgroup of its pesticide program dialogue committee , which could recommend further actions .

this committee was established in 1995 as a forum to provide feedback to epa on various pesticide regulatory , policy , and program implementation issues .

it is authorized pursuant to the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) , which details requirements for the management and oversight of federal advisory committees to ensure impartial and relevant expertise and advice to epa and other agencies .

in 2006 , the committee convened a spray drift workgroup charged with studying the issue of pesticide drift across water and its accompanying impact on water quality and wildlife .

the following year , the workgroup finalized a report that focused on issues related to product labeling , applicator training , and practices and equipment to mitigate drift and adverse effects .

in 2009 , epa proposed new pesticide labels to reduce the drifting of spray and dust from pesticide applications .

the agency also has proposed several guidance documents addressing pesticide spray drift , including guidance for pesticide labeling and guidance on how off - site spray drift will be evaluated for ecological , drinking water , and human health risk assessments .

in 2014 , epa announced a voluntary drift reduction technology program under which manufacturers of spraying devices may conduct studies of their products to see how much drift they prevent .

epa will then assign a rating , based on how much spray drift is reduced by the device .

other options for epa relate to implementation of fifra and procedures used to evaluate the risks of pesticides during the registration process .

environmentalists have argued for some time that epa's risk review procedures are inadequate because they fail to account for synergistic and additive effects , as well as sub - lethal and indirect effects of pollutants on the environment .

in 2003 , epa convened a task force of officials from its pesticide and water quality offices to explore , among other things , whether the agency's pesticide review processes are protective enough to meet water quality standard limits .

one outcome of the task force's review could be changes to implementation of fifra in order to address some of these concerns .

subsequently , epa officials held a series of regional meetings with state pesticide and water quality agencies and other stakeholders and announced plans to complete a series of white papers on how to harmonize methods used by the agency's office of water and the office of pesticide programs for ecological assessment of pesticide chemicals' water quality risks .

the white papers are intended to address what officials acknowledge is a gap between the way the cwa and fifra approach pesticide risk and to support a consistent and common set of effects characterization methods using best available information .

prior to the 2009 federal court ruling that vacated epa's rule , some environmental activists favored legislation to clarify that npdes permits are required , since they contended that the rule was unlawful .

however , no such legislation was introduced .

others argued during this time that legislation is not needed because , in their view , the cwa is clear enough that permits are required for discharge of pesticides from point sources .

the federal court's review of the epa rule supports that view .

but , following the court's ruling , other stakeholders came to favor legislation to support a narrow view of the cwa's jurisdiction on this issue .

although many acknowledge that any such legislative effort would be controversial and could be seen as representing not clarification but , rather , an environmental rollback , lawmakers in the house and senate have repeatedly attempted to pass such a bill .

legislation intended to clarify that permits are not required for some or all pesticide spraying activity was first introduced in the 109 th congress ( h.r .

1749 and s. 1269 , the pest management and fire suppression flexibility act ) .

these bills would have provided that npdes permits are not required for the use of fifra - approved pesticides ; chemicals , fire retardants , or water used for fire suppression ; biological organisms used for plant pest or weed control ; or silviculture activities such as timber harvesting that are not currently regulated as point source activities .

as discussed above , epa's 2006 rule ( although subsequently vacated by a federal court ) addressed situations in which pesticides are put directly in waters to control pests ( eg , controlling mosquito larvae or aquatic weeds ) or cases of pesticides that are present over water and a portion of the pesticide is deposited in the water ( eg , aerial application to a forest canopy where waters of the united states may be present below the canopy ) and excluded these situations from requiring a cwa permit .

the proposed legislation in the 109 th congress , in addition to codifying these policies , also would have addressed other , broader circumstances that epa had declined to include in the rule: applications over land areas that may drift over and into waters of the united states , broad exemption of activities for preventing or controlling plant pests or noxious weeds , and use of fire retardants .

in 2005 , a house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee held a hearing on h.r .

1749 .

witnesses representing a number of sectors that are pesticide users ( state foresters , western irrigation districts , and farmers ) testified in support of the legislation , saying that it would resolve existing legal uncertainties about permitting .

an epa witness said that the agency's then - proposed rulemaking was intended to reduce uncertainty about the relationship between fifra and the cwa .

the epa official did not expressly endorse the legislation , but he said that epa appreciated congressional efforts to reduce potential confusion over these issues .

there was no further action on either h.r .

1749 or s. 1269 during the 109 th congress , and no similar bills were introduced in the 110 th congress .

legislation on this issue was introduced in the 111 th congress .

one proposal was contained in identical bills , s. 3735 and h.r .

6087 .

the intention of the these bills was similar to that of the earlier bills — to clarify permitting requirements under other laws and , effectively , to nullify the 2009 federal court ruling — but the 111 th congress legislation differed in several respects .

first , it would have amended fifra , while the earlier bills would have amended the cwa .

second , the bills would not expressly have exempted chemicals , fire retardants , water used for fire suppression , or specified silviculture activities from permit requirements .

third , s. 3735 and h.r .

6087 were broader in their potential application .

the earlier bills were limited to exempting fifra - authorized activities from cwa permits , but the 111 th congress legislation would have exempted fifra - authorized activities from permits required by other federal environmental laws ( including the cwa ) , other federal nonenvironmental permits or licenses , as well as state or local laws and ordinances .

pursuant to authority in fifra , many state and local governments control pesticide application within their jurisdictions by employing permitting systems to restrict aerial application of pesticides , or by imposing notice - and - posting requirements .

another bill in the 111 th congress was h.r .

6273 .

this bill also was intended to nullify the 2009 federal court ruling , but it was narrower in scope than the other two measures .

it would have amended both fifra and the cwa to provide that a cwa permit shall not be required by epa , nor shall epa require a state to require a permit , for the application of any pesticide that is subject to fifra if it is applied in conformance with that act .

attention to these issues resumed in the 112 th congress , because the pgp has remained controversial .

critics continue to argue that requirements of cwa and fifra are duplicative , although others disagree , saying that the purposes and approaches of the two laws differ greatly ( see discussion of " the laws " above ) .

even as they are beginning to implement permit requirements for pesticide discharges , water quality officials in some states have said that they see little water quality benefit from the permit .

despite epa's contention that many farms are not affected by the national cotton council ruling and do not need cwa permits for their pesticide applications , the pgp has been particularly controversial in the agriculture community .

at a joint hearing of subcommittees of the house agriculture and transportation and infrastructure committees in february 2011 , draft legislation to overturn the national cotton council ruling was discussed .

subsequently introduced as h.r .

872 , the bill would amend fifra and the cwa to provide that neither epa nor a state may require a cwa permit for discharge of a pesticide whose use has been authorized pursuant to fifra .

the bill defined specified circumstances where a permit would be required ( eg , municipal or industrial treatment works effluent that contains pesticide or pesticide residue ) .

at the hearing , some members indicated that the bill had been drafted with epa's technical assistance , but the administration's official position on h.r .

872 was unknown .

the house passed h.r .

872 on march 31 , 2011 , by a vote of 292-130 .

the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry approved the bill without amendment in june 2011 .

the text of h.r .

872 also was included as a provision of h.r .

2584 , a bill providing fy2012 appropriations for epa , which the house debated in july 2011 , without taking final action .

related bills in the 112 th congress included s. 3605 ( similar to h.r .

872 , with the addition of a report to congress on effectiveness of regulatory actions related to pesticide registration and protecting water quality ) and s. 718 ( a bill to amend only fifra to clarify that , notwithstanding any other law , no permit shall be required for use of a fifra - registered pesticide or organisms or practices covered by the plant protection act ) .

in july 2012 , the house agriculture committee ordered reported the 2012 farm bill ( h.r .

6083 , the federal agriculture reform and risk management act ) .

a provision identical to house - passed h.r .

872 was included in the legislation .

the senate had previously passed its version of a 2012 farm bill ( s. 3240 ) ; it did not include a similar provision .

the 112 th congress did not take final action on comprehensive farm bill legislation .

legislation to nullify the 2009 federal court ruling also was introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

935 , similar to h.r .

872 in the 112 th congress ; s. 175 , similar to s. 718 in the 112 th congress ; and s. 802 , similar to s. 3605 in the 112 th congress ) .

the house passed h.r .

935 on july 31 , 2014 , by a vote of 267-161 .

in addition , a provision similar to h.r .

935 was included in farm bill legislation approved by the house in june 2013 ( h.r .

2642 ) .

however , the senate - passed version of farm bill renewal legislation ( s. 954 ) did not include a similar provision .

the 2014 farm bill , enacted in february 2014 ( the agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) , also did not include a provision to overturn the sixth circuit ruling .

the pgp requirements have been in place for more than five years .

in march 2015 , an epa official stated during congressional testimony that the agency is not aware of any issues with the permit or of any instances of individuals not being able to apply a pesticide in a timely manner .

further , epa is not aware of any active litigation in connection with the pgp .

nevertheless , it remains controversial .

critics of the permit continue to argue that its cwa requirements are duplicative of fifra and are burdensome , due to costs that applicators incur in obtaining permits .

critics also say that applicators are vulnerable to potential cwa citizen suit litigation .

supporters of the permit respond that the two laws are different because the cwa allows evaluation of pesticides' impacts on localized waterbodies , while fifra makes more generalized determination of impacts on human health and environmental risk .

they believe that the regulatory process for the pgp has been reasonable and workable for pest control operations and agriculture interests .

in the 114 th congress , legislation similar to bills passed by the house in the 112 th and 113 th congresses to overturn requirements for the pgp was introduced .

in the senate , the environment and public works committee approved s. 1500 on august 5 , 2015 .

this bill proposed to clarify congressional intent regarding the regulation of the use of pesticides in or near u.s. waters .

it differed from previous versions of the legislation in that it also would require epa to report to congress on better coordination of efforts by the agency's water quality and pesticides offices in order to analyze the water quality impacts of pesticides and the effectiveness of current pesticide registration actions at protecting water quality .

on january 20 , 2016 , the senate environment committee approved s. 659 , the bipartisan sportsmen's act of 2015 , with an amendment identical to the text of s. 1500 .

in the house , legislation identical to h.r .

935 from the 113 th congress was introduced ( h.r .

897 , the reducing regulatory burdens act ) and was approved by the house agriculture committee in march 2015 .

the house passed a modified version on may 24 , 2016 .

proponents argued that the legislation is needed so that public health agencies that spray pesticides to respond to mosquitoes that carry the zika virus and other diseases could focus resources on disease - carrying vectors , rather than cwa permitting .

opponents asserted that the legislation would weaken environmental protections by relaxing standards for pesticide application to the point that waterbodies will become impaired or threatened by pesticides .

as passed , the legislation was retitled the zika vector control act and modified previous versions by including a sunset provision , under which the legislation would expire on september 30 , 2018 , and the pgp would again become effective after that date .

separate senate legislation , s. 2899 , the zika response and regulatory relief act , was introduced to provide a temporary , 180-day waiver of the pgp and its reporting requirements solely for the purpose of public health pesticide applications of a mosquito control program .

proposals to provide a pgp waiver also arose in connection with fy2017 appropriations legislation , in bills addressing whether and how to provide funds to control the spread of the zika virus in the united states .

on june 23 , 2016 , the house passed a bill providing $1.1 billion in zika funding and other appropriations ( h.r .

2577 ) .

however , the senate failed on two occasions to approve this legislation , due to controversies over several provisions .

one of the controversies was a section in the house - passed bill that would have provided a temporary waiver ( until september 30 , 2018 ) of the pgp for control of mosquitos or mosquito larvae to prevent or control the zika virus .

as the beginning of fy2017 approached on october 1 , 2016 , and congress had not yet enacted any full - year appropriations bills , the issue also was raised in connection with legislation to continue fy2016 government funding for a short period of time extending beyond the november 2016 election .

on september 28 , the senate and house passed a bill providing a 10-week continuing resolution , from october 1 until december 9 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-223 ) .

as passed , while the bill included zika funding , it did not include provisions that would waive requirements of the pgp , either temporarily or permanently .

congress subsequently passed a second continuing appropriations resolution , extending fy2016 funding from december 10 , 2016 , through april 28 , 2017 ( p.l .

114-254 ) , with no language affecting the pgp .

