the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) is one of several statutory offices within the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and can play a significant — if not determinative — role in the rulemaking process for most federal agencies .

in addition to its many other responsibilities , oira currently reviews the substance of between 500 and 700 significant proposed and final rules each year before agencies publish them in the federal register , and can clear the rules with or without change , return them to the agencies for reconsideration , or encourage the agencies to withdraw the rules .

between 70 and 100 of the rules that oira reviews each year are each considered "economically significant" or "major" ( eg , have a $100 million impact on the economy ) .

the office was created by congress and has a number of specific statutory responsibilities , but it also helps ensure that agencies' rules reflect the president's policies and priorities .

oira's role in the federal rulemaking process has been highly controversial in all five of the presidential administrations in which it has been in existence , but some of the criticisms directed at the office have varied over time .

in some administrations , oira has been accused of controlling the agenda of the rulemaking agencies too much , directing them to change substantive provisions in draft rules or even stopping proposed regulatory actions that it believes are poorly crafted or unnecessary .

at other times , though , oira has been accused of not exerting enough authority over the agencies' rules .

other , more persistent criticisms have focused on the lack of transparency of oira's regulatory reviews to the public and the sometimes unseen influence that regulated entities and other nongovernmental organizations can have on agencies' rules through those reviews .

this report describes how oira reviews covered agencies' draft rules , oira's effects on the rules , and changes in oira's procedures and policies in recent years .

much of that discussion is drawn from a september 2003 report on oira by the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) .

first , though , this report will provide a brief history of presidential regulatory review and describe how oira's review process was established .

finally , the report describes several potential legislative issues regarding oira's regulatory review authority .

oira was created within omb by section 3503 of the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) of 1980 ( 44 u.s.c .

chapter 35 ) .

the pra provided that oira would be headed by an administrator , and designated the oira administrator as the "principal advisor to the director on federal information policy. .

the act also said that the director of omb "shall delegate to the ( oira ) administrator the authority to administer all functions under this chapter. .

specific areas of responsibility in the pra that were assigned to the director ( and later delegated to oira ) included information policy , information collection request clearance and paperwork control , statistical policy and coordination , records management , privacy , and automatic data processing and telecommunications .

with regard to paperwork reduction , the act generally prohibited agencies from conducting or sponsoring a collection of information until they had submitted their proposed information collection requests to oira and the office had approved those requests .

the pra's requirements cover rules issued by virtually all agencies , including cabinet departments , independent agencies , and independent regulatory agencies and commissions .

although the pra gave oira substantive responsibilities in many areas , the bulk of the office's day - to - day activities under the act were initially focused on reviewing and approving agencies' proposed information collection requests .

oira had 77 staff members when the pra took effect in 1981 , of which about half were involved in reviewing agencies' information collection requests .

that year , oira took nearly 5,000 paperwork review actions — approving new and revised collections , extending existing collections , and reinstating expired collections .

the office's paperwork clearance workload since then has generally been between 4,000 and 6,000 actions each year , although the number of oira staff overall and those reviewing proposed collections has declined substantially .

many federal regulations have an information collection component , but the pra did not authorize oira to review or comment on the non - paperwork elements of those regulations , or on regulations without an information collection component .

in september 1993 , president clinton issued executive order 12866 on "regulatory planning and review," which revoked executive orders 12291 and 12498 and abolished the council on competitiveness .

although different from its predecessors in many respects , executive order 12866 ( which is still in effect ) continued the general framework of presidential review of rulemaking .

for example , it requires covered agencies ( again , cabinet departments and independent agencies but not independent regulatory agencies ) to submit their proposed and final rules to omb before publishing them in the federal register .

the order also requires agencies to prepare cost - benefit analyses for their "economically significant" rules ( essentially the same as "major" rules under executive order 12291 ) .

as discussed in detail below , however , executive order 12866 established a somewhat new regulatory philosophy and a new set of rulemaking principles , limited oira's reviews to certain types of rules , and established transparency requirements that included but went beyond those that had been put in place by the administrator's june 1986 memorandum .

section 2 ( b ) of the order assigns responsibility for review of agency rulemaking to omb , and specifically names oira as "the repository of expertise concerning regulatory issues. .

the order also named the vice president as principal advisor to the president on regulatory policy , planning , and review .

although a great deal has been written about oira's reviews of agencies' draft rules , few studies have systematically tried to determine the extent to which those reviews result in substantive changes to the rules .

one such study ( using data prior to the advent of executive order 12988 ) concluded that oira's reviews resulted in the rejection of some regulations that would have been economically inefficient , but did not appear to have improved the cost - effectiveness ( eg , costs - per - life saved ) of many of the rules .

other studies have used oira's database showing the number of rules that were coded as "consistent with change" and "consistent without change" in an attempt to determine the significance of oira's effects on agencies' rules and whether those effects have changed over time .

as mentioned previously , however , the "consistent with change" code includes changes made at the initiation of the agencies as well as changes suggested by oira .

also , the code does not differentiate between minor editorial changes and changes that radically alter the effect of the rule .

"returns" and "withdrawals" in oira's database also need careful interpretation .

a return may be for purely administrative reasons , not for substantive oira objections .

conversely , a withdrawal of a rule by an agency may have been initiated by oira .

in order to use these data effectively , researchers should examine the associated documentation in the agencies' and oira's rulemaking dockets .

the formal process by which oira reviews agencies' draft rules has changed little since executive order 12866 was issued in 1993 .

there have , however , been several subtle yet notable changes in oira policies and practices in recent years — particularly after dr. john d. graham became oira administrator in july 2001 .

in october 2002 , administrator graham said "the changes we are making at omb in pursuit of smarter regulation are not headline grabbers: no far - reaching legislative initiatives , no rhetoric - laden executive orders , and no campaigns of regulatory relief .

yet we are making some changes that we believe will have a long - lasting impact on the regulatory state. .

on january 18 , 2007 , president george w. bush issued executive order 13422 , making the most significant amendments to executive order 12866 since it was published in 1993 .

the changes made by this new executive order were controversial , characterized by some as a "power grab" by the white house that undermined public protections and lessened congressional authority , and by others as "a paragon of common sense and good government. .

the most important changes made to executive order 12866 by executive order 13422 fell into five general categories: ( 1 ) a requirement that agencies identify in writing the specific market failure or problem that warrants a new regulation , ( 2 ) a requirement that each agency head designate a presidential appointee within the agency as a "regulatory policy officer" who can control upcoming rulemaking activity in that agency , ( 3 ) a requirement that agencies provide their best estimates of the cumulative regulatory costs and benefits of rules they expect to publish in the coming year , ( 4 ) an expansion of oira review to include significant guidance documents , and ( 5 ) a provision permitting agencies to consider whether to use more formal rulemaking procedures in certain cases .

a separate crs report discusses each of these changes , noting areas that are unclear and the potential implications of the changes ; provides background information on presidential review of rules ; discusses three congressional hearings on the executive order in 2007 ; and notes congressional efforts to block the implementation of the order .

it concludes by pointing out that the significance of the changes made to the review process by executive order 13422 may become clear only through their implementation .

the changes made by this executive order represented a clear expansion of presidential authority over rulemaking agencies .

in that regard , executive order 13422 can be viewed as part of a broader statement of presidential authority presented throughout the bush administration .

on january 30 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13497 , which revoked both executive order 13422 and executive order 13258 ( which had been issued in february 2002 , and amended executive order 12866 to reassign all roles originally assigned to the vice president to the president's chief of staff ) .

on march 4 , 2009 , however , the director of omb issued a memorandum to federal agencies instructing them to continue sending significant guidance documents to oira for review .

on january 30 , 2009 , president barack obama issued a memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies instructing the director of omb , in consultation with representatives of regulatory agencies , to "produce within 100 days ( i.e. , by may 10 , 2009 ) a set of recommendations for a new executive order on federal regulatory review. .

the memorandum said that the recommendations should , among other things: offer suggestions for the relationship between oira and the agencies ; provide guidance on disclosure and transparency ; encourage public participation in agency regulatory processes ; offer suggestions on the role of cost - benefit analysis ; address the role of distributional considerations , fairness , and concern for the interests of future generations ; identify methods of ensuring that regulatory review does not produce undue delay ; clarify the role of the behavioral sciences in formulating regulatory policy ; and identify the best tools for achieving public goals through the regulatory process .

on february 26 , 2009 , the director of omb published a notice in the federal register requesting comments from the public on how to improve the regulatory review process .

the director noted that although executive orders are not subject to notice and comment procedures , and public comments are not normally invited before their issuance , omb was doing so in this case because there had been an "unusually high level of public interest," and because of the "evident importance and fundamental nature of the relevant issues. .

the initial deadline for comments was march 16 , 2009 , but the comment period was extended until march 31 , 2009 , because of "requests from a number of interested members of the public. .

in response to its request , omb received 183 comments from the public , including members of congress , representatives of public interest and private sector interest groups , academicians , and individuals .

the comments and suggestions varied widely , with some advocating a reduced role for oira , and others pushing for oira to assume a stronger role .

some of the comments proposed a stronger role for cost - benefit analysis , while others suggested that the analysis be used only when required by statute .

in addition to its regulatory review responsibilities under executive order 12866 and its multiple responsibilities under the paperwork reduction act ( paperwork review , information resources management , statistical policy and coordination , records management , privacy and security , and information technology ) , congress has assigned oira a number of other specific functions related to the rulemaking and regulatory process .

for example: the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( 2 u.s.c .

1532-1538 ) generally requires agencies to prepare written statements describing the effects of their rules that are subject to the act's requirements .

the act requires the director of omb to collect those written statements and provide them to the congressional budget office , to establish pilot programs to test innovative regulatory approaches , and to prepare an annual report on the implementation of the act .

the omb director has delegated these responsibilities to oira .

the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act of 1996 ( sbrefa ) ( 5 u.s.c .

601 note ) required epa and osha to convene "advocacy review panels" before publishing proposed rules expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities .

the act specifically requires the review panel to include full - time employees from oira as well as other agencies .

sbrefa also contains provisions commonly referred to as the "congressional review act," which ( among other things ) requires agencies to delay the effective date of "major" rules , and requires gao to submit a report on those rules within 15 days of their issuance .

sbrefa defines a major rule as one that the oira administrator concludes has resulted or is likely to result in ( among other things ) a $100 million annual effect on the economy .

section 515 of the treasury and general government appropriations act for fiscal year 2001 ( 44 u.s.c .

3504 ( d ) ( 1 ) and 3516 ) , generally known as the "data quality act" or the "information quality act," directed omb to take several actions ( all of which were delegated to oira ) .

specifically , the act required omb to issue governmentwide guidelines that "provide policy and procedural guidance to federal agencies for ensuring and maximizing the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of information ( including statistical information ) disseminated by federal agencies. .

omb published those guidelines in final form on february 22 , 2002 .

the act also required agencies to develop their own guidelines ( which were reviewed by omb ) , and to report to omb on the number and nature of complaints received and how such complaints were handled by the agency .

section 624 of the treasury and general government appropriations act , 2001 , ( 31 u.s.c .

1105 note ) , sometimes known as the "regulatory right - to - know act," requires omb to prepare and submit with the budget an annual "accounting statement and associated report" containing an estimate of the costs and benefits ( including quantifiable and nonquantifiable effects ) of federal rules and paperwork , to the extent feasible , ( 1 ) in the aggregate , ( 2 ) by agency and agency program , and ( 3 ) by major rule .

the accounting statement is also required to contain an analysis of impacts of federal regulation on state , local , and tribal governments , small businesses , wages , and economic growth .

similar one - year requirements were in previous appropriations acts .

the same legislation requires omb to include "recommendations for reform" in its cost - benefit reports .

rather than rely on its own expertise , oira decided to solicit suggestions from the public .

for example , in march 2002 , oira asked the public for recommendations to eliminate or modify existing rules as well as to expand or extend existing programs .

in response , oira received more than 300 suggestions , which oira turned over to the appropriate agencies for prioritization .

in february 2004 , oira asked the public for suggested reforms of rules affecting the manufacturing sector .

oira said it was focusing on manufacturing because of the relatively large impact that regulations have on that sector .

the small business paperwork relief act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-198 ) requires omb to annually publish , in the federal register and on the internet , a list of compliance assistance resources available to small businesses .

the act also requires omb to convene and chair a task force to study the feasibility of streamlining paperwork requirements on small businesses .

the task force was required to file an initial report by the end of june 2003 , and is required to file a second report by the end of june 2004 .

the e - government act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-347 ) requires the oira administrator to work with the administrator of the office of electronic government to establish the strategic direction of the governmentwide e - government program and to oversee its implementation .

oira has been particularly active in the administration's e - rulemaking initiative .

in the treasury and general government appropriations act , 2002 ( p.l .

107-67 ) , congress stated that about $6.3 million of omb's $70.7 million appropriation was for oira , but stipulated that nearly $1.6 million of that amount should not be obligated until omb "submits a report to the committees on appropriations that provides an assessment of the total costs and benefits of implementing executive order no .

13166. .

the conference report for omb's appropriation for fy2004 ( to accompany h.r .

2673 ) directed oira to submit a report to the house and senate committees on appropriations by june 1 , 2004 , on "whether agencies have been properly responsive to public requests for correction of information pursuant to the ( data quality act ) . .

congress also sometimes limits oira's actions through riders on omb's appropriation .

for example , since 1983 , language has been included in omb's appropriation stating that none of the funds appropriated to omb could be used for the purpose of reviewing any agricultural marketing orders issued by the department of agriculture .

marketing orders , which cover dozens of commodities from lemons to milk , basically keep prices up by regulating supplies , and had been targeted for elimination or amendment by president reagan's task force on regulatory relief in the early 1980s .

in response , members of congress have inserted this restriction in each subsequent appropriation bill , asserting that the department of agriculture , not omb , has statutory authority in this area .

in other cases , oira has taken on additional responsibilities , sometimes basing its actions on previous statutory or executive order authorities .

for example: in december 2004 , oira published a final bulletin establishing government - wide guidance aimed at enhancing the practice of peer review of government science documents .

the bulletin applied to all "influential scientific information" and "highly influential scientific assessments. .

the final version of the bulletin gave agencies significantly greater discretion to decide when information required peer review than the september 2003 proposed bulletin , but oira retained significant authority in certain areas ( eg , when information is "highly influential" and requires more stringent peer review ) .

in november 2005 , omb published a proposed bulletin "good guidance practices," saying that it was concerned that agency guidance documents "may not receive the benefit of careful consideration accorded under the procedures for regulatory development and review .

omb did not cite any specific statutes or executive orders as authorizing the issuance of the bulletin , but did indicate that it was "responsible both for promoting good management practices and for overseeing and coordinating the administration's regulatory policy. .

the bulletin would require agencies to develop written procedures for the approval of significant guidance documents , and to publish "economically significant" documents in the federal register and invite comments .

in january 2006 , oira published a proposed bulletin on agency risk assessment practices for public comment and peer review by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) .

however , in january 2007 , an nas committee reported that the proposed bulletin was "fundamentally flawed" and should be withdrawn .

in september 2007 , omb withdrew the proposed bulletin and instead issued a memorandum reiterating and reinforcing principles for risk assessment that were originally written in 1995 , indicating that agencies should comply with the principles .

for 30 years , oira has played a central role in the federal rulemaking process .

although some argued early in oira's history that the office's regulatory review role was unconstitutional , few observers continue to hold that view .

no court has directly addressed the constitutionality of the oira regulatory review process , but in 1981 ( the year that oira was created ) the d.c .

circuit said the following: the court recognizes the basic need of the president and his white house staff to monitor the consistency of agency regulations with administration policy .

he and his advisors surely must be briefed fully and frequently about rules in the making , and their contributions to policymaking considered .

the executive power under our constitution , after all , is not shared — it rests exclusively with the president .

oira is located within the executive office of the president and is the president's direct representative in the governmentwide rulemaking process .

as executive order 12866 states , oira is the "repository of expertise on regulatory issues" within the executive branch , and is uniquely positioned both within omb ( with its budgetary influence ) and within the federal rulemaking process ( reviewing and commenting on rules just before they are published in the federal register ) to enable it to exert maximum influence .

variations in how oira operates — as a gatekeeper or a counselor — are largely a function of the wishes of the president that the office serves .

for example , in a june 2001 article in harvard law review , elena kagan posited that , while it is generally acknowledged that president reagan used oira's review function as a tool to control the policy and political agenda in an anti - regulatory manner , president clinton did much the same thing to accomplish pro - regulatory objectives .

she said he did so by exercising directive authority and asserting personal ownership over a range of agency actions , thereby making them "presidential" in nature .

she also characterized this emergence of enhanced methods of presidential control over the regulatory state — what she termed the "presidentialization of administration" — as "the most important development in the last two decades in administrative process. .

other observers , however , view oira ( like other executive branch agencies ) as having more of a shared allegiance between the president and the congress .

they point out that oira was created by congress , and has been given a number of statutory responsibilities through the pra and other laws .

nevertheless , even supporters of a strong legislative perspective recognize that oira is part of the executive office of the president , and that congress gave oira its responsibilities because of its strategic position within that office .

with both statutory and executive order responsibilities , oira embodies a broader tension between congress and the president for control of administrative agencies .

although major differences of opinion exist among observers of the federal rulemaking process regarding the appropriateness of oira's regulatory review role , the broad reach and influence of the office's is undebatable .

rulemaking agencies formally challenge oira's returns and "suggestions" for change only rarely , and sometimes refrain from even submitting draft rules for review if they believe they will be opposed by oira .

regulated entities also recognize oira's influence , and seem to view the office as a "court of second resort" if they are unable to influence regulatory agencies to their position directly .

congress also recognizes the importance that oira plays in the rulemaking process , and sometimes holds hearings examining oira's implementation of its responsibilities pursuant to various statutes and executive orders .

proposals for changes to oira's authority and responsibilities have focused on such issues as ( 1 ) providing a statutory underpinning for regulatory reviews , ( 2 ) increasing or decreasing the office's funding and staffing , ( 3 ) including independent agencies' rules under the office's regulatory review function , and ( 4 ) improving the transparency of oira's regulatory review processes .

as noted previously , congress has enacted legislation expanding oira's statutory responsibilities , and has considered ( but not enacted ) legislation that would provide a statutory basis for oira's regulatory review function .

for example , in the 106 th congress , section 632 of s. 746 ( the "regulatory improvement act of 1999" ) would have required the president ( via omb and oira ) to "establish a process for the review and coordination of federal agency regulatory actions. .

the proposed legislation also would have placed in statute many of the transparency requirements in executive order 12866 .

congress has also considered legislation that would affect oira as part of broader omb changes .

for example , during the 107 th congress , proposed legislation was introduced ( h.r .

616 ) that would have established an office of management within the executive office of the president and redesignated omb as the office of the federal budget .

as part of that process , oira and other offices within omb would have been abolished and their functions and authorities transferred to the new office of management .

neither of these bills was enacted .

oira does not have a specific line item in the budget , so its funding is part of omb's appropriation .

similarly , oira's staffing levels are allocated from omb's totals .

although oira staffing increased somewhat during the bush administration , oira has still fewer staff than it had when its regulatory review function was first established in 1981 .

currently , about 30 to 40 oira desk officers and branch chiefs review about 3,000 agency information collection requests each year and between 500 and 700 significant rules each year .

at various times in its history , certain members of congress have attempted to reduce funding for oira in order to signal congressional displeasure with the office's actions .

other observers , however , believe that oira's funding should be increased , not reduced , arguing that a relatively small amount of additional resources for oira could yield substantial benefits .

at other times , proposed legislation has been introduced designating how oira staff should be used .

for example , in the 108 th congress , a provision in h.r .

2432 as originally introduced would have required the omb director to "assign , at a minimum , the equivalent of at least 2 full time staffers to review the federal information collection burden on the public imposed by the internal revenue service. .

the internal revenue service accounts for more than 80% of the estimated paperwork burden , but oira indicated that it devoted less than one fte to reviewing the agency's paperwork requests ( because much of the burden is mandated by statute ) .

the bush administration objected to this specific direction of oira staff , so the sponsors of the bill agreed to delete this requirement before it was approved by the house of representatives in may 2004 .

although several of the statutes that oira helps to administer include rules issued by independent regulatory agencies ( eg , the pra , the regulatory flexibility act , the congressional review act , and the data quality act ) , the executive orders that have established regulatory review within oira have explicitly excluded rules issued by those agencies .

some observers have suggested that this limitation be lifted , arguing that independent regulatory agencies issue regulations that have a significant impact on the economy ( about $230 billion per year according to oira ) but their rules often contain little quantitative information on regulatory costs and benefits .

those opposed to this expansion in oira's duties point out that independent regulatory agencies were established to be relatively independent of the president , and inclusion of their rules under oira's would be counter to this purpose .

in response , proponents argue that independent regulatory agencies' rules are already reviewed for purposes such as paperwork clearance and ensuring that data quality requirements are met , so examining the substance of the rules is just an extension of those reviews .

one consistent area of concern to some observers has been the lack of transparency of the oira review process to the public .

notwithstanding recent improvements , they argue that it is difficult for the public to know with any degree of certainty what changes oira has suggested to agencies' draft rules , what contacts oira has made with regulated entities and other outside parties regarding those rules , or whether documents were exchanged between oira and the agencies .

in its september 2003 report , gao said that the documentation that agencies are required to provide showing the changes made at oira's suggestion or recommendation were not always available and , when done , were not always clear or consistent .

gao also said that the transparency requirements incumbent on oira were not always clear , and recommended several improvements .

for example: although oira indicated that it can have its greatest impact on agencies' rules during informal reviews before review packages are formally submitted , oira indicated that agencies only had to disclose the changes made at oira's suggestion during formal review ( some of which were as short as one day ) .

gao recommended that oira define this requirement in the executive order to include informal reviews , just as it did with regard to the requirements involving the office's communications with outside parties .

as noted previously , the "consistent with change" code in oira's database does not differentiate between oira - or agency - initiated changes , or changes that were major or minor in nature .

gao recommended that the database be changed to more clearly indicate which rules were substantively changed at oira's suggestion .

gao also recommended refinements to the executive order's requirements applicable to oira ( eg , more clearly indicating on its website the regulatory actions being discussed at meetings with outside parties and the affiliations of the participants ) and the requirements applicable to the agencies ( eg , defining the types of "substantive" changes that agencies should disclose ) .

in commenting on gao's report , the administrator of oira said that the office planned to review its implementation of the executive order's transparency requirements and would work to improve the clarity of its meeting log .

the administrator did not , however , believe that changes made during informal oira reviews should be disclosed — even though he said that oira can have its greatest influence during informal reviews .

disclosure of these informal review changes could be required through an administrative directive issued by the oira administrator or , alternatively , through legislation .

in april 2009 , gao again examined the changes made during oira's reviews , and concluded that oira had implemented only one of the eight recommendations in its 2003 report .

gao recommended that oira ( 1 ) define in guidance what types of changes made as a result of those reviews are substantive and need to be publicly identified , ( 2 ) instruct agencies to clearly identify those changes made at oira's suggestion or recommendation , ( 3 ) direct agencies to clearly state in their final rules whether substantive changes were made to their rules as a result of oira's reviews , and ( 4 ) standardize how agencies label documentation of these changes in their rulemaking dockets .

omb said that these recommendations had merit and warranted further consideration .

in the 112 th congress , h.r .

214 would , if enacted , establish a "congressional office of regulatory analysis. .

among other things , the office would be required to "provide to the committee on oversight and government reform of the house of representatives and the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs of the senate , information that will assist the committee in the discharge of all matters within its jurisdiction , including information with respect to its jurisdiction over authorization and oversight of the office of information and regulatory affairs of the office of management and budget. .

