on september 9 , 2004 , the house committee on appropriations reported a bill makingappropriations for the departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development , andindependent agencies for fy2005 ( va - hud appropriations bill ) ( h.r .

5041 ) .

 ( 1 ) under h.r .

5041,the veterans health administration ( vha ) would receive $30.3 billion in fy2005 .

this is a $1.9billion increase from fy2004 and $1.2 billion more than the president's request .

it includes $19.5billion for medical services , $4.7 billion for medical administration , $3.7 billion for medical facilities,$385 million for the medical and prosthetic research , and $2 billion in medical care collections .

furthermore , the committee recommended approximately $370 million from the construction majoraccount , and nearly $162 million from the construction minor account for capital asset realignmentfor enhanced services ( cares ) activities .

the committee rejected the administration's proposalto fund vha through an alternative appropriations structure , in which the vha budget would havebeen consolidated into two business lines: medical care , and medical and prosthetic research .

it alsodisregarded the administration's proposal to increase copayments and fees for lowest - priorityveterans .

the senate committee on appropriations reported its version of the va - hud appropriationsbill for fy2005 ( s. 2825 ) on september 21 , 2004 .

 ( 2 ) under s. 2825vha would receive $30.4 billion in fy2005 .

this is a $2 billion increase from fy2004 , and $1.2billion more than the president's request .

it includes $19.5 billion for medical services , ( 3 ) $4.7 billion for medicaladministration , $3.7 billion for medical facilities , $405 million for the medical and prosthetic research,and $2 billion in medical care collections .

the committee also recommended $370 million from theconstruction major account , and $182 million from the construction minor account for caresactivities .

the committee also rejected the administration's proposal to fund vha through analternate account structure and did not include any copayment changes that were proposed in thebudget .

on november 20 , 2004 , both the house and senate adopted the conference agreement toaccompany the consolidated appropriations act , 2005 ( h.r .

4818 , p.l .

108-447 ) .

 ( 4 ) under p.l.108-447 vhawould receive $30.3 billion in fy2005 an increase of $1.2 billion over the fy2005 appropriationrequest , and $1.9 billion over fy2004 .

none of the funds would be contingent upon an emergencydeclaration as proposed by the senate appropriations committee ( s. 2825 ) .

p.l.108-447 provides $19.5 billion to finance medical services .

furthermore , it appropriates $4.7billion for medical administration , $3.7 billion for medical facilities , and $405 million for medical andprosthetic research .

funding for vha includes $2 billion in medical care collections ( mccf ) .

theconference agreement also includes $370 million from the construction major account , and $182million from the construction minor account for cares related activities .

it should be noted thatthese amounts are not included in the total vha budget since construction major and constructionminor accounts are funded through separate construction accounts .

the conferrees of theconsolidated appropriations act , 2005 rejected the administration's proposal to fund vha throughan alternative account structure , and did not include any copayment changes that were proposed inthe president's budget request .

this report will first provide a brief summary of the fy2004 budget for vha care alongwith a general discussion of the budget process in order to provide a context for this summary .

second , the report will provide information on the president's fy2005 budget request for vha .

 ( 5 ) third , it will discuss theadministration's major legislative and regulatory proposals for va medical care for fy2005 .

thisreport has been updated to show the amounts recommended by the house and senate , and enactedby congress and signed into law by the president .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides benefits to veterans who meet certaineligibility rules .

benefits to veterans range from disability compensation and pensions , education,training and rehabilitation services , hospital and medical care , and other benefits such as home loanguarantees and death benefits ( including burial expenses ) .

va provides these benefits to veteransthrough three major operating units: the veterans health administration ( vha ) , the veteransbenefits administration ( vba ) and the national cemetery administration ( nca ) .

va's budgetincludes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disabilitycompensation , pension benefits , vocational rehabilitation , and life insurance , among other benefits andservices .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services , including medicalcare .

in fy2004 , discretionary budget authority accounted for approximately 47% of the total vabudget authority , with most of this discretionary funding going toward supporting va medical care .

vha operates the largest direct health care delivery system in the nation .

 ( 6 ) in fy2003 , vha operated160 hospitals , 134 nursing homes , 42 residential rehabilitation treatment centers , and 847 ambulatorycare and community - based outpatient clinics .

vha also pays for care provided to veterans byindependent providers and practitioners on a fee basis under certain circumstances .

in addition , vhaprovides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities , andcollaborates with the department of defense ( dod ) in sharing health care resources and services .

during fy2003 , vha provided medical services to an estimated 4.5 million unique veteranpatients , a caseload that is expected to reach approximately 4.7 million in fy2004 and approximately4.9 million by the end of fy2005 .

 ( 7 ) the total number of outpatient visits reached 49.7 million duringfy2003 , and is projected to increase to 53.1 million in fy2004 to 56.4 million in fy2005 .

infy2003 , vha spent approximately 50% of its medical care obligations on outpatient care .

in addition , vha manages the largest medical education and health professions trainingprogram in the united states .

veterans' health care facilities are affiliated with 107 medical schools,55 dental schools and more than 1,200 other schools across the country .

each year , about 81,000health professionals are trained in va medical centers .

in general , the federal budget process begins with the submission of the president's budgetrequest to congress .

following this submission , the budget committees of the house and senatedevelop the annual budget resolution which sets forth aggregate spending and revenue levels , byfunctional levels of spending , for the upcoming fiscal year and at least the following four fiscalyears .

 ( 11 ) the budgetresolution is not binding and does not allocate funds among specific programs or accounts , but themajor program assumptions underlying the functional amounts are often discussed in theaccompanying report .

 ( 12 ) the house and senate appropriations committees subdivide their allocations among their respective13 subcommittees , each of which is responsible for one of the regular appropriations acts .

authorizing committees for certain programs may also consider legislation that will affect spendingunder their programs .

a committee has the discretion to decide on the legislative changes to berecommended .

it is not bound by the program changes recommended or assumed by the budgetcommittees in the reports accompanying the budget resolution .

 ( 13 ) enumerated below aremajor highlights of the congressional budget process , beginning with the president's request to enactspending levels for va medical care for fy2004 .

the administration requested approximately $27.5 billion for vha for fy2004 ; this includedapproximately $1.8 billion in medical care collections ( see table 2 ) .

the house veterans affairs,housing and urban development , and independent agencies fy2004 appropriations bill ( fy2004va - hud appropriations bill ) recommended a new account structure for vha .

 ( 14 ) the fy2004 va - hudappropriations bill proposed establishing four new accounts: medical services , medicaladministration , ( 15 ) medical facilities , ( 16 ) andmedical and prosthetic research .

the fy2004 va - hud appropriations bill included approximately$16.4 billion for medical services , which included nearly $1.5 billion from the medical carecollections fund ( mccf ) ( the bill language did not provide the $1.5 billion as a separate line item,and it is not shown under the mccf line on table 2 ) .

in addition , the fy2004 va - hudappropriations bill included approximately $4.9 billion for medical administration , $4 billion formedical facilities , and $408 million for medical and prosthetic research .

in total , the house fy2004va - hud appropriations bill provided vha approximately $25.7 billion .

the senate's appropriations bill ( s. 1584 ) did not propose modifying the fy2003account structure ( 17 ) and the senate approved approximately $25.7 billion for medical care .

in addition , s.1584 provided approximately $413 million for medical and prosthetic research , andprovided approximately $80 million for medical administration and miscellaneous operating expenses .

in total , the senate bill provided vha approximately $28.6 billion for fy2004 , includingapproximately $1.6 billion from mccf .

the consolidated appropriation act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) ( 18 ) provided funding for vhabased on the account structure proposed in h.r .

2861 .

the new accounts that arefunded are medical services , medical administration , medical facilities , and medical prostheticresearch .

according to the conference committee , this account structure will provide for "betteroversight and a more accurate accounting of funds. .

p.l .

108-199 provided approximately $17.9billion for medical services , $5 billion for medical administration , $4 billion for medical facilities , and$408 million for medical and prosthetic research .

in total , p.l.108-199 provided $28.6 billion for theveterans health administration , including a separate amount for mccf .

the following table shows appropriations to va medical care programs for fy2003 , and forfy2004 , the administration's request ( based on the conference committee's account structure ) , theamounts recommended by the house and the senate , and the amounts ultimately approved bycongress and signed into law by the president .

table 2 .

vha appropriationsfy2003-fy2004 ( $ in thousands ) source: h.rept .

108-401 .

note: totals may not add due to rounding .

fy2004 amounts do not include effects of the 0.59%across - the - board rescission in most discretionary accounts , as called for in p.l .

108-199 .

a .

this amount includes $1.3 billion in emergency funding for medical care .

b .

the senate committee on appropriations included bill language delaying availability of $1.1 billionfor medical care to provide flexibility to va to implement significant program changes .

c. the senate committee on appropriations included bill language that canceled budget authority of $270 million , representing prior years recoveries for medical care .

d. medical care collections fund ( mccf ) receipts are restored to the vha as an indefinite budgetauthority equal to the revenue collected , estimated to be $1.386 billion in fy2003 .

theamount initially projected for fy2004 was $1.8 billion ; the conferees on the va - hudportion of the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

108-199 ) used a later estimate of$1.564 billion .

source : department of veterans affairs note: service - connected disability means with respect to disability , that such disability was incurredor aggravated in the line of duty in the active military , naval or air servic .

medical care .

the medical care appropriationwould provide for medical care and treatment of eligible veterans , and certain dependents andsurvivors of veterans .

in addition , this appropriation would also provide for training of medicalresidents and interns and other professional paramedical and administrative personnel in the healthcare field .

medical care collections fund ( mccf ) .

vadeposits copayments collected from veterans obligated to make such payments for either medicalservices or inpatient pharmacy benefits for outpatient medication , ( 36 ) and third - party insurancepayments from service - connected veterans for nonservice - connected conditions into the mccf .

 ( 37 ) however , copayments,third - party insurance payments , and fees for services other than medical services or inpatientpharmacy benefits were deposited in several medical collections accounts .

in fy2004 , the administration's budget proposed consolidating several medical collectionsaccounts into the mccf .

the conferees of the consolidated appropriations act [ h.rept.108-401 ] ( 38 ) recommended that collections which would otherwise be deposited in the entities formerly known asthe health services improvement fund , the veterans extended care revolving fund , the specialtherapeutic and rehabilitation activities fund , the medical facilities revolving fund , and theparking revolving fund be deposited in the mccf .

the funds deposited in the mccf would beavailable for medical services for veterans .

these collected funds do not have to be spent in anyparticular fiscal year and are available until expended .

the following describes former collectionaccounts now consolidated under the mccf , and current programs .

pharmacy copayments ( formerly collected in the health services improvement fund - - hsif ) .

in fy2002 , congress created a new fund ( the health services improvementfund ) to collect increases in pharmacy copayments ( from $2 to $7 for a 30-day supply of outpatientmedication ) that went into effect on february 4 , 2002 .

the consolidated appropriations resolution,2003 ( p.l .

108-7 ) granted va the authority to consolidate the hsif with the mccf and grantedpermanent authority to recover copayments for outpatient medications .

long - term care copayments ( formerly veterans extended care revolvingfund ) .

 ( 39 ) this fund received per diems and copayments from certain veteran patients receiving extended careservices from va providers or outside contractors .

according to the administration's budgetdocuments , extended care services are defined as geriatric evaluation , nursing home care , domiciliaryservices , respite care , adult day health care , and other noninstitutional alternatives to nursing homecare .

 ( 40 ) compensated work therapy program ( formerly the special therapeutic andrehabilitation activities fund ) .

 ( 41 ) the compensated work therapy ( cwt ) program is acomprehensive rehabilitation program that prepares veterans for competitive employment andindependent living .

the major goals of the program are: ( 1 ) to use remunerative work to maximizea veteran's level of functioning ; ( 2 ) to prepare veterans for successful reentry into the community asproductive citizens , and ; ( 3 ) to provide a structured daily activity to those veterans with severe andchronic disabling physical and / or mental conditions .

as part of their work therapy , veterans produceitems for sale or undertake subcontracts to provide certain products and / or services ( such asproviding temporary staffing to a private firm ) .

funds collected from the sale of these productsand / or services were used to fund the program .

compensation and pension living expenses program ( formerly the medical facilitiesrevolving fund ) .

 ( 42 ) under this program , veterans who do not have either a spouseor child would have their monthly pension reduced to $90 after the third month he or she is admittedfor nursing home care .

the difference between the veteran's pension and the $90 was used for theoperation of the va medical facility .

parking program ( formerly the parking revolving fund ) .

the programprovided funds for construction and acquisition of parking garages at va medical facilities .

vacollects fees for use of these parking facilities .

national program administration ( formerly medicaladministration and miscellaneous operating expenses , mamoe ) .

the nationalprogram administration provides support to va's comprehensive and integrated health care systemby headquarters staff .

specific activities include the development and implementation of policies,plans , and broad program activities ; assistance for the networks in attaining their objectives andnecessary follow - up action to ensure complete accomplishment of goals including the capital facilitiesmanagement and development functions .

construction major .

funds from this accountwould be for construction , altering , extending and improving any of the facilities used by va. anyproject that costs more than $7 million falls under this category .

construction minor .

funds from this accountwould be used for construction , altering , extending and improving any of the facilities used by va.any project that costs $500,000 or more , and less than $7 million falls under this category .

grants for construction of extended - carefacilities .

under this program grants are provided to states to acquire or constructstate owned and / or funded nursing home and domiciliary facilities , and to remodel , modify , or alterexisting buildings for furnishing domiciliary or nursing home care for veterans in state nursing homes .

the veterans health care act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-585 ) granted permanent authority for this program .

the millennium health care and benefits act ( p.l .

106-117 ) reformed the construction grantprogram by giving higher priority to critically needed renovations , such as projects involving fire - andlife - safety improvements in existing state homes .

prior to the enactment of this law , such projectswere given lower priority than grants for constructing new state nursing homes .

va / dod health care sharing incentive fund .

the national defense authorization act for fy2003 ( p.l .

107-314 ) directed the secretaries ofdefense and veterans affairs to enter into agreements and contracts for the mutually beneficialcoordination , use , or exchange of use of health care resources with the goal of improving access to , and the quality and cost - effectiveness of , the health care provided to beneficiaries .

under this act,va and the department of defense must establish a joint incentive fund , with each departmentcontributing a minimum of $15 million to the fund .

at present , the two departments are in theprocess of establishing the fund and developing criteria for its use .

the program is set to expire in2007 .

 ( 43 ) .

medical and prosthetic research .

in addition toproviding medical care , va conducts medical , rehabilitative , and health services research .

themedical and prosthetic research program is an intramural program .

funds from this appropriation are allocated to support va employees conducting research projects .

in addition to funds from thisappropriation , reimbursements from dod , grants from the national institutes of health , and privatesources support va researchers .

medical research supports both basic and advanced clinical studies .

the prosthetic research program is involved in the development of prosthetic , orthopedic , andsensory aides to improve the lives of disabled veterans .

the health services research program focuseson improving the outcome effectiveness and cost efficiency of health care delivery for veterans .

medical care research support .

prior to theproposed new account structure , funds appropriated under the medical care account were used forthe indirect cost of va research .

these indirect costs include costs of heating , lighting , and otherutilities associated with laboratory space , administrative costs associated with human resourcesneeded for research , and supply services attributed to research .

