most analysts conclude that , despite difficulties in the relationship , turkey is still strategically important to the united states .

it remains geographically near to crisis areas in the middle east , thecaucasus , central asia , and the balkans .

for over a decade , u.s. and allied planes flew out ofincirlik air base in southeast turkey to enforce a no - fly zone over northern iraq .

u.s. planes haveflown more than 8,000 flights out of incirlik in support of afghan operations .

nato is usingincirlik to support the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

and , althoughnot using turkish air bases , u.s. planes flew more than 4,000 flights through turkish airspace duringthe iraq war .

since the war , the united states has used turkish ports and overland routes to resupplycoalition forces in iraq .

turkey is a source of water , gas , and other supplies for u.s. forces there .

turkey allows the use of turkish bases , ports , and airports to assist in the reconstruction of iraq .

and , as noted above , thousands of u.s. troops are rotating from iraq via incirlik .

on june 12 , 2003,nato defense ministers agreed to move nato's southern air command headquarters from naplesto izmir , affirming nato's growing interest in the east .

turkey's role as a transit route for energy resources from caucasus and central asia is being realized with construction of the long - awaited baku - tblisi - ceyhan oil pipeline and of a gas pipelinefrom azerbaijan to turkey , with both pipelines scheduled for completion in 2005 .

the oil pipelinefrom iraq to turkey is considered vital to the revival of iraq's economy , although the segment in iraqhas been sabotaged repeatedly .

turkey is closely cooperating with the united states in the war on terrorism .

arrests of al qaeda operatives have been made in turkey as a result of close cooperation between turkish andu.s .

intelligence agencies .

 ( 97 ) after the november2003 bombings in istanbul , deputy secretary ofstate richard armitage told the turks , "our enemy is your enemy.... we are very much closer now,in the wake of this tragedy. .

 ( 98 ) turkey's large army is among the most experienced in the world in peacekeeping .

turkish forces have served in somalia , bosnia , kosovo , macedonia , east timor , and led isaf inafghanistan from july 2002 to february 2003 .

 ( 99 ) turkey lost several soldiers in afghanistan , andsome of its civilian workers were kidnaped there .

after its period of command , turkey reduced itsforces in afghanistan and , as of june 15 , 2004 , only 161 turkish soldiers remained there .

innovember 2003 , respected former foreign minister hikmet cetin became nato's senior civilianrepresentative in afghanistan .

in may 2004 , turkey dispatched three helicopters and 56 flight andmaintenance personnel to assist isaf .

deputy chief of staff general ilker basbug said that turkeymay command isaf again from february to august 2005 .

turkey also participates in the u.s. - initiated southeast europe brigade ( seebrig ) , black sea naval group ( blackseafor ) , and provides nato partnership for peace ( pfp ) training forcountries of the balkans , caucasus , and central asia .

finally , turkey is an example of a predominantly muslim , democratic country at a time when u.s. policy is to encourage democratization in the muslim world .

in this area , turkish officials echothe u.s. agenda , sometimes with caveats .

on may 28 , 2003 , foreign minister gul delivered alandmark speech at the organization of the islamic conference foreign ministers' meeting inteheran .

he called for the group to act with "a refreshed vision" in which good governance,transparency and accountability would reign , and fundamental rights and freedoms as well as genderequality are upheld .

 ( 100 ) in june 2004 , primeminister erdogan attended the g - 8 summit in seaisland , georgia , as a "democratic partner" for the formal launching of the broader middle east andnorth africa initiative .

turkish officials have cautioned that reforms should be generated from within societies , not imposed , that the agenda and pace of reform must be decided by each country to suit the needs andsensitivities of its society , that it is a gradual process , and that it cannot be thought of in isolationfrom international problems such as the arab - israeli conflict and iraq .

 ( 101 ) gul has noted that reformswould not come automatically even if the arab - israeli conflict were solved , and urged that they bestarted without delay .

he argued that the islamic world must address both issues .

gul hasacknowledged that turkish reforms demonstrate that islam and modernism can be integrated and thatturkey could not prevent itself from being used as a model .

 ( 102 ) in contrast , turkish secularists findinappropriate the idea that turkey should be a model for islamic countries .

president sezerreportedly lectured president bush at the nato summit in june 2004 that "turkey is a country withpredominantly muslim population , but it is not an islamic country ... religion is separated from stateaffairs. .

 ( 103 ) u.s. officials have accommodated turkish language preferences and now refer to turkey as an "example" or "symbol. .

president bush declared that he admired "the example" turkey "has set onhow to be a muslim country and at the same time a country which embraces democracy and the ruleof law and freedom. .

 ( 104 ) some observers doubt the sincerity of akp's commitment to democracy .

they question whether behind the party's democratic rhetoric , in the actions of its islamist elements discussedabove , and in legislation to reduce the power of the secularist military , the party has begun a processthat could transform turkey into an islamic republic .

 ( 105 ) such a transformation , these observersassume , would be contrary to u.s. interests .

opposition to the war in iraq and u.s. actions against turkish soldiers at sulaymaniyah helped to form an unfavorable image of the united states in turkey .

according to a pew research centerpoll conducted in may 2003 , 83% of turks had a somewhat or very unfavorable view of the unitedstates , while only 15% viewed it positively .

a pew poll in february 2004 indicated improved , butstill negative , perceptions of the united states: 63% of turks with negative perceptions , compared to 30% with positive ones .

 ( 106 ) the foundationfor social , economic , and political research inturkey ( tuses ) reported poll results in march 2004 , which found that 52.6% of responding turksviewed the united states as a danger to the rest of the world , while 86% viewed the u.s. militaryintervention in iraq as unjustified .

 ( 107 ) only 6%of the respondents in a turkish pollmark researchpoll later in 2004 "desire to be close to the united states," 60% oppose the u.s. operation in iraq,while 42% support the resistance and attacks against u.s. forces there .

 ( 108 ) turkish far - rightnationalists and leftist secular nationalists promote antipathy toward u.s. policies .

the turkish government does not appear to be countering these sentiments .

akp leaders didnot argue that relations with the united states were so important that their repair warranted sendingturkish peacekeepers to iraq , among reasons for a possible deployment .

while turkish visitors tothe united states and op - ed articles by turkish officials in u.s. newspapers inform americanaudiences of the importance of the bilateral relationship , a survey of the turkish press indicates thatthe same messages are not delivered at home .

in fact , foreign minister gul thanked those who haddemonstrated against president bush during the nato summit in june 2004 for helping to securethe release of three turkish hostages in iraq , thereby fulfilling a demand of abductors .

 ( 109 ) theabsence of an akp government response to anti - americanism at home has led some to suggest thatwashington should question its sincerity .

 ( 110 ) .

u.s. - turkish trade relations have not developed as planned since 2002 .

a u.s. initiative to create qualifying industrial zones ( qizs ) in turkey as an extension of the u.s. - israel free tradeagreement has not been achieved .

 ( 111 ) goodsin the zones were to be eligible for tariff - free andquota - free status .

legislation proposed in the 107th congress would have excluded turkish textilesand apparel products from the qiz program , making 49% of turkey's exports ineligible for theenhanced treatment .

turks were disappointed that the administration was unwilling to challengechampions of u.s. textile manufacturing and demanded the inclusion of textiles in the qizs.administration officials repeatedly reminded their turkish counterparts that global textile quotas areto be eliminated in january 2005 .

in april 2004 , turkish state minister kursad tuzmen signaleda change in turkey's view of qizs accepting that they might be limited to high - tech products andthereby recognizing that insistence on textiles was impeding development of the qizs .

 ( 112 ) a u.s. - turkey economic partnership commission under the co - chairmanship of the u.s .

undersecretary of state for economic , business , and commercial affairs and the turkishundersecretary of the foreign ministry has met twice .

the u.s. team includes representatives fromtreasury , commerce , u.s. trade representative , export - import bank , overseas private investmentcorporation , and the trade and development agency .

trade is one subject discussed by thecommission .

after the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , turkey received $20 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) from the emergency response fund set up by p.l .

107-38 , september 18 , 2001 .

on march 19 , 2002 , vice president cheney said that the administration would provide turkey with$200 million in economic support funds ( esf ) to help address the financial difficulties caused byturkey's ongoing economic crises "that seriously affect turkey's ability to contribute to current andfuture u.s. government policy objectives" and $28 million in fmf to help defray the costs ofassuming leadership of the isaf in afghanistan .

 ( 113 ) the funds were provided in the fy2002supplemental appropriations approved in p.l .

107-206 , august 2 , 2002 .

for fy2003 , the administration requested $17.5 million in fmf and $2.8 million in international military education and training funds ( imet ) , which were appropriated in p.l .

108-7 ,february 20 , 2003 .

as part of the emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act , p.l.108-011 , april 16 , 2003 , turkey was to receive $1 billion in esf to support not more than $8.5billion in direct loans or loan guarantees .

the conference report , h.rept.108-76 , april 12 , 2003,provided that the $1 billion remain available until september 30 , 2005 .

however , the funds may notbe made available if the secretary of state determines and reports that turkey is not cooperating withthe united states in operation iraqi freedom , including the facilitation of humanitarian assistanceto iraq , or has unilaterally deployed troops into northern iraq .

the president will determine the termsand conditions for issuing the assistance , and should take into consideration budgetary and economicreforms undertaken by turkey .

under the terms of a loan agreement signed by the united states andturkey on september 22 , 2003 , the loan will mature in 10 years and have a four - year grace periodfor repayment .

funds may be disbursed in four equal installments over 18 months ; none have beendisbursed so far .

minister of state babacan has said that they are not needed , while prime ministererdogan suggests that "the political condition" that congress attached to the loan is the reason thatthe funds have not been drawn down .

for fy2004 , the administration requested $50 million in fmf and $200 million in esf .

there were no economic or military assistance earmarks for turkey in the consolidated appropriationsact , p.l .

108-199 , january 23 , 2004 , and , in fy2004 , turkey will receive an estimated $40 millionin fmf , $99,410,000 in esf , and $5 million in imet .

 ( 114 ) for fy2005 , the administration has requested $50 million in esf , $34 million in fmf , and $4 million in imet .

h.rept .

108-599 , july 13 , 2004 , for h.r .

4818 , the foreignoperations appropriations act for fy2005 , passed on july 15 , calls for a $50 million reduction inassistance for turkey , noting that $1 billion appropriated in p.l .

108-011 remains unexpended .

h.r.4818 , sec .

578 would prohibit use of funds made available to turkey to lobby against h.res .

193 , which would reaffirm support for the genocide convention ( and mentionthe armenian genocide ) .

state department spokesman richard boucher has said that theadministration opposes the measure .

house leaders have observed that the provision is not neededbecause law already prohibits use of u.s. aid for lobbying and said that they will insist that confereesdrop it .

house speaker dennis hastert , majority leader tom delay , and majority whip roy bluntissued a statement declaring , "turkey has been a reliable ally of the united states for decades , andthe deep foundation upon which our mutual economic and security relationship rests should not bedisrupted by this amendment. .

 ( 115 ) .

