at the outset of military operations in both bosnia and kosovo , congressional reaction wasmixed .

in both cases , resolutions in favor and in opposition to participation passed either the houseor senate ; but no legislation authorizing or prohibiting u.s. participation passed both chambers.appropriations for these military operations were never denied , though extensive reportingrequirements often conditioned the funding .

 ( 6 ) if current intentions are carried out , nato forces - including u.s. troops - will be completely withdrawn from bosnia by the end of 2004 and replaced by a european union force of both policeand military personnel .

with that withdrawal , a close monitoring of the eu's mission performanceand bosnia's political stability would appear to be the primary remaining concerns .

while nato troops may withdraw from bosnia , there appears to be no time line for a withdrawal from kosovo .

a continued nato military presence in kosovo will probably remainuntil the province's political future is determined , and perhaps for a period thereafter .

whether thenato contingent need continue to include u.s. troops is , however , open to question .

thepossibility remains that the european union could eventually assume peace - keeping responsibilitiesin kosovo also ; however , that is unlikely to occur until its performance in bosnia is evaluated .

p.l .

108-384 to authorize appropriations for fy2004 for military activities of the department of defense,and for military construction , to prescribe military personnel strengths for fiscal year 2004 , and forother purposes .

signed into law november 24 , 2003 .

p.l .

108-87 making appropriations for the department of defense for the fiscal year 2004 , and for otherpurposes .

signed into law september 30 , 2003 .

crs report rl31053 , kosovo and u.s. policy .

crs report rl30906 ( pdf ) , bosnia - herzegovina and u.s. policy .

crs issue brief ib94040 , peacekeeping and related stability operations: issues of u.s. military involvement .

bosnialink ( dod ) - - http: / / www.dtic.mil / bosnia / kfor headquarters - - http: / / www.nato.int / kfor / welcome.html nato headquarters - - http: / / www.nato.int / kosovo / press.ht .

