in the past several decades the practice of torture by public officials has been condemned by the international community through a number of international treaties and declarations , leading many commentators to conclude that customary international law now prohibits the use of torture by government entities .

perhaps the most notable international agreement prohibiting the use of torture is the united nations convention against torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment ( convention or cat ) , which obligates parties to prohibit the use of torture and to require the punishment or extradition of torturers found within their territorial jurisdiction .

since opening for signature in december 1984 , over 140 states , including the united states , have become parties to the convention .

cat defines torture as "any act by which severe pain or suffering , whether physical or mental , is intentionally inflicted on a person ... by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity. .

this definition does not include "pain or suffering arising only from , inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions. .

according to the state department's analysis of cat , which was included in president reagan's transmittal of the convention to the senate for its advice and consent , this definition was intended to be interpreted in a "relatively limited fashion , corresponding to the common understanding of torture as an extreme practice which is universally condemned. .

indeed , cat article 16 further obligates signatory parties to take action to prevent "other acts of cruel , inhuman , or degrading punishment which do not amount to acts of torture.... " according to the state department , this distinction reflected the belief by the drafters of cat that torture must be "severe" and that rough treatment , such as police brutality , "while deplorable , does not amount to 'torture'" for purposes of the convention .

further , cat provides that offenses of torture require actual intent to cause severe pain and suffering ; an act that results in unanticipated and unintended severity of pain and suffering is not torture for purposes of the convention .

in accordance with cat article 2 , parties agree to take effective legislative , administrative , judicial , and other measures to prevent acts of torture from occurring within their territorial jurisdiction .

further , parties are required to ensure that all acts of torture , as well as attempts to commit torture and complicity or participation in torture , are criminal offenses subject to penalty .

cat article 2 makes clear that "no exceptional circumstances whatsoever," including a state of war or any other public emergency , may be invoked to justify torture .

the state department has claimed that this explicit prohibition of all torture , regardless of the circumstances , was viewed by the drafters of cat as "necessary if the convention is to have significant effect , as public emergencies are commonly invoked as a source of extraordinary powers or as a justification for limiting fundamental rights and freedoms. .

cat also imposes specific obligations upon signatory parties with respect to their transfer of individuals to other countries .

cat article 3 requires that no state party expel , return , or extradite a person to another country where "there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture. .

in determining whether grounds exist to believe an individual would be in danger of being subjected to torture , state parties are required to take into account "all relevant considerations including , where applicable , the existence in the state concerned of a consistent pattern of gross , flagrant or mass violations of human rights. .

the state department has interpreted the words "where applicable" to indicate that competent authorities must decide whether and to what extent these considerations are a relevant factor in a particular case .

cat article 3 does not expressly prohibit persons from being removed to countries where they would face cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment not rising to the level of torture .

the committee against torture , the monitoring body created by the parties to the convention , has interpreted the obligations of article 3 as placing the burden of proof on an applicant for non - removal to demonstrate that there are substantial grounds to believe that he would be subjected to torture if removed to the proposed country .

further , the committee has interpreted the non - removal provisions of article 3 to refer to both direct and indirect removal to a state where the individual concerned would likely be tortured , meaning that a state cannot remove a person to a third country when it knows he would subsequently be removed to a country where he would likely face torture .

the united states signed cat on april 18 , 1988 , and ratified the convention on october 21 , 1994 , subject to certain declarations , reservations , and understandings , including a declaration that cat articles 1 through 16 were not self - executing , and therefore required domestic implementing legislation .

this section will discuss relevant declarations , reservations , and understandings made by the united states to cat , and u.s. laws and regulations implementing the convention .

the provisions of cat article 3 appear to protect all individuals from removal to a state where they are likely to be tortured , regardless of whether these individuals engaged in criminal practices themselves .

however , while cat obligates the united states not to remove aliens to countries where they are likely to be tortured , the convention does not require the united states to permit such aliens' open presence in its territory .

the question thus occurs as to what happens in the case of an otherwise inadmissible or deportable alien whose removal is effectively barred by cat .

in zadvydas v. davis , the supreme court concluded that the indefinite detention of deportable aliens ( eg , aliens who were admitted into the u.s. , and thereafter committed an immigration violation that caused them to become removable ) would raise significant due process concerns .

the court interpreted the applicable immigration statute governing the removal of deportable aliens as only permitting the detention of aliens following an order of removal for so long as is "reasonably necessary to bring about that alien's removal from the united states .

it does not permit indefinite detention. .

the court found that the presumptively reasonable limit for the post - removal - period detention is six months , but indicated that continued detention may be warranted when the policy is limited to specially dangerous individuals and strong procedural protections are in place .

subsequently , the supreme court ruled that aliens who have been deemed inadmissible ( i.e. , arriving aliens who have not been granted legal entry , as well as those aliens who have been "paroled" into the country by immigration authorities ) also could not be indefinitely detained , but the court's holding was based on statutory construction of the applicable immigration law , and it did not consider whether such aliens were owed the same due process protections as aliens who had been legally admitted into the united states .

it is important to note , however , that despite generally rejecting the practice of indefinite detention , the zadvydas court nevertheless suggested that the continued detention of particular aliens past the statutory period for removal might be warranted in limited cases where the alien was "specially dangerous. .

though the court only specifically mentioned mental illness as a special circumstance perhaps warranting indefinite detention , it appears that aliens detained on security or related grounds , such as terrorists , might also be considered "specially dangerous" and warrant indefinite detention as well .

following the court's ruling in zadvydas , new regulations were issued to comply with the court's holding .

after a six - month detention period , which the zadvydas court found to be presumptively reasonable , an alien's request for release from detention , accompanied by evidence that his removal would not otherwise be effected in the reasonably foreseeable future , may be reviewed by the dhs's bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

following consideration of this evidence , the ice is required to issue a written decision either ordering the alien released or continuing his detention .

dhs regulations permit the continued detention of certain classes of aliens on account of special circumstances , including , inter alia , any alien who is detained on account of ( 1 ) serious adverse foreign policy consequences of release ; ( 2 ) security or terrorism concerns ; or ( 3 ) being considered specially dangerous due to having committed one or more crimes of violence and having a mental condition making it likely that the alien will commit acts of violence in the future .

as a result of the zadvydas decision , some criminal aliens afforded non - refoulement protection under cat may be required to be eventually released from detention , even though such aliens would otherwise be subject to removal from the united states .

according to the dhs , "in all but the most serious cases , a criminal alien who cannot be returned — regardless of the reason — may be subject to release after six months. .

in 2003 , the dhs stated that in practice less than one percent of criminal aliens who have received cat protection have been released from custody following a final order of removal .

however , given the court's ruling in zadvydas and subsequent jurisprudence suggesting that the use of indefinite detention may be severely limited , as well as the growing number of aliens who have been granted deferral of removal under cat , the magnitude of this potential obstacle to alien removal may increase over time .

it is important to note that cat only prohibits signatory parties from expelling persons to states where they would likely to be tortured — it does not provide aliens with protection from removal to states where they would not be tortured , even if such aliens would face cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment not rising to the level of torture .

reaching agreements with countries to permit the removal of criminal aliens to these countries ( possibly for the purpose of prosecuting them ) , subject to the condition that they will not be tortured or perhaps face other harsh forms of treatment , could be one possible method for handling this potential problem , although it is unclear whether other states would be receptive to such agreements .

when immigration officials identify a suspected foreign terrorist or similar security threat at a port of entry , the government's interest in the alien likely extends beyond simply assuring that the suspect does not enter the united states .

security and criminal law enforcement interests may also come into play .

controversy over how cat applies in reconciling these diverse interests is illustrated by the case of maher arar .

in september 2002 , u.s. authorities arrested mr. arar , a canadian citizen born in syria , at john f. kennedy airport in new york while he was waiting for a connecting flight to canada .

according to news reports , u.s. officials allege that arar was on a terrorist watch list after "multiple international intelligence agencies" linked him to terrorist groups , though arar has denied any knowing connection to terrorism .

though the particulars remain unclear , arar alleges that he was detained for several days of interrogation in the united states and asked to voluntarily agree to be transferred to syria .

arar claims he refused to approve such transfer , but was nevertheless transferred to jordan and then to syria , where he was reportedly imprisoned for ten months .

at the time of arar's transfer , syria was listed by the state department as a regular practitioner of torture .

syria is not a party to cat .

upon release and his subsequent return to canada , arar claims that he was tortured by syrian officials in an effort to compel him to confess to terrorist activities .

canada subsequently ordered a public inquiry as to what role , if any , canada played in arar's transfer to syria , and arar filed civil suit in a u.s. federal court against various current and former u.s. officials for their role in his transfer and alleged subsequent torture .

in late 2003 , then - attorney general john ashcroft was quoted as stating , "in removing mr. arar from the u.s. , we acted fully within the law and applicable treaties and conventions. .

the united states reportedly received assurances from syria that arar would not be tortured prior to removing him there , and syria has reportedly stated that arar was not tortured .

it is unclear whether arar's rendition complied with any legal procedures governing covert renditions that are not handled through either extradition or the general process for alien removal .

further , there appears to be no public information concerning what assurances , if any , were given by syria to the united states prior to arar's transfer .

arar's lawsuit claimed in part that his removal was in violation of regulations concerning the removal of arriving aliens , and u.s. officials have claimed that his removal was conducted pursuant to expedited removal procedures outlined in ina § 235 ( c ) .

on the other hand , it is possible that arar's rendition was conducted at least in part pursuant to a law - enforcement action relating to the war on terror rather than pursuant to u.s. immigration laws .

whether arar's removal to syria constituted a violation of u.s. obligations under cat and cat - implementing laws and regulations may require a finding of fact as to the particular nature of the assurances provided to the united states and the role they played in the decision to remove arar .

whether such a finding will be made in the foreseeable future remains to be seen .

on february 16 , 2006 , the u.s. district court for the eastern district of new york dismissed arar's civil case on a number of grounds , including that certain claims raised against u.s. officials implicated national security and foreign policy considerations , and the propriety of those considerations was most appropriately reserved to congress and the executive branch .

the district court's dismissal was upheld by a three - judge panel of the court of appeals for the second circuit on june 30 , 2008 .

a rehearing en banc was granted on august 12 , 2008 , but a ruling has yet to be issued .

the final report of the commission established by the canadian government to investigate canada's role in arar's transfer was released in september 2006 .

it concluded that arar had not been a security threat to canada , but canadian officials provided u.s. authorities with inaccurate information regarding arar that may have led to his transfer .

for a detailed discussion concerning the legality of renditions under the laws on torture , including cat , see crs report rl32890 , renditions: constraints imposed by laws on torture , by [author name scrubbed] .

