a number of economic factors influence u.s. trade policy: domestic economic conditions ; growing trade deficits ; the impact of trade ( exports and imports ) on various states , regions , andindustries ; the importance of trade to the u.s. economy ; and the geographical distribution of u.s.exports and imports ; among other factors .

it is also influenced by political factors , such as the roleand concerns of congress in trade policy , the role and agenda of the president , and the differentperspectives that the two branches bring to the trade debate and foreign policy considerations .

thesefactors influence the climate in which the issues emerge and are debated by the congress .

the 109th congess has already faced some trade issues , and will likely confront more,requiring consideration and debate during the second session .

how congress addresses these issuescould have long - term implications for u.s. trade policy .

the range of trade issues that the 109th congress will likely face is very broad and diverse .

each issue or set of issues bears its own implications as members of congress weigh the merits anddisadvantages .

in most cases , the 109th congress will be considering and debating each issueseparately .

however , the cumulative effect of each debate may have wider implications for u.s.trade policy .

as the 109th congress addresses these issues , its decisions may define u.s. trade policyin the long term .

the history of u.s. trade policy since the 1930s is one of a movement toward tradeliberalization - - lowering of tariffs and other trade barriers - - and working in concert with other majortrading powers to create multilateral rules to promote freer trade .

at the same time , u.s. tradepolicymakers have taken measures to restrict trade by crafting laws that make it easier for domesticu.s .

industries to obtain relief from dumped and subsidized imports and from surges in fairly - tradedimports .

while this debate over the direction of u.s. trade policy is sometimes framed as "free tradeor protectionism," the terms of the debate are more subtle - - more open trade or more restrictedtrade .

the outcome of the trade issues before the 109th congress will influence in which directionu.s .

trade policy proceeds .

developing countries have emerged as significant players in u.s. trade and world trade asa result of globalization .

this trend presents the united states with challenges .

for example , howshould the united states respond to the increasing competition from less expensive labor in thedeveloping countries ? .

should labor rights be included in trade agreements ? .

these questions cutacross the debates on each of the u.s. ftas with developing countries , the doha developmentagenda negotiations in the wto , discussions and congressional proposals on trade remedy laws,the issue of "outsourcing," and the anticipated surge in textile and wearing apparel imports , amongother issues .

a broader question that might be considered is whether on balance the united stateswill consider trade with developing countries as a "race to the bottom" or as a "win - win" propositionfor both sides .

the issues of workers rights and environmental protection , become significant points ofdebate in congressional consideration of many trade matters .

more precisely , the question is to whatextent should workers rights , environmental protection , and other concerns be part of tradeagreements or other trade policy initiatives .

the congress included workers rights andenvironmental policy as principal negotiating objectives in the legislation granting trade promotionauthority .

some members of congress have argued that trade agreements should ensure that tradepartners' treatment of workers rights meet internationally accepted core labor standards or otherwiseface trade sanctions .

others contend that trade agreements should only ensure that countriesadequately enforce their own trade laws .

a similar division of thought exists regarding tradeagreements and environmental protection .

this underlying debate will likely emerge in congressional consideration of dr - cafta andother trade agreements involving developing country trading partners .

it may also arise if and whencongress considers renewal of the president's trade promotion authority and reviews u.s.participation in the wto .

the outcome of these debates might determine in which direction u.s.trade policy is moving on these issues .

the trade issues that the 109th congress faces and how the congress deals with them couldhave an impact on the international trading system .

the international system is becoming larger andmore complex .

lying at the foundation of the system is the wto .

over the years , the rules thewto ( and its predecessor the gatt ) administers have expanded from tariffs to such nontariffbarriers as government procurement practices , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and iprprotection .

an objective of the doha development agenda is to broaden the rules coverage evenmore .

the 107th congress helped set the agenda for the dda round and u.s. negotiating positionsduring the round when it granted the president trade promotion authority and established negotiatingobjectives .

the 109th congress through oversight and the administration's mandatory consultationscan continue to influence the agenda .

the wto is also expanding its membership .

as of february 2006 , the wto has 149members with 29 more countries at various stages of attaining membership or accession .

congressdoes not vote on whether a country can join the wto .

through oversight it can influence the u.s.position on negotiating a country's entry .

the congress could have a more direct impact when itconsiders pntr for those countries , such as russia , ukraine , and vietnam , whose ntr status is stillconditioned under the jackson - vanik amendment .

along with the wto , the international trading system is populated by a web of regional andbilateral free trade areas based on ftas .

in some cases , these areas are interlinked , while in others,they are distinct .

ftas have become a significant and expanding part of the international tradingsystem .

international trade observers and policymakers are divided on whether the two tracks of theinternational trading system - - the multilateral ( the wto ) and bilateral / regional ( ftas ) - - aremutually reinforcing or in conflict .

the bush administration firmly bases its trade policy strategyon the two prongs being reinforcing .

former ustr zoellick has argued that the ftas he negotiatedare "cutting edge agreements [that] carry an importance beyond the size of newly opened markets,because they set high , enforceable standards in newer areas of importance to america - - such asservices , intellectual property , transparency and anti - corruption and e - commerce. .

 ( 30 ) on the other hand , others contend that ftas undermine the wto and its principles becausethey promote discriminatory treatment in trade by limiting preferential treatment to the participantsin the fta .

some critics have also asserted that bilateral and regional ftas create a conglomerationof tariff - reduction schedules and rules of origin that are in conflict with one another and createconfusion in the trading system undermining trade efficiency .

 ( 31 ) in between these two groups are policymakers and observers who assert that ftas and thewto are not necessarily incompatible , but oppose the emphasis that bilateral and regional ftashave been given by the bush administration .

they argue that the administration needs to devotethe limited available staff and other resources to wto negotiations where , they claim , it can promoteu.s .

trade policy goals more effectively .

 ( 32 ) .

