over the past several decades , multiple international agreements and declarations have condemned and / or sought to prohibit the practice of torture by public officials , leading many to conclude that torture is now prohibited under customary international law .

perhaps the most notable international agreement prohibiting torture is the united nations convention against torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment ( convention or cat ) , signed by the united states and more than 140 other countries .

the united states signed cat on april 18 , 1988 , and ratified the convention on october 21 , 1994 , subject to certain declarations , reservations , and understandings .

perhaps most significantly , the united states included a declaration in its instruments of ratification that cat articles 1 through 16 were not self - executing .

the following sections discuss relevant declarations , reservations , and understandings made by the united states to cat , and u.s. laws implementing cat article 4 requirements to criminalize torture .

although u.s. courts and administrative bodies have found that severe beatings , maiming , sexual assault , rape , and ( in certain circumstances ) death threats may constitute "torture" for purposes of either cat or the tvpa , there is little u.s. jurisprudence concerning whether harsh yet sophisticated interrogation techniques of lesser severity constitute "torture" under either cat or u.s. implementing legislation .

"severe" pain or suffering constituting torture is not defined by either cat or the federal torture statute .

in the 2004 doj memo superseding the department's earlier memorandum on torture , the doj concluded that "severe physical suffering" may constitute torture under the federal torture statute even if such suffering does not involve "severe physical pain. .

the continuing relevance of this legal opinion to u.s. agents is unclear , given president obama's executive order generally barring u.s. agents from relying on bush - era doj opinions regarding the laws of interrogation .

although few , if any , u.s. courts have had the opportunity to address this issue , decisions and opinions issued by foreign courts and international bodies might serve as indicators of an international consensus for the prohibition of certain interrogation techniques .

assuming for the purposes of discussion that a u.s. body reviewed certain interrogation methods to assess whether they constituted "torture" for purposes of cat and domestic implementing legislation , it might consider looking at jurisprudence by non - u.s. bodies for guidance , though such jurisprudence would not be binding upon u.s. courts .

it should also be noted that the u.s. military has also barred specified interrogation techniques it has deemed to rise to the level of torture , and a reviewing court may consider these prohibitions as well .

the next section briefly discusses two notable circumstances in which international or foreign state bodies have assessed whether a state's interrogation techniques constituted torture .

in 1978 , the european court of human rights ( echr ) heard a case brought by ireland against the united kingdom concerning british tactics used to counter secessionist movements and organizations in northern ireland during the early 1970s , and whether such tactics violated the european convention for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms ( european convention ) .

one issue that the echr was asked to resolve was whether five interrogation techniques previously employed by british authorities and approved by "high level" british officials violated article 3 of the european convention , which provides that "no one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. .

according to the echr , these five interrogation techniques , which were sometimes used in combination and other times individually , included: wall - standing: forcing the detainees to remain for periods of some hours in a "stress position," described by those who underwent it as being "spreadeagled against the wall , with their fingers put high above the head against the wall , the legs spread apart and the feet back , causing them to stand on their toes with the weight of the body mainly on the fingers" ; hooding: putting a black or navy coloured bag over the detainees' heads and , at least initially , keeping it there all the time except during interrogation ; subjection to noise: pending their interrogations , holding the detainees in a room where there was a continuous loud and hissing noise ; deprivation of sleep: pending their interrogations , depriving the detainees of sleep ; and deprivation of food and drink: subjecting the detainees to a reduced diet during their stay at the center and pending interrogations .

an investigation by the european commission of human rights concluded that no physical injury resulted from the use of these techniques , though certain detainees suffered weightloss and adverse effects relating to their "acute psychiatric systems ... during interrogation. .

the echr concluded that the interrogation techniques employed by britain violated the european convention's prohibition upon "inhuman or degrading treatment," but found that the interrogation methods did not constitute "torture. .

the echr stated that a distinction exists between inhuman or degrading treatment and torture ; a "distinction [that] derives principally from a difference in the intensity of the suffering inflicted. .

the echr concluded that while the five interrogation techniques , at least when used in combination , were inhuman or degrading treatment , "they did not occasion suffering of the particular intensity and cruelty implied by the word torture as so understood. .

the echr did not offer an in - depth analysis as to why these techniques did not cause sufficient suffering to constitute torture , although it should be noted that it appeared that few , if any , of the persons who were subject to the interrogation techniques sustained lasting , debilitating physical or mental injuries .

it did note , however , that its inquiry required an evaluation of "all the circumstances of the case , such as the duration of the treatment , its physical or mental effects and , in some cases , the sex , age and state of health of the victim. .

accordingly , it may be possible that in different circumstances these interrogation techniques might have been judged by the echr to rise to the level of torture .

beginning in the late 1980s and ending in the late 1990s , certain israeli security forces were authorized to employ harsh interrogation techniques against palestinian security detainees , including the use of "moderate physical pressure. .

in its initial report to the cat committee , israel argued that the interrogation techniques it employed were in accordance with international law prohibiting torture .

it specifically noted the echr decision declaring that the interrogation techniques employed by britain in northern ireland during the early 1970s did not constitute torture .

the committee concluded , however , that such tactics were "completely unacceptable" given israel's obligations under cat articles 2 and 16 .

in response to committee concerns about its interrogation techniques , israel submitted additional information concerning the nature of the interrogation techniques it employed against security detainees .

according to the cat committee , these interrogation techniques included: restraining in very painful conditions ; hooding under special conditions ; sounding of loud music for prolonged periods ; sleep deprivation for prolonged periods ; threats , including death threats ; violent shaking ; and using cold air to chill .

in 1997 , after examining a special report by israel discussing these tactics , the committee concluded that the tactics described violated israel's obligations as a party to cat , representing a breach of cat article 16 and constituting torture as defined by cat article 1 .

the committee opinion suggests that some of the interrogation techniques employed by israel might constitute torture when employed singularly , although the committee did not specify how particular methods constituted torture .

despite acknowledging that israel faced a "terrible dilemma ... in dealing with terrorist threats to its security," the committee noted that cat provides that no exceptional circumstances permit state parties to engage in torture .

accordingly , the committee recommended that israel immediately cease its use of the interrogation tactics described above .

the committee is an advisory body , and its rulings are not binding .

however , in 1999 , the israeli supreme court sitting as the israeli high court of justice prohibited the use of "brutal or inhuman means" of interrogation , including five specific interrogation techniques at issue in the petitions before it , namely: the shaking of a detainee ; placing the detainee in the "shabach" position , which involves cuffing of the suspect , seating him on a low chair , covering his head with a sack , and playing loud music in the area ; placing the detainee in a "frog crouch" position , during which a detainee is forced to crouch while on the tips of his toes , for repeated , five - minute intervals ; the use of excessively tight handcuffs ; and the use of sleep deprivation ( by design and not merely as "a side effect" of the interrogation ) .

in finding that these techniques were impermissible under israeli law , the court noted that "[t]his conclusion is in accord with international treaties , to which israel is a signatory , which prohibit the use of torture , 'cruel , inhuman treatment' and 'degrading treatment.' .

in doing so , the high court did not expressly determine whether the prohibited techniques were unlawful because they constituted "torture," or some other form of cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment prohibited under domestic law and international treaties .

according to a 2003 report by the u.s. state department , israel was reported to have used "extraordinary interrogation methods , some of which included physical pressure" at least 90 times since the israeli high court's ruling .

for its part , the state department reported in 2000 that israeli security forces "abused , and in some cases , tortured palestinians suspected of security offenses. .

more recently , the state department has noted that human rights groups claim that torture is being employed .

