the connections between trade and migration are as longstanding as the historic movements of goods and people .

the desire for commerce may often be the principal motivation , but the need to send people to facilitate the transactions soon follows .

recognition of this phenomenon was incorporated into the immigration act of 1924 , which included a provision for aliens who were entering the united states solely to carry on trade between the united states and the foreign state the alien was coming from , pursuant to a treaty of commerce and navigation .

over 80 years later , a comparable provision of immigration law continues to enable foreign nationals , now known as "treaty traders" and "treaty investors," to enter the united states .

in addition to the specific treaty trader / investor provisions of immigration law , there are often broader immigration issues raised in the context of the recent free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

these issues include whether ftas should contain provisions that expressly expand immigration between the countries as well as whether ftas should require that the immigrant - sending countries restrain unwanted migration ( typically expressed as illegal aliens ) .

the question of whether the movement of people — especially temporary workers — is subsumed under the broader category of "provision of services" and thus an inherent part of any free trade agreement also arises .

even in ftas that do not have explicit immigration provisions , such as the u.s. - dominican republic - central america free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) , there is a debate over the effects that ftas may have on future migration .

this report opens with an overview of the specific elements of immigration law and policy that are germane to trade - related immigration and follows with a summary of the recent ftas that include changes to u.s. immigration law .

an analysis of research on the interaction between trade and migration is discussed , with caveats on the limitations of such analysis .

the report concludes with a set of immigration policy questions that arise in the context of ftas .

the united states is not a signatory to any trade agreements that provide for open borders or freedom of movement of individuals among the participating countries .

although the united states has not created a common market for the movement of labor with our trading partners , there are immigration provisions in several existing ftas that spell out reciprocal terms regulating the "temporary entry of business persons. .

these provisions are discussed below .

negotiators for the uruguay round agreements of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , completed in 1994 and known as the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) , included specific language on temporary professional workers .

this language references §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) ( h ( i ) ( b ) of ina and commits the united states to admitting 65,000 h - 1b visa holders each year under the definition of h - 1b specified in gats .

in addition , gats includes very specific language on "intra - corporate transfers. .

this language is similar but not identical to the definitions of intracompany transferee found in the regulations governing the l visa .

classical trade theory presents trade and migration as substitutes , that is , a country where labor is abundant and inexpensive is assumed to have the option of exporting either labor - intensive goods or its workers .

another construct — the multinational corporation — emphasizes the value of relocating managers and technical experts to facilitate production , which has led to the theory that trade liberalization increases the migration of knowledge - based workers .

obviously , the similarities of the economies of the trading partners ( eg , relative level of development and size of the economy ) are factors that would affect the assumptions underlying any theory of the nexus between trade and migration .

one analyst summed up the research on these relationships as follows: the question of whether trade and migration are complements or substitutes has been the focus of numerous studies , the results of which differ markedly according to the hypotheses selected .

according to some authors free trade could lead to a reduction in migration flows .

for others , it could have no visible effect on migration or it could bring about an increase of these flows ( disruptive effect ) by having a negative effect on small and medium - sized industries and by accelerating the drift from rural to urban areas .

there are a variety of approaches to study the impact of trade agreements on migration , and this report draws on three of several different possible perspectives .

the first explores the relationship between trade and temporary workers and business personnel among the united states' top trading partners .

the second synthesizes the research on how nafta may have affected temporary migration of knowledge - based workers between the united states and canada .

the third analyzes possible effects of nafta on permanent migration from mexico .

the issues of trade and immigration generate a considerable number of policy questions and legislative issues , most of which have no direct bearing on the other , yet there are policy questions that arise at the nexus of immigration and trade .

this report concludes with three common policy questions and summaries of the competing answers .

some have expressed concern that ftas , most recently the chile and singapore ftas , included language that liberalized immigration law on temporary professional workers and bars the united states from future statutory changes to h - 1b visas as well as other temporary business and worker nonimmigrant categories .

some asserted that the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) overstepped its authority by negotiating immigration provisions in ftas and voiced opposition to trade agreements that purportedly prevent congress from revising immigration law on temporary professional nonimmigrants .

some expressed concern that professional workers from chile and singapore are held to a less stringent standard than existing h - 1b law as a result of the recent ftas .

proponents of these trade agreements argue that they are merely reflecting current immigration law and policy , and that the movement of people is subsumed under the broader category of "provision of services" and thus an inherent part of any free trade agreement .

such agreements on the flow of business people and workers , they maintain , are essential to u.s. economic growth and business vitality .

the ustr states that the labor attestations , education and training fees , and numerical limits provisions have been added to the ftas in response to congressional concerns .

the ustr further argues that the temporary business personnel provisions in the ftas are not immigration policy because they only affect temporary entry .

this question has become one of the most controversial issues at this stage of the negotiations in services that the world trade organization ( wto ) are engaged in now in the "round" of negotiations called the doha development agenda .

several developing countries have criticized the visa restrictions placed on temporary workers entering the united states , particularly workers not directly affiliated with companies located in the united states and have also called for greater transparency of u.s. immigration policy on the temporary entry of personnel .

the u.s. business community maintains that the united states needs to be more flexible in its offers , arguing that not doing so prevents the united states from obtaining useful commitments from developing countries .

in a may 2005 letter to the new ustr rob portman , the then - chairman and ranking member of the house judiciary committee ( representative f. james sensenbrenner , jr. and representative john conyers , jr. , respectively ) asked the ustr to pledge , "not to negotiate immigration .... provisions in bilateral or multilateral trade agreements that require changes in united states law. .

arising initially in the context of nafta and mexico , some have advocated hinging ftas on bilateral agreements on stronger immigration enforcement .

some proponents of this view argue the immigrant - sending countries that are parties to the agreement should agree to measures that curb the flow of migrants to the united states , while others maintain that the agreements should include strict numerical limits on the numbers of migrants who can enter the united states .

more recently , some opine that ftas should include immigration enforcement measures aimed at human trafficking and smuggling as well as terrorist tracking .

others argue that negotiating bilateral and multilateral immigration enforcement measures is not the appropriate role of the ustr and is best done by other federal departments and agencies , such as the departments of homeland security and state .

some refer to congress' primary role in setting u.s. immigration policy and a longstanding preference to have country - neutral immigration policies as further grounds to oppose inclusion of immigration enforcement provisions in ftas .

some express the view that ftas are an important policy option to reduce unauthorized migration .

in the debate over dr - cafta , for example , some called the agreement "good immigration policy. .

proponents argue that trade liberalization will improve the economies in the migrant - sending countries and reduce the "push" factors that foster unwanted migration .

as the workers' employment opportunities improve at home , they maintain , the workers will be less motivated to migrate .

others maintain that , while this theory may prove true in the long run , ftas are more likely to trigger new migration , some of it illegal , for at least a generation .

they assert that this additional migration , whether temporary or permanent , will take root and stimulate the traditional flows of family - based immigration to the united states .

some argue that ftas should be evaluated on the particular terms of the agreement and not on their potential effects on unauthorized migration .

appendix a .

selected trade and admissions data for top u.s. trading partners , 2004 ( millions of u.s. dollars , customs basis ) appendix b .

year of arrival for non - mexican foreign - born residents the march supplement of the current population survey offers limited data on migration by year of arrival .

the cps is a representative sample of all persons living in the united states and , thus , includes unauthorized aliens , long - term nonimmigrants , and legal permanent residents , as well as u.s. citizens .

specifically , the cps asks foreign - born residents: "when did you come to the u.s. to stay ? .

the cps data represent a sample of those foreign born who still remain in the united states as of march 2004 .

the data understate the earlier migration trend because of the emigration and death of earlier migrants .

as a result , the slope of the trend line depicted in figure b - 1 is biased upward .

as figure b - 1 illustrates , the estimated number of non - mexican foreign - born residents of the united states who report that they came after 1995 tracks fairly closely to the trend line based upon the numbers who came prior to 1996 .

migration to the united states dropped sharply after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks .

post - september 11 revisions of immigration law and procedures have slowed down the processing of immigrant petitions and visas .

the united states' economic recession in 2001 and initially slow recovery , moreover , may have also slowed down migration .

