the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) is an international agreement among national governments .

it aims to ensure that the international trade in plants and animals does not threaten their survival .

the united states , a signatory to cites , is the largest importer and exporter of wildlife products in the estimated $300 billion global wildlife trade .

cites also provides a framework for addressing the illegal trade in wildlife .

according to u.s. government estimates , illegal trade in endangered wildlife products , including elephant ivory , rhino horns , and turtle shells , is worth at least an estimated $7 billion - $10 billion annually .

this figure does not include illegal logging and illegal fishing , which can account , respectively , for roughly an additional $30 billion - $100 billion annually and $10 billion - $23 billion annually .

such figures may place illegal wildlife trafficking among the top 10 most lucrative criminal activities worldwide , behind only narcotics , counterfeiting , and human trafficking .

the implementation and enforcement of cites is of interest to congress because of the prominence of the united states in the international wildlife trade .

congress provides oversight on u.s. activities related to cites by holding hearings on u.s. recommendations for cites , as well as by providing appropriations for conservation programs that aim to improve the populations and habitats of some species listed on cites .

the most recent conference of the parties ( cop ) for cites was held march 2013 .

several decisions regarding the listing of species were discussed , including the adoption of 55 new listing proposals on sharks , manta rays , turtles , and timber , among other species .

the next cop will be held in south africa starting on september 24 , 2016 .

this report provides background information on the structure of cites , the enforcement of cites in the united states , and implementing issues related to cites .

the origins of cites can be traced to the 1960s , during international discussions about the world trade of wildlife and wildlife products and its effect on wildlife populations .

in 1963 , the international union for conservation of nature and natural resources ( iucn ) called for an international convention on the trade in animal species and their products .

a first draft of the convention was produced in 1964 , and in 1973 , cites was signed by 21 nations in washington , dc .

cites entered into force in 1975 after 10 countries ratified the agreement .

as of 2016 , there are 183 signatories to cites .

cites is applied to species whose populations may be significantly harmed by international trade .

species are first identified as needing protection and then assessed for the risk trade poses for the species survival .

cites regulates trade through a series of import and export permits corresponding to the degree of protection .

there are approximately 5,600 species of animals and approximately 30,000 species of plants listed under cites .

the administrative bodies of cites are the secretariat , the conference of the parties ( cop ) , and the management and scientific authorities of each country .

the parties ( i.e. , signatory countries ) meet generally every two years at a cop to evaluate the implementation of the treaty and consider efforts which would improve cites's success .

in the united states , the implementing legislation for cites is the endangered species act ( esa ; 16 u.s.c .

1531ff ) .

the office of management authority ( oma ) and the office of scientific authority ( osa ) of the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) exercise the responsibilities of the management and scientific authorities .

enforcement responsibilities for cites are shared in varying levels by the fws ( division of law enforcement ) , and the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) and the customs service in the department of homeland security .

the noaa fisheries in the department of commerce also has a small role in cites's enforcement .

the implementation of cites has generated several success stories along with controversy and problems .

arguably , the success of cites can be summarized with the fact that no species listed under cites within the last 30 years has gone extinct .

cites is an international treaty that is steadily gaining acceptance in the world and growing in terms of its application .

although most believe that the treaty has been effective in curbing the international trade of endangered and threatened species , some argue that many issues with implementation remain .

the primary issue , according to some , is the lack of implementing legislation , and hence enforcement mechanisms , in several party nations .

this lack compromises the effectiveness of the treaty and lowers the value of enforcement and monitoring activities in complying party nations .

this aspect of cites is to be addressed by the united states in the implementation plan for the u.s. national strategy for combating wildlife trafficking .

the plan calls for the united states to provide support and technical assistance to ensure that countries are implementing cites and to hold accountable countries that fail to fulfill their cites obligations .

the plan also calls for the united states to clarify and enforce use - after - import provisions mandated by cites .

use - after - import provisions under cites allow party nations to specify how species or products derived from species may be used after they are imported .

in the united states , the comparison between domestic regulations and cites regulations for foreign endangered species may be an emerging issue .

although fundamental differences in protection and criteria for listing species exist between the esa and cites , there seems to be consensus that the esa has stricter measures than cites .

however , there does not appear to be a consensus that stricter measures under the esa would necessarily be more effective than cites in protecting foreign endangered species .

