representatives of the office of the secretary of defense , the armed services , and nnsa participate in the nuclear weapons council , which under 10 u.s.c .

179 coordinates their efforts in this area .

the council approved forming a dod - doe project officers group ( pog ) for the rrw program in march 2005 .

according to nnsa , the pog is composed of representatives of nnsa , the nuclear weapon labs ( los alamos , lawrence livermore , and sandia ) , the office of the secretary of defense , the u.s. strategic command , the navy , the air force , and lockheed martin space systems company .

there are also observers from the office of the chief of naval operations , the defense threat reduction agency , and three nuclear weapon plants ( kansas city , pantex , and y - 12 ) .

in practice , pogs do not take votes , so members and observers participate on an equal footing .

the nuclear weapons council tasked the pog to conduct an 18-month design competition , which started with the first pog meeting in may 2005 .

in the competition , two teams — los alamos and sandia's new mexico branch , and lawrence livermore and sandia's california branch — were tasked to provide warhead designs consistent with rrw program objectives .

the council set the terms of reference for the designs in a memorandum to the pog .

dod requested that the study be done as a competition between the two teams rather than as a collaboration , according to nnsa .

by february 2006 , the two teams had become fully confident that their designs would meet military requirements , would not require nuclear testing to certify , and would meet other criteria including ease of manufacturing , reduction in the use of hazardous and exotic materials , and significantly enhanced safety and use control .

the teams completed their preliminary designs in march 2006 , and released their designs to the competing team .

over the next few months , the labs , pog , and nnsa reviewed and analyzed candidate design concepts .

on november 30 , 2006 , the pog briefed the council on rrw , and the council determined that rrw "is feasible as a strategy for sustaining the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile for the long - term without underground nuclear testing. .

according to a december 1 press release , the council was expected to select a preferred design "in the next few weeks. .

on march 2 , 2007 , nnsa announced that the nuclear weapons council had selected the california team's design .

according to nnsa , the two nuclear weapons laboratories both submitted designs that fully met all rrw requirements .

however , [acting nnsa administrator thomas] d'agostino noted that higher confidence in the ability to certify the livermore design without underground testing was the primary reason for its selection .

that design was more closely tied to previous underground testing .

the competing designs were for a submarine - launched ballistic missile ( slbm ) replacement warhead .

this was consistent with a statement in a house armed services committee report: "the committee encourages the department of defense and the department of energy to focus initial reliable replacement warhead efforts on replacement warheads for submarine launched ballistic missiles. .

specifically , the designs sought to provide the military capability of the w76 warhead .

in particular , as general james cartwright , usmc , then commander of the u.s. strategic command , stated in 2007 , the yield of this rrw would be within 1% or 2% of that of the w76 .

because of this slbm focus , the navy is the pog chair , and the air force is co - chair .

at the same time , the designs were made so that they can also be used on land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles .

in this way , the rrw could serve as a backup in case icbm warheads encountered a problem .

this approach could permit reducing the number of warhead types , meeting an objective in the house appropriations committee's energy and water report: "a more reliable replacement warhead will allow long - term savings by phasing out the multiple redundant cold war warhead designs that require maintaining multiple obsolete production technologies to maintain the older warheads. .

nnsa requested $88.8 million for fy2008 , with most of the funds to be used for a design definition and cost study .

the study was to be completed by the end of 2007 .

the fy2007 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-364 , section 3111 ) set as an objective having the first production unit ( fpu , the first complete warhead from a production line certified for deployment ) of rrw in 2012 , and nnsa stated in april 2007 that 2012 remained its target date for fpu .

however , a nuclear weapons council memorandum of march 2007 stated , "given the level of maturity of the [rrw] design effort to date , our planning target for the first production unit , is 2014 plus or minus two years. .

each year , it would be up to congress to decide whether to fund the program as requested , modify it , or cancel it .

rrw would involve plants as well as labs .

the plants involved in rrw ( kansas city , pantex , and y - 12 ) provided the labs with design information beginning at an early stage .

they worked with the labs and nnsa to identify options for manufacturing processes and infrastructure transformation , such as steering the labs away from hard - to - manufacture designs .

the contribution of the plants would change over time as the designs became more mature , at which time designers would be in a position to accept detailed recommendations on manufacturing from the plants .

the results of this work , nnsa states , would be incorporated in the design and cost study .

this role of the plants is in keeping with numerous congressional statements that ease and safety of manufacture , cost savings , and reduction of hazardous materials are goals of rrw .

as of november 2007 , the navy - led rrw pog was conducting a phase 2a design definition and cost study .

the lawrence livermore , los alamos , and sandia national laboratories were working within the pog study to refine the design , review tradeoff options , plan the potential development program , and estimate costs of the design .

the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

110-161 , eliminated funds for rrw .

when it was signed into law ( december 26 , 2007 ) , nnsa instructed the laboratories to cease all technical work on rrw and to document the work done to that point so it would be available for use .

in fact , the congressionally mandated advanced certification campaign is currently drawing on this work .

as specified in p.l .

110-161 , this campaign will address means of increasing confidence in certification of warheads through improved peer review , refinement of computer models , improved understanding of surety mechanisms and failure modes , and the like .

the fy2009 and fy2010 requests and congressional action on them are discussed below .

consistent with congressional action in fy2005 , nnsa requested $9.4 million for rrw for fy2006 .

the request stated that the program "is to demonstrate the feasibility of developing reliable replacement components that are producible and certifiable for the existing stockpile .

the initial focus will be to provide cost and schedule efficient replacement pits ( see appendix ) that can be certified without underground tests. .

the house appropriations committee reported the fy2006 energy and water development appropriations bill , h.r .

2419 , on may 18 , 2005 ( h.rept .

109-86 ) .

the bill passed the house , 416-13 , on may 24 with no amendments to the weapons activities section .

in its report , the committee offered a "qualified endorsement" of rrw "contingent on the intent of the program being solely to meet the current military characteristics and requirements of the existing stockpile. .

 ( p. 128 ) ( page numbers in this section refer to h.rept .

109-86 . ) .

it did not endorse rrw if it produces new weapons for new military missions .

 ( p. 128 ) the committee saw rrw as part of a new sustainable stockpile initiative , in which doe would "develop an integrated rrw implementation plan that challenges the [nuclear weapons] complex to produce a rrw certifiable design while implementing an accelerated warhead dismantlement program and an infrastructure reconfiguration proposal that maximizes special nuclear material [essentially , highly enriched uranium and weapons - grade plutonium] consolidation. .

 ( p. 128 ) the committee focused on rrw throughout its discussion of weapons activities , linked rrw to many weapons activities programs , and used the potential of rrw as the rationale to reduce or delay several requested programs .

its many actions and statements on rrw include the following: "the rrw weapon will be designed for ease of manufacturing , maintenance , dismantlement , and certification without nuclear testing , allowing the nnsa to transition the weapons complex away from a large , expensive cold war relic into a smaller , more efficient modern complex .

a more reliable replacement warhead will allow long - term savings by phasing out the multiple redundant cold war warhead designs that require maintaining multiple obsolete production technologies to maintain the older warheads. .

 ( p. 128 ) "the committee directs the secretary of energy to establish a federal advisory committee on the reliable replacement warhead initiative.... " ( p. 128 ) a rebaselined lep , an rrw program plan , and a dismantlement plan would provide "reliable nuclear deterrence" with a stockpile after 2025 that is significantly smaller than the stockpile level planned for 2012 .

as a result , "the current life extension plans will be scoped back to lower levels and the resources will be redeployed to support the sustainable stockpile initiative. .

accordingly , the committee recommended reducing the budget request for directed stockpile work , a major category of weapons activities that directly supports weapons in the stockpile , by $137.3 million to $1,283.7 million .

 ( p. 129 ) the committee recommended increasing rrw funding from $9.4 million to $25.0 million "to accelerate the planning effort to initiative a competition between the nnsa weapons laboratories to develop the design for the rrw re - engineered and remanufactured warhead. .

 ( p. 130 ) the committee recommended eliminating the $4.0 million requested to study the robust nuclear earth penetrator , in part because it "threatens congressional and public support for sustainable stockpile initiatives that will actually provide long - term security and deterrent value for the nation. .

 ( p. 131 ) test readiness is a program to enable the resumption of nuclear testing at nevada test site should that be deemed necessary .

last year , the committee opposed a move to reduce the test readiness posture ( the time between a presidential decision to test and the conduct of the test ) from 24 to 18 months , this year , it added rrw to the rationale against an 18-month posture: "the initiation of the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) program designed to provide for the continuance of the existing moratorium on underground nuclear testing by insuring the long - term reliability of the nuclear weapons stockpile obviates any reason to move to a provocative 18-month test readiness posture. .

 ( p. 132 ) accordingly , it recommended reducing test readiness funds from $25.0 million to $15.0 million .

the committee noted that "congressional testimony by nnsa officials is beginning to erode the confidence of the committee that the science - based stockpile stewardship is performing as advertised. .

accordingly , it "redirects asci [advanced simulation and computing] funding to maintain current life extension production capabilities pending the initiation of the reliable replacement warhead program" and recommended reducing funding from $660.8 million to $500.8 million .

 ( pp .

133-134 ) the committee recommended eliminating the $7.7 million requested for the modern pit facility ( see appendix ) .

it recommended that "nnsa focus its efforts on how best to lengthen the life of the stockpile and minimize the need for an enormously expensive infrastructure facility until the long - term strategy for the physical infrastructure of the weapons complex has incorporated the reliable replacement warhead strategy.... " ( p. 134 ) the committee recommended eliminating the $55.0 million requested for construction of the chemistry and metallurgy research facility replacement ( cmrr ) at los alamos .

"construction at the cmrr facility should be delayed until the department [of energy] determines the long - term plan for developing the responsive infrastructure required to maintain the nation's existing nuclear stockpile and support replacement production anticipated for the rrw initiative. .

 ( p. 136 ) the house armed services committee reported the fy2006 national defense authorization bill , h.r .

1815 , on may 20 ( h.rept .

109-89 ) .

the bill passed the house , 390-39 , on may 25 with no amendments concerning rrw .

the committee recommended providing the amount requested for rrw .

the report stated: "the committee firmly believes that the nation must ensure that the nuclear stockpile remains reliable , safe , and secure and that national security requires transforming the cold war - era nuclear complex .

thus , the committee supports the reliable replacement warhead program .

to clearly articulate the congressional intent underlying this program authorization , the committee further states the key goals of the program. .

 ( h.rept .

109-89 , p. 463 ) in section 3111 of h.r .

1815 , the committee required the secretary of energy , in consultation with the secretary of defense , to carry out the rrw program , and spelled out its objectives for rrw: ( b ) objectives - the objectives of the reliable replacement warhead program shall be — ( 1 ) to increase the reliability , safety , and security of the united states nuclear weapons stockpile ; ( 2 ) to further reduce the likelihood of the resumption of nuclear testing ; ( 3 ) to remain consistent with basic design parameters by using , to the extent practicable , components that are well understood or are certifiable without the need to resume underground nuclear testing ; ( 4 ) to ensure that the united states develops a nuclear weapons infrastructure that can respond to unforeseen problems , to include the ability to produce replacement warheads that are safer to manufacture , more cost - effective to produce , and less costly to maintain than existing warheads ; ( 5 ) to achieve reductions in the future size of the nuclear weapons stockpile based on increased reliability of the reliable replacement warheads ; ( 6 ) to use the design , certification , and production expertise resident in the nuclear complex to develop reliable replacement components to fulfill current mission requirements of the existing stockpile ; and ( 7 ) to serve as a complement to , and potentially a more cost - effective and reliable long - term replacement for , the current stockpile life extension programs .

the committee's report ( pp .

464-465 ) described these objectives in more detail .

section 3111 of h.r .

1815 also required the nuclear weapons council to submit an interim report on rrw by march 1 , 2006 , and a final report by march 1 , 2007 .

the final report is to assess characteristics of warheads to replace existing ones ; discuss the relationship of rrw within ssp and its impact on leps ; assess the extent to which rrw , if successful , could lead to a reduction in warhead numbers ; discuss rrw design criteria that will minimize the likelihood of nuclear testing ; describe the infrastructure needed to support rrw ; and summarize how funds will be used .

of the committee's 28 democratic members , 23 signed a statement of additional views ( h.rept .

109-89 , pp .

511-512 ) .

according to the statement , "democrats are willing to explore the concept of the rrw program , but do not yet embrace it. .

they felt that , to merit support , rrw must reduce or eliminate the need for nuclear testing , lead to dramatic reductions in the arsenal , avoid introducing new mission or weapon requirements , deemphasize nuclear weapons' military utility , increase nuclear security , and "[lead] to ratification and entry into force of the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

on the latter point , they maintained that a successful rrw program should erase the main rationale against the treaty , uncertainty about the reliability of the nuclear arsenal .

therefore , "[w]e believe strongly that ratification of the ctbt [comprehensive test ban treaty] is the logical end result of a successful rrw program.... " the senate armed services committee reported the fy2006 national defense authorization bill , s. 1042 , on may 17 .

it recommended providing the amount requested for rrw .

it noted that nnsa administrator brooks had presented several goals for rrw in his testimony to the committee on april 4: increasing warhead security and reliability ; developing replacement components that can be manufactured more easily , using materials that are more readily available and more environmentally benign ; developing replacement components that provide high confidence in warhead safety and reliability ; developing these components on a schedule that would reduce the need to conduct a nuclear test to address a reliability problem ; reducing the cost and increasing the responsiveness of the infrastructure ; and increasing confidence in the stockpile enough to permit reductions in non - deployed warheads .

"the committee supports these goals and this modest investment in feasibility studies. .

it required nnsa's administrator to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by february 6 , 2006 , "describing the activities undertaken or planned for any rrw funding in fiscal years 2005 , 2006 , and 2007. .

the bill passed the senate , 98-0 , on november 15 .

the reporting requirement was superseded by a similar requirement in the conference bill .

the defense authorization conference bill , as reported ( h.rept .

109-360 ) december 8 , included the house provision on rrw , somewhat revised , as section 3111 of the conference bill .

conferees stated: the conferees support the goal of continuing to ensure that the nuclear weapons stockpile remains safe , secure , and reliable .

the conferees believe that the reliable replacement warhead program is essential to the achievement of this goal and support its establishment with the objectives as defined in the provision [section 3111] , and as further described in the committee reports of the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives for fiscal year 2006 .

the measure was signed into law ( p.l .

109-163 ) january 6 , 2006 .

the senate appropriations committee reported h.r .

2419 on june 16 .

it endorsed rrw and recommended increasing its funding above the fy2006 request .

the committee recognizes that rrw is early in its development and will not significantly alter the near - term plans for stockpile support such as leps , but nnsa is encouraged to move aggressively to incorporate benefits from rrw into the stockpile as soon as possible .

the committee recommends $25,351,000 for rrw to accelerate the planning , development and design for a comprehensive rrw strategy that improves the reliability , longevity and certifiability of existing weapons and their components .

the bill passed the senate , 92-3 , on july 1 , with no change to the rrw provision .

conferees on the energy and water bill reported h.r .

2419 ( h.rept .

109-275 ) on november 7 , 2005 .

the house agreed to the conference bill , 399-17 , on november 9 , and the senate agreed to it , 84-4 , on november 14 .

the president signed it into law ( p.l .

109-103 ) november 19 .

the bill provides $25.0 million for rrw .

conferees wanted the complex to use various resources "to support a nuclear weapons council determination in november 2006. .

this determination would be a decision on which design to use for the first reliable replacement warhead .

conferees also emphasized goals and requirements of the rrw program: the conferees reiterate the direction provided in fiscal year 2005 that any weapon design work done under the rrw program must stay within the military requirements of the existing deployed stockpile and any new weapon design must stay within the design parameters validated by past nuclear tests .

the conferees expect the nnsa to build on the success of science - based stockpile stewardship to improve manufacturing practices , lower costs and increase performance margins , to support the administration's decision to significantly reduce the size of the u.s. nuclear stockpile .

in sum , congress supported rrw in various ways in the fy2006 budget cycle .

both armed services committees recommended fully funding the request , both appropriations committees recommended a sharp increase in rrw funding , and congress appropriated $25.0 million , reduced to $24.75 million by a rescission .

the four committees saw rrw as a way to achieve a wide range of goals for the nuclear weapons program , spelled out many of these goals in legislation and in committee reports , and required several reports to track the status of rrw .

nnsa's fy2007 budget document evidenced a program that gained momentum in the preceding year .

the request for rrw was $27.7 million , up from $24.8 million for fy2006 .

 ( p. 71 ) ( page numbers in parentheses in the next few paragraphs refer to nnsa's fy2007 budget document. ) .

outyear budgets are: fy2008 , $14.6 million ; fy2009 , $29.7 million ; fy2010 , $29.6 million ; and fy2011 , $28.7 million .

 ( p. 72 ) the fy2006 budget request document contained few references to rrw because the program received its first funding just two months before that document was released .

in contrast , the fy2007 document contains 30 or more references to rrw that show many sites and programs linked to rrw .

programs are discussed below ; sites include kansas city plant ( p. 620 ) , livermore ( p. 627 ) , los alamos ( p. 635 ) , pantex ( p. 646 ) , sandia ( p. 651 ) , and y - 12 ( p. 665 ) .

what emerges is a program that is drawing on many resources of the complex beyond the program's own budget .

this is in accord with a directive in the fy2006 energy and water conference report: the conferees expect that the laboratories and plants will also utilize the existing resources in the directed stockpile , campaigns , and readiness in technical base and facilities accounts [the three largest accounts of the stockpile stewardship program] where applicable to further the rrw design options to support a nuclear weapons council determination in november 2006 .

various programs expect to support rrw in many ways: "during the period fy2007-2011 , the science campaign will endeavor to make significant progress toward providing the experimental data and certification methodologies necessary to support the current stockpile workload and future requirements that will include the reliable replacement warhead and reflect an evolving stockpile. .

 ( p. 96 ) within the dynamic materials properties program of the science campaign , "a second principal effort is to characterize the reaction kinetics and dynamics of high explosives , with special emphasis on improving the modeling of insensitive high explosives that will be used in replacement warheads to provide improved safety and surety. .

 ( p. 100 ) within the engineering campaign , enhanced surveillance deliverables in the outyears are planned to support reliable replacement warhead components assessment" ( p. 116 ) and the enhanced surety program "will support studies such as the reliable replacement warhead. .

 ( p. 118 ) "only through asc [the advanced simulation and computing campaign] simulations can national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) determine the effects of changes to current systems as well as margins and uncertainties in future and untested systems , such as the rrw. .

 ( p. 176 ) within the pit manufacturing and certification campaign , "additional personnel will be hired and additional equipment procured to support manufacture of existing pit types ( or a rrw pit ) ," and los alamos and livermore "will continue planning and development of integral experiments in fy2007 in support of certification of reliable replacement warhead pits. .

 ( p. 191 ) the budget document offers many details of the proposed program .

the nuclear weapons council ( nwc ) approved the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) feasibility study which began in may 2005 , and is expected to take 18 months to complete .

the goal of the rrw study is to identify designs that will sustain long term confidence in a safe , secure and reliable stockpile and enable transformation to a responsive nuclear weapon infrastructure .

the joint doe / dod rrw project officer's group ( pog ) was tasked to oversee a laboratory design competition for a rrw warhead with the fpu [first production unit] goal of fy 2012 .

the pog will assess technical feasibility including certification without nuclear testing , design definition , manufacturing , and an initial cost assessment to determine whether the proposed candidates will meet the rrw study objectives and requirements .

at the end of the study , the pog will establish the preferred rrw design options and recommendations to the nwc standing and safety committee ( nwcssc ) and nwc... .

in fy 2007 specific activities include: with nwc approval , proceed with detailed design and preliminary cost estimates of rrw concepts to confirm that rrw designs provide surety enhancements , can be certified without nuclear testing , are cost - effective , and will support both stockpile and infrastructure transformation .

 ( 83 ) further , "the rrw budget will increase when the rrw option is selected and starts development and production engineering activities. .

 ( 76 ) the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 , p.l .

109-364 ( h.r .

5122 ) , increased the amount requested by $20.0 million to support a second rrw design competition .

it required nnsa to submit a plan for transform the complex to achieve a responsive infrastructure by 2030 ( section 3111 ) , with a report on the plan due february 1 , 2007 .

an objective of the plan is "to prepare to produce replacement warheads under the reliable replacement warhead program at a rate necessary to meet future stockpile requirements , commencing with a first production unit in 2012 and achieving steady - state production using modern manufacturing processes by 2025. .

it required ( section 3116 ) nnsa to enter into an arrangement with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) to have the latter prepare a study of quantification of margins and uncertainties , a method to assess the nuclear stockpile .

the study is to evaluate , among other things , "whether the application of the quantification of margins and uncertainty used for annual assessments and certification of the nuclear weapons stockpile can be applied to the planned reliable replacement warhead program so as to carry out the objective of that program to reduce the likelihood of the resumption of underground testing of nuclear weapons. .

as of june 2008 , nas planned to deliver a classified version to doe and congress in july and planned to make an unclassified version available to the public as soon as possible thereafter .

nas held the ninth meeting for this project at los alamos national laboratory on august 13-15 .

nas also plans to do a phase 2 study on the use of archived underground nuclear test data for qmu .

the house appropriations committee "supports the rrw , but only if it is part of a larger package of more comprehensive weapons complex reforms. .

it criticized nnsa's complex 2030 plan as basically modernization in place , and favored a plan by a doe task force .

it recommended $52.7 million for rrw , an increase of $25.0 million , but fenced the latter amount until doe provides the committee with a "comprehensive complex transformation plan. .

it directed nnsa to engage the jason defense advisory group to "evaluate the competing rrw designs" and to analyze "the feasibility of the fundamental premise of the rrw initiative that a new nuclear warhead can be designed and produced and certified for use and deployed as an operationally - deployed nuclear weapon without undergoing an underground nuclear test. .

the report is due march 31 , 2007 .

professor roy schwitters , chair of the jason steering committee , met with house appropriations committee staff and nnsa officials to set a schedule for the jason study ; the schedule calls for a preliminary report to be submitted to nnsa by march 1 , 2007 , an executive summary of the final report by august 1 , 2007 , and the final report by october 1 , 2007 .

 ( as noted , the executive summary was transmitted on september 28 and the final report by october 1. ) .

the house passed the bill , 404-20 , on may 24 , 2006 , with no amendments to rrw provisions .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $62.7 million for rrw .

the committee ... recognizes the need to protect against unforeseen challenges and urges the nnsa to accelerate the transition to a responsive infrastructure and to proceed expeditiously with the rrw design .

the committee also realizes that a dual track strategy of supporting eight legacy systems and a rrw program is not sustainable and therefore has taken steps in this legislation to reduce the number of legacy systems and begin the replacement with rrw designs .

the committee has also initiated a second design competition for another rrw design... .

regarding the second competition , the committee urged doe and nnsa to "expand the rrw program immediately to ensure that our strategic forces have at least two different certified rrw warheads" to guard against failure in one system .

it recommended using $10.0 million for this second competition , with a first production unit goal of 2014 , and adding $4.0 million to "accelerate the deployment" of surveillance devices into the rrw design .

this bill was placed on the senate legislative calendar on june 29 , but the senate took no further action on it .

congress did not pass a separate fy2007 energy and water development appropriations act , but instead included these funds in a continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-5 , february 15 , 2007 ) to fund energy and water and many other programs through the balance of fy2007 .

doe's fy2007 operating plan includes $35.8 million for rrw .

the president submitted his fy2008 budget request to congress on february 5 , 2007 .

the nnsa request document presents details of the dod - nnsa plan for rrw .

in november 2006 , according to the document , the nwc [nuclear weapons council] decided that the rrw for submarine launched ballistic missiles is feasible and should proceed to complete a phase 2a design definition and cost study .

in addition , the nwc determined that the rrw is to be adopted as the strategy for maintaining a long term safe , secure and reliable nuclear deterrent and as such also directed the initiation of a conceptual study for an additional rrw design .

the document also stated that the shift in strategy from a life extension program to a rrw program will require substantial planning and resource realignments between the departments of defense and energy that will not be completed in time for the fy 2008 budget submission .

when planning is complete , expected at the end of fy 2007 , an rrw budget adjustment will be requested .

it further stated that the budget approach for fy2008 for transforming the nuclear stockpile included the following goal: "maintain a relatively level dsw [directed stockpile work] budget with rrw development funded through reductions in resources required to support legacy weapons. .

while nnsa's rrw budget figures are thus subject to revision , the projected figures as presented are as follows ( in millions ) : fy2008 , $88.769 ; fy2009 , $99.787 ; fy2010 , $109.240 ; fy2011 , $167.358 ; and fy2012 , $179.933 .

in addition , the navy requests $30.0 million for fy2008 , and estimates a request of $50.0 million for fy2009 , for rrw .

these figures are dod funds to develop a cost estimate and to "[c]ontinue the rrw program into phase 3 engineering development , when approved by congress and the nuclear weapons council. .

examples of this work for rrw include development of an arming , fuzing , and firing system and of "ancillary reentry body types," as well as integration of rrw with the trident ii ( d5 ) missile that will carry the rrw .

the navy plans to award contracts for at least $29.5 million of the fy2008 request in october 2007 , and for at least $49.0 million of the fy2009 request in october 2008 .

while keeping in mind nnsa's caveats , the projected total for rrw in the nnsa budget for fy2008-fy2012 and the navy budget for fy2008-fy2009 is $725.1 million .

the house armed services committee's strategic forces subcommittee marked up its portion of h.r .

1585 , the fy2008 defense authorization bill , on may 2 , 2007 .

the full committee retained the subcommittee's provisions relating to rrw and completed its markup may 9 .

the rule for considering the bill ( h.res .

403 , h.rept .

110-151 ) did not make in order any amendments regarding rrw .

h.r .

1585 passed the house , 397-27 , on may 17 ( roll no .

373 ) .

the bill as passed by the house included several provisions relevant to rrw: a congressional commission on u.s. strategic posture ( section 1046 ) .

among other things , the commission would recommend a strategic posture and nuclear weapons strategy .

it would include the force structure to support the strategy , "the number of nuclear weapons required to support the strategy , including the number of replacement warheads required , if any," an analysis of the effectiveness of the strategy , and the size of the complex needed to support the strategy .

the committee stated in its report that it "believes that there is an urgent need for a debate over the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. strategic posture ... the administration ... has not articulated its views on the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. strategic posture since issuance of the [nuclear posture review , i.e. , at the end of 2001] .

the committee believes clear policy objectives should be established before congress commits to ambitious new programs. .

the commission's report would be due by december 1 , 2008 .

a reduction in the navy's request for rrw funds from $30.0 million to $5.0 million .

the committee noted ( p. 191 ) that the navy said the funds would permit continuing rrw into phase 3 engineering development ( see below ) , but "[t]he committee does not support moving into phase 3 activities during fiscal year 2008 , but understands that the navy intends to pursue better design definition [of rrw] as part of the phase 2a study during fiscal year 2008. .

a reduction in nnsa's rrw funds , from $88.8 million requested to $68.8 million ( pp .

528-529 ) .

the committee noted that p.l .

109-163 , the fy2006 national defense authorization act , set several objectives for rrw , such as increasing reliability , safety , and security of the nuclear stockpile , reducing the likelihood of resumed nuclear testing , and using components that can be certified without nuclear testing .

"the committee believes it is too soon to judge whether the rrw program can achieve these objectives ... the committee believes the focus of the rrw program during fiscal year 2008 should be the analysis necessary to describe in detail how the rrw program will achieve these objectives. .

further , "[t]he committee supports establishing clear nuclear weapons requirements before committing to the rrw program , and sees the planned phase 2a design review and cost study as consistent with this approach. .

accordingly , the committee limited fy2008 nnsa rrw funds "for phase 2a study activities only. .

elimination of funds ( $24.9 million requested ) for a consolidated plutonium center ( cpc ) ( pp .

529-530 ) .

this facility would make pits .

the committee "finds that construction of a cpc is only required if the united states moves toward large - scale production of pits .

the committee does not believe the need for such large scale processing has been established. .

a study on using existing pits for rrw ( pp .

538-539 ) .

the committee felt that the need for cpc had not been established in part because of the prospect of reusing existing pits in rrws .

in testimony before the strategic forces subcommittee in march 2007 , thomas d'agostino , then acting administrator of nnsa , stated that existing pits might be suitable for use in rrw bombs but not rrw ballistic missile warheads .

the house - passed bill required nnsa , in consultation with the nuclear weapons council , to conduct the study , to be completed by february 1 , 2008 .

the study ( section 3111 of h.r .

1585 ) would assess the feasibility of pit reuse for rrw , whether it is more desirable to remanufacture warheads with existing or with newly - manufactured pits , the number of pits suitable for remanufacture , and "the extent to which remanufacturing warheads with existing pits , as compared to remanufacturing warheads with newly manufactured pits , would reduce future requirements for new pit production. .

eliminate funds for a b61 bomb life extension program ( lep ) .

the prospect of pit reuse figured into another committee action .

the request contained $63.1 million for the b61 lep account .

the b61 is currently undergoing an lep , but nnsa planned to begin a phase 6.2 / phase 6.2a study ( see below ) for another lep for the b61 .

however , "[t]he committee views the initiation of a new b61 lep ... as unwarranted while the nnsa examines the feasibility of pit reuse for the remanufacture of warheads. .

accordingly , it reduced the b61 lep account by $4.2 million and directed nnsa "to make no funds available for commencement of the new b61 lep. .

 ( p. 530 ) .

in its may 23 markup of the fy2008 energy and water development appropriations bill , the energy and water development subcommittee eliminated nnsa funds for rrw .

 ( the subcommittee has jurisdiction over rrw funds in the nnsa request but not in the navy request. ) .

subcommittee chairman peter visclosky's statement on the subcommittee's markup included the following: reducing unneeded nuclear weapons without question , there is a need for a comprehensive nuclear defense strategy and stockpile plan to guide transformation and downsizing of the stockpile and nuclear weapons complex , and until progress is made on this critical issue , there will be no new facilities or reliable replacement warhead .

only when a future nuclear weapons strategy is established can the department of energy determine the requirements for the future nuclear weapons stockpile and nuclear weapons complex plan .

given the serious international and domestic consequences of the u.s. initiating a new nuclear weapons production activity , it is critical that the administration lay out a comprehensive course of action before funding is appropriated .

given the track record of mismanagement at the agency for projects that have a plan , i don't think it is asking too much for a comprehensive nuclear strategy before we build a new nuclear weapon .

the house appropriations committee marked up the bill on june 6 .

the committee bill recommended eliminating all nnsa funds for rrw .

the report expressed extreme displeasure at changes in the program: "the committee finds the rrw program the dod and nnsa have pursued at the direction of congress goes far beyond the scope and purpose of the original congressional language and intent... .

the committee is unconvinced that pursuing the rrw design competition to a production phase is necessary at this time. .

it expressed concern that this program might impede nuclear nonproliferation: a particularly troubling issue for the committee related to the rrw proposal is the contradictory u.s. policy position of demanding other nations give up their nuclear ambitions while the u.s. aggressively pursues a program to build new nuclear warheads .

the administration needs to develop a policy rationale that explains why the rrw program is not contradictory and does not undermine our international nuclear nonproliferation goals .

the committee raised further concerns with the administration's rationale for the nuclear weapons program and nnsa's plan for the complex .

it stated that the rrw program and complex 2030 "are being proposed in a policy vacuum without any administration statement on the national security environment that the future nuclear deterrent is designed to address. .

accordingly , "the committee believes it is premature to proceed with further development of the rrw or a significant nuclear complex modernization plan , until a three - part planning sequence is completed. .

this sequence has three elements: "a comprehensive nuclear defense and nonproliferation strategy" ; a detailed description translating that strategy into a "specific nuclear stockpile" ; and "a comprehensive , long - term expenditure plan , from fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2030.... " the committee did not specify a due date for this plan , but "views completion of this three - part planning sequence as a necessary condition before considering additional funding for complex 2030 and rrw activities. .

the house passed the bill , 312-112 ( roll no .

641 ) , on july 17 , leaving the rrw provisions unchanged .

the senate armed services committee's national defense authorization bill , s. 1547 , would reduce the navy's rrw request of $30.0 million by $15.0 million , the amount for support of phase 3 .

the committee's report "recommends no funds for rrw activities beyond phase 2a in fiscal year 2008. .

the committee stated that in addition to $88.8 million that the nnsa request labeled as rrw , the request contained rrw funds in other budget elements: engineering campaigns , $86.4 million ; pit manufacturing and certification campaign , $37.9 million ; and readiness campaign , $25.0 million , for a total of $238.1 million .

the committee recommended reducing this amount by $43.0 million and restricting fy2008 rrw work to phase 2a and below .

"[t]he committee believes that many years of research are necessary before any such decision [proceeding beyond phase 2a] can be made or even meaningfully discussed. .

further , "the rrw as envisioned by the nnsa and the nwc [nuclear weapons council] would be a new warhead.... as a new warhead , there are many policy questions , concerns , and issues that must be raised , discussed , and resolved before any decision can be made to move to phase 3 or beyond. .

at the same time , "the committee believes that the technical work [on rrw] must go forward apace with the policy discussion and before any decision on rrw development , manufacturing , or deployment. .

the committee discussed its policy concerns in detail .

it stated , the idea of a new nuclear warhead and leadership in nonproliferation are distinctly at odds in the absence of additional steps and policies to reduce the reliance on nuclear weapons , accelerate reductions in the size of the stockpile , formalize the moratorium on nuclear weapons testing , strengthen the nonproliferation regime , and renew commitments to all aspects of the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons .

as part of this policy focus , section 1061 of s. 1547 required a revised nuclear posture review , to include , among other things , the role of nuclear forces , the relationship among deterrence policy , targeting , and arms control , the nuclear delivery systems required , the nuclear weapons complex required , and the stockpile required , "including any plans for replacing or modifying warheads. .

section 3122 of s. 1547 , "sense of congress on the nuclear nonproliferation policy of the united states and the reliable replacement warhead," is another part of the committee's policy focus .

under this section , it would be the sense of congress that the united states should: reaffirm its commitment to article vi of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( discussed below ) , initiate talks with russia to reduce numbers of nuclear weapons , work with other nuclear weapon states to "decrease reliance on , and the importance of , nuclear weapons," and "formulate any decision on whether to manufacture or deploy a reliable replacement warhead within the broader context of the progress made by the united states toward achieving each of the goals described in [this section]. .

further , under section 3122 , "the senate should ratify the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty. .

the senate appropriations committee reported s. 1751 , the energy and water development appropriations bill , on july 9 .

the report stated , "the committee is divided on the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) program , but unified in its desire to review and discuss our national strategic defense policy and the role of nuclear weapons in the post - cold war and post - september 11 th world. .

the committee recommended $66.0 million for nnsa for rrw in order to complete phase 2a .

it made clear that it was not committed to proceeding with phase 3 but wanted "a more vigorous analysis and debate" first .

it wanted more information to help with this decision , such as characteristics of the future stockpile , the possible effects of rrw on u.s. nuclear nonproliferation efforts , and comparative costs of rrw vs. lep .

to this end , it favored a bipartisan , congressionally - created commission "to evaluate and make recommendations on the role of nuclear weapons in our future strategic posture.... that commission report can form the basis of information and advice from which the president and the congress can make decisions about the future of rrw and other weapons programs. .

at the same time , "[i]t will be incumbent upon nnsa to provide specific details as to how many rrw weapons will be manufactured , how the department of defense intends to integrate the system into the stockpile and how many weapons from the existing deterrent can be retired. .

although the committee recommended funds to continue phase 2a work on the first rrw type , it barred the use of funds for initial research on a second rrw type .

on july 20 , the secretaries of energy , defense , and state issued a statement urging congress to fully fund rrw for fy2008 .

they stressed the "essential role that nuclear weapons play in maintaining deterrence," argued that "it becomes increasingly difficult to certify the existing stockpile of weapons," and said that pursuit of rrw "is critical to sustaining long - term confidence in our deterrent capability. .

further , "[d]elays on rrw also raise the prospect of having to return to underground testing to certify existing weapons. .

responding to this statement , representatives skelton and tauscher wrote a letter to the secretaries , stating in part: we see promise in the proposed rrw program , but we take issue with your assertion that any delay in rrw would "force the united states to maintain a large stockpile of nuclear weapons and sustain it through increasingly costly and risky life extension programs," and "raise the prospect of having to return to underground nuclear testing to certify existing weapons. .

as we stated in the report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fy 2008 , it is too early to know whether rrw can deliver on the objectives that have been established for the program , and the prudent course at this point is rigorous study of the feasibility of achieving those objectives .

representatives hobson and visclosky also responded to the statement .

they said , "the joint statement reads as a description of the status quo," and continued , the joint statement goes so far as to imply that rrw is the only available option for addressing the concerns about the existing stockpile of legacy nuclear weapons .

particularly troubling is the direct link between a resumption of nuclear testing and the provision of funding for rrw: " delays on rrw also raise the prospect of having to return to underground nuclear testing to certify existing weapons. .

it is irresponsible for the administration to make such an assertion... .

there is no record of congressional testimony or reports sent to congress by the administration claiming that the safety , security , or reliability of the existing legacy stockpile is on a performance cliff such that a resumption of testing to verify performance of the warheads would be a necessity .

funds for the navy's rrw work fall under the jurisdiction of the defense appropriations subcommittee .

the house appropriations committee reported the defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3222 , h.rept .

110-279 ) on july 30 .

it recommended eliminating the $30.0 million navy request for rrw .

the house passed this bill , 395-13 , on august 5 ( roll no .

846 ) , leaving this provision unchanged .

on august 1 , senator feinstein introduced s. 1914 , nuclear policy and posture review act of 2007 .

subsection ( c ) of this bill would require the president to report to congress on the results of a nuclear policy review by september 1 , 2009 , and to report to congress on the results of a nuclear posture review by march 1 , 2010 .

the bill also provides , "no funds may be appropriated or otherwise made available for the reliable replacement warhead program for fiscal years 2008 , 2009 , or 2010 until the reports required under subsection ( c ) have been submitted to congress. .

a phase 3 decision could be delayed to fy2010 or beyond for several reasons .

the house armed services committee called for a report on u.s. strategic posture , due december 2008 , stating , "the committee believes clear policy objectives should be established before congress commits to ambitious new programs. .

the senate armed services committee called for a nuclear posture review , to be submitted to congress in december 2009 .

congress may wish to evaluate these reports before deciding how to proceed with rrw .

there may also be interest in examining what approach to rrw a new presidential administration may adopt in 2009 .

staff at the lawrence livermore , los alamos , and sandia national laboratories have indicated that were a delay to occur , continuing phase 2a through fy2008 and fy2009 would allow more time for in - depth study of rrw issues such as safety , use control , cost , and manufacturing , thereby potentially reducing technical risk .

they believe that this work could be accomplished by a small core team at modest cost .

the senate appropriations committee reported h.r .

3222 , the department of defense appropriations bill , on september 14 .

it recommended reducing navy rrw funding by $15.0 million .

as noted earlier , the jason defense advisory group delivered a classified report on rrw , along with an unclassified executive summary , to congress on september 28 .

the report was required by the fy2007 house appropriations committee's report ( h.rept .

109-474 ) on energy and water appropriations .

the jason report stated that the design for the first rrw type , wr1 , "is pursued with the above principles [on how to assess confidence and provide for successful certification] in mind , but certification is not yet assured .

the certification plan presented needs further development... .

substantial work remains on the physical understanding of the surety mechanisms that are of high priority to the rrw program. .

it recommended steps to "ensure that the new manufacturing processes [proposed for rw1] do not have a deleterious effect on wr1 performance" and made several recommendations to establish a peer review to establish confidence in the warhead's design , such as having the effectiveness of the peer review mechanism "examined periodically by an independent organization" and having the review team "broadly constituted" with "authority to pose formal tests of a computational or experimental nature to the design team. .

nnsa lauded the report , saying that it confirmed that nnsa's "approach towards developing a reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) was proceeding with appropriate scientific principles" and "concluded that nnsa's current approach , with additional technical , experimental and peer review enhancements , could determine that rrw can be certified for the stockpile without the need to conduct an underground nuclear test. .

further , nnsa administrator thomas d'agostino said , "i am pleased that the jason panel feels that we are on the right track. .

in a subsequent letter , d'agostino stated , "resolution of issues raised in the jason's study can only be achieved if this [rrw] r&d effort is allowed to proceed and is funded along the lines of the request submitted last february.... " representatives visclosky and hobson , in a statement on the jason report , said , "once again , independent sources have raised serious questions that must be addressed before proceeding with the rrw.... only when the department of energy has completed the work recommended by the jason report , can the nation appropriately consider what role an rrw might play as a 21 st century nuclear deterrent. .

in october , dod appealed items in the fy2008 defense appropriations bill .

one such item was rrw .

dod asked that congress provide the $15 million that the senate provided for the navy's rrw effort rather than the house - passed $0 .

it stated that $15.0 million is "the minimum level of funding needed by the navy to begin phase 2a activities in fy2008 , and with at least the same level of funding in fy2009 , to complete the effort within 2 years , one year later than the date that could have been achieved with the president's original budget request for this item. .

dod indicated how the money would be spent: it "is required to begin the navy portion of phase 2a and for risk reduction analysis and preliminary development of a follow - on arming , fuzing and firing ( af&f ) subsystem for all weapons associated with the mk5 aeroshell deployed on the trident ii d5 fleet ballistic missile system. .

 ( these funds would not be used to develop wr1 itself ; that task is the responsibility of nnsa. ) .

the nuclear warhead currently associated with the mk5 is the w88 .

according to steve henry , deputy assistant to the secretary of defense for nuclear matters , the w88 is housed in a mk5 aeroshell .

because of the mk5 size , it was also the aeroshell for the proposed rrw .

in the not too distant future , a w88 lep will have to be performed and the af&f will require replacement .

the future af&f for the mk5 aeroshell is the same af&f regardless of the nep [nuclear explosive package] ( w88 lep'd or an rrw ) .

thus , the new af&f subsystem could be used with the life - extended w88 and wr1 , but if wr1 does not go forward , the af&f subsystem would still be used with the life - extended w88 .

in march 2008 , the navy provided further details on how it plans to use rrw funds: the fy 08 rrw funding is currently on hold , so no work has been performed to date but , ssp has been directed by the office of secretary of defense ( osd ) to use the fy 08 and fy 09 rrw funding to support mk5a life extension efforts .

once the fy 08 funds are released and the fy 09 funds are appropriated , ssp will use the rrw funds for risk reduction analysis and preliminary development of a follow - on arming , fusing and firing ( af&f ) subsystem for all weapons associated with the mk5 aeroshell deployed on the trident ii ( d5 ) fleet ballistic missile system .

specific mk5a af&f efforts directed by the office of secretary of defense ( osd ) supports a number of tasks needed to address early technology for the life extension program for the mk5 / w88 nuclear weapon system .

below is a list of some of the major areas of technology to be pursued: define new safety architectures for the af&f design of high density high power radar non - volatile radiation hardened memory radiation hardened application specific integrated circuits ( asics ) high density thermal battery development radiation hardened wide band analog electronics low noise radar receivers utilizing commercial parts fuze modeling and test analysis in support of this effort , the above technologies will be synthesized into bench top systems for test purposes .

on november 6 , conferees on the defense appropriations bill filed their report ( h.rept .

110-434 ) , which included $15.0 million for the navy for rrw .

 ( adjustments reduced this figure to $14.455 million. ) .

on november 8 , the house agreed to the conference report , 400-15 , and the senate did so by voice vote .

an article in november 2007 offered some support for rrw .

it reported that a letter to senators jon kyl and pete domenici from former secretary of state henry kissinger said , "i believe that research and design of the rrw should continue. .

the article also cited a letter by former secretary of state george shultz and sidney drell , professor emeritus of physics at stanford university , to kissinger that stated , "research work on new rrw designs should certainly go ahead .

such work would make possible the decision to implement the construction phase of the program were that to be desired at some future time .

the design work itself is relatively small in cost and need not be viewed in any way as an eventual commitment to go ahead. .

the conference version of h.r .

1585 , fy2008 national defense authorization act , provided $66.0 million for rrw .

it contained several provisions on rrw .

it barred moving rrw beyond phase 2a in fy2008 ( section 3111 ) .

the conference report stated , "the conferees believe clarification of the united states' long - term nuclear weapons policy is a prerequisite to any major decisions on the size and composition of the nuclear weapons stockpile and the complex that supports it .

to that end , the conference agreement includes section 1062 establishing a congressionally appointed bipartisan commission to examine u.s. nuclear policy and strategic posture , and section 1070 , requiring that a new nuclear posture review be submitted to congress in december 2009. .

it required a study on the use of existing pits in the rrw program ( section 3121 ) it included a sense of congress provision that the united states should make any decisions on rrw in the context of progress made toward several goals related to nuclear nonproliferation and arms reduction ( section 3126 ) as an aid to future decisions on nuclear weapons and related matters , it provided for establishing a commission on nuclear policy and strategic posture ( section 1062 ) , with a report due december 1 , 2008 , and required a new nuclear posture review be submitted to congress by february 1 , 2010 ( section 1070 ) .

on december 12 , the house agreed to the conference report on h.r .

1585 , 370-49 .

on december 14 , the senate agreed to the conference report , 90-3 .

president bush vetoed the measure on december 28 for reasons having to do with iraqi economic issues ; he signed a bill revised to accommodate these concerns , h.r .

4986 , into law ( p.l .

110-181 ) on january 28 , 2008 .

on december 16 , the house rules committee posted the fy2008 consolidated appropriations bill ( the house amendments to senate amendment to h.r .

2764 , state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2008 ) .

the house and senate agreed to this bill through an exchange of amendments , december 17-19 , and the president signed the consolidated appropriations act , fy2008 , into law ( p.l .

110-161 ) december 26 .

p.l .

110-161 eliminated nnsa rrw funds .

according to the explanatory statement , the amended bill provides no funds for the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) , as proposed by the house .

as stated in both the house and senate reports , congress believes a new strategic nuclear deterrent mission assessment for the 21 st century is required to define the associated stockpile requirements and determine the scope of the weapons complex modernization plans .

the nnsa is directed to develop a long - term scientific capability roadmap for the national laboratories to be submitted to the committees on appropriations .

commenting on the bill , according to a press report , representative peter visclosky , chairman of the house energy and water development appropriations subcommittee , said , "[m]oving forward on a new nuclear weapon is not something this nation should do without great consideration ... the u.s. needs a comprehensive nuclear defense strategy , and a revised stockpile plan to guide the transformation and downsizing of the [nuclear weapons] complex," while an nnsa spokesman said that eliminating nnsa rrw funding means "we will likely have to go down a path of a full - life extension program for nuclear weapons in our stockpile , which in the long run will be more costly , without introducing modern safety and security measures into our weapons. .

for fy2009 , doe requests $10.0 million and projects a request the same sum for each year fy2010-fy2013 .

it justified the request as follows: $10 million is requested to enable maturation of the rrw design to address questions raised by the jason review of rrw feasibility study activities .

design refinement is necessary to establish parameters for potential impact on certification .

without further design work , there is insufficient detail available to use this design to resolve certification questions raised by the jasons review .

this funding will also facilitate documenting the phase 2a rrw work that has been completed through 2007 ( prior to the fy 2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) ) to support future administration decisions on options for our nuclear weapons stockpile .

the department of defense and the joint dod - doe nuclear weapons council fully support continuing efforts to examine how the rrw concept can address issues of safety , security and long - term reliability of the nation's nuclear deterrent .

in february 2008 , nnsa administrator thomas d'agostino testified that proceeding with the rrw study will provide information crucial to completing the review of the nuclear posture in a timely manner .

further , it would address concerns about u.s. ability to maintain the stockpile for the long term with lep , offer the prospect of improving warhead surety , and address the maintenance of nuclear skills .

in the same hearing , general kevin chilton , usaf , commander , u.s. strategic command , argued for "a warhead that is designed for the 21 st century," with greater emphasis on reliability , safety , security , and maintainability , rather than on maximizing yield to weight .

according to one report , he also said that without completing the rrw study "he would be ill - prepared to advise the incoming president next year on how best to modernize the atomic arsenal. .

others expressed opposition to rrw .

regarding the need to improve surety , daryl kimball , executive director of the arms control association , said , "should we spend billions of dollars to replace existing warhead types in our arsenal to reduce by an infinitesimal amount [the possibility] that al - qaeda could detonate it ? .

and former senator sam nunn said , "in this world atmosphere , in this climate , for us to build a new warhead now would be a real setback to all of our nonproliferation efforts , so i am opposed to it.... at this moment i think it would be a mistake for america to go forward with that program. .

for fy2009 , the navy requests $23.3 million under "reliable replacement warhead," a reduction from a planned request of $50.0 million .

the previous section details how the navy plans to use fy2008 and fy2009 rrw funds .

in its markup of the fy2009 defense authorization bill , reported in a press release of may 1 , 2008 , the senate armed services committee recommended retaining nnsa's request for rrw but eliminating the navy's request .

the senate passed the bill on september 17 , 88-8 , without amending the rrw provisions .

in its may 7 markup of its portion of the defense authorization bill , the strategic forces subcommittee of house armed services committee recommended eliminating nnsa and navy funds for rrw .

chairwoman tauscher said in a statement that these funds were "re - directed to higher priority nuclear weapons research. .

in its may 16 report on the authorization bill , h.r .

5658 , the house armed services committee adopted these positions and explained them in some detail .

regarding the navy's request , the committee "finds that the activities described in the budget request are premature and not executable in fiscal year 2009. .

noting that this request was for an af&f system ( described under "congressional action on the fy2008 rrw request," above ) , the committee eliminated funds for rrw and authorized $13.3 million for research into integrated af&f systems .

regarding the nnsa request , the committee stated that the $10.0 million request was to "address questions raised by the jason review of rrw feasibility study activities. .

however , it noted , other funds requested by nnsa , in advanced certification and enhanced surety , would also examine these certification issues .

the committee stated its support for research on certification and stewardship issues "critical to sustaining and modernizing the stockpile stewardship program ( ssp ) , whether or not the rrw program proceeds. .

accordingly , it recommended eliminating the $10.0 million requested for rrw and adding $10.0 million within advanced certification to address issues raised by the jason review and for "other high priority ssp challenges. .

on may 22 , representative stevan pearce offered h.amdt .

1052 to h.r .

5658 .

the amendment would increase funding for rrw by $10.0 million in title xxxi , department of energy national security programs , while offsetting that amount by a like amount "to be derived from energy conservation on military installations. .

the amendment failed by a vote of 145 to 271 ( roll no .

358 ) .

also on may 22 , the house passed the bill , 384-23 ( roll no .

365 ) .

the house and senate had an informal conference on the defense authorization bill .

according to the joint explanatory statement , "the result of these negotiations comprised the house amendment to s. 3001 , which was considered and passed under suspension of the rules of the house of representatives on september 24 , 2008 , by a vote of 392-39 .

by unanimous consent , the senate agreed with the house amendment to s. 3001 on september 27 , 2008. .

the resulting bill had no rrw funds for the navy or nnsa .

it was signed into law , p.l .

110-417 , on october 14 , 2008 .

the house appropriations committee marked up the fy2009 energy - water appropriations bill on june 25 and released a committee print version of its report in june .

the committee eliminated the $10.0 million nnsa request for rrw .

the committee was highly critical of this request: the committee is aware of the advantages of a modern warhead design and strongly supports improved surety .

the committee also understands that high margin provides protection against failure due to compound unknowns .

the committee supports trading off cold war high yield for improved reliability , in order to move to a smaller stockpile requiring a smaller and cheaper weapons complex with no need for nuclear testing .

that said , the committee remains to be convinced that a new warhead design will lead to these benefits .

the committee will not spend the taxpayers' money for a new generation of warheads promoted as leading to nuclear reductions absent a specific glide path to a specified , much smaller force of nuclear weapons .

similarly , the committee finds no logic in spending the taxpayers' money on a new generation of warheads promoted as avoiding the need for nuclear testing , while the secretary of state insists that "the administration does not support the comprehensive test ban treaty. .

... before the committee will consider funding for most new programs , substantial changes to the existing nuclear weapons complex , or funding for the rrw , the committee insists that the following sequence be completed: ( 1 ) replacement of cold war strategies with a 21 st century nuclear deterrent strategy sharply focused on today's and tomorrow's threats , and capable of serving the national security needs of future administrations and future congresses without need for nuclear testing ; ( 2 ) determination of the size and nature of the nuclear stockpile sufficient to serve that strategy ; ( 3 ) determination of the size and nature of the nuclear weapons complex needed to support that future stockpile .

the committee stated that while plans to execute these steps were laid out in the fy2008 omnibus appropriations act , "none of the required plans have been submitted. .

the committee approved the bill by voice vote on june 25 ; the report ( h.rept .

110-921 ) was released december 10 , 2008 .

the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3258 , the fy2009 energy - water appropriation bill , on july 14 .

it recommended no nnsa funds for rrw .

the house and senate versions of this bill were not brought to the floor .

instead , funding for nnsa and many other agencies was made available through the continuing resolution component of h.r .

2638 , consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , for the period october 1 , 2008-march 6 , 2009 or until enactment of the applicable regular appropriations bill .

section 104 provided that "no appropriation or funds made available or authority granted pursuant to section 101 shall be used to initiate or resume any project or activity for which appropriations , funds , or other authority were not available during fiscal year 2008. .

rrw was one such activity ; accordingly , the bill provided no nnsa funds for rrw .

h.r .

2638 was signed into law , p.l .

110-329 , on september 30 , 2008 .

p.l .

111-6 , a one - sentence continuing resolution , extended the expiration of p.l .

110-329 through march 11 , 2009 .

p.l .

111-8 , omnibus appropriations act , 2009 , provided funds for the balance of fy2009 .

it provided no nnsa funds for rrw .

the administration requested $23.3 million in rrw funds for the navy in the department of defense appropriations bill .

these funds were part of an $80.1 million request for program element 11221n , strategic submarine and weapons system support .

while the defense appropriations subcommittees marked up the bill , the full committees did not report their respective bills .

instead , the department of defense appropriations bill was contained in h.r .

2638 , division c , as a regular appropriations bill .

that bill eliminated navy rrw funds .

for fy2010 , the administration requested no funds for rrw and included the program in a list of programs to be terminated .

an office of management and budget report called rrw "not consistent with presidential commitments to move towards a nuclear - free world. .

the house armed services committee reported h.r .

2647 , the fy2010 defense authorization bill , on june 18 , 2009 .

section 3112 of the bill would strike section 4204a of the atomic energy act directing doe to establish the rrw program .

the bill passed the house , 389-22 , with 1 present , june 25 .

the senate armed services committee reported s. 1390 , fy2010 defense authorization bill , on july 2 .

section 3113 would strike section 4204a of the atomic energy act .

the bill passed the senate , 87-7 , on july 23 .

no amendments on rrw were offered to either bill .

the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

3183 , fy2010 energy and water development appropriations bill , on july 13 .

it contained no funds for rrw .

the house passed the bill , 320-97 , on july 17 , with no amendments on rrw .

the senate appropriations committee reported its energy - water bill on july 9 .

it contained no funds for rrw .

with the termination of the rrw program , the section on policy options and issues for rrw that appeared in previous updates of this report has become moot and is deleted .

american association for the advancement of science , center for science , technology and security policy , nuclear weapons complex assessment committee , the united states nuclear weapons program: the role of the reliable replacement warhead , april 2007 , 34 p. brown , harold , and john deutch , "the nuclear disarmament fantasy," wall street journal , november 19 , 2007 , p. 19 .

center for security policy , "towards a new deterrent: analysis and recommendations for the commission on the strategic posture of the united states," 5 p. , c. may 2008 , at http: / / www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org / modules / newsmanager / center%20publication%20pdfs / towards%20a%20new%20deterrent%20516.pdf .

d'agostino , thomas , "statement of thomas p. d'agostino , administrator , national nuclear security administration , u.s. department of energy , before the house committee on armed services subcommittee on strategic forces," february 27 , 2008 , 11 p. fox , jon , "former secretaries of state support new warhead," global security newswire , november 15 , 2007 .

gaffney , frank , jr. , "the genie - stuffers," washington times , june 19 , 2007 , p. 15 .

grossman , elaine , "u.s. general calls for faster action on reliable replacement warhead," global security newswire , march 6 , 2008 .

grossman , elaine , "draft house markup adds $9 million for fast strike," global security newswire , september 9 , 2008 harvey , john , "maintaining the 21 st [century] nuclear deterrent: the case for rrw," remarks to the stanley foundation conference , "u.s. nuclear force posture and infrastructure," updated february 8 , 2008 .

hemley , r.j. , et al. , pit lifetime , ( jason report ) , the mitre corporation , mclean , va , jsr - 06-335 , january 11 , 2007 , 20 p. hoffman , ian , "nuclear deal may come with strings: democrats signal openness to new arsenal , as long as it is linked with test ban treaty ratification," contra costa times , february 3 , 2007 , p. f4 .

jason [defense advisory group] , the mitre corporation , "reliable replacement warhead: executive summary," jsr - 07-336e , mclean , va , september 7 , 2007 , 8 p. kimball , daryl , "replacement warheads and the nuclear test ban," defense news , march 5 , 2007 .

"national security and nuclear weapons: maintaining deterrence in the 21 st century: a statement by the secretary of energy , secretary of defense and secretary of state," july 2007 .

"the next generation of nuclear weapons," bulletin of the atomic scientists ( several short articles by multiple authors ) , july / august 2007 , pp .

30-49 .

pincus , walter , "congress skeptical of warhead plan," washington post , april 22 , 2007 , p. 5 .

pincus , walter , "making a pitch for nuclear warhead program," washington post , october 6 , 2008 , p. 13 .

pincus , walter , "strategic command chief urges quick nuclear weapons modernization," washington post , december 5 , 2008 , p. 9 .

scheber , thomas , reliable replacement warheads: perspectives and issues , publication 0005 of the united states nuclear strategy forum , national institute press , august 2007 , 31 p. spring , baker , "congress's critical role in the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) program," heritage foundation executive memorandum 1026 , may 11 , 2007 , 2 p. u.s. department of defense and department of energy .

nuclear weapons council .

"memorandum for the nuclear weapons council ( nwc ) , subject: reliable replacement warhead 1 ( rrw - 1 ) path forward," march 18 , 2007 , 1 p. + attachment .

u.s. department of defense and department of energy .

"report on the feasibility and implementation of the reliable replacement warhead program: submitted to the congressional defense committees pursuant to section 3111 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 , p.l .

109-163 , by the secretary of defense and the secretary of energy in consultation with the nuclear weapons council," april 2008 , 14 p. u.s. department of defense and department of energy .

"national security and nuclear weapons in the 21 st century," september 2008 .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

"design selected for reliable replacement warhead," news release , march 2 , 2007 .

u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

"report on the feasibility of using existing pits for the reliable replacement warhead program," transmitted to congress august 8 , 2008 , 15 p. u.s. department of energy .

national nuclear security administration .

office of defense programs .

report on the plan for transformation of the national nuclear security administration nuclear weapons complex , [report to] congressional defense committees as requested by the united states congress in p.l .

109-364 , john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 , january 31 , 2007 , 31 p. u.s. executive office of the president .

office of management and budget .

"terminations , reductions , and savings: budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2010," 2009 .

webb , greg , "leading u.s .

scientist criticizes warhead effort," global security newswire , february 27 , 2008 .

this report refers to nuclear weapons design , operation , and production throughout .

this appendix describes key terms , concepts , and facilities as an aid to readers not familiar with them .

current strategic ( long - range ) and most tactical nuclear weapons are of a two - stage design .

the first stage , the "primary," is an atomic bomb similar in principle to the bomb dropped on nagasaki .

the primary provides the energy needed to trigger the second stage , or "secondary. .

the primary has at its center a "pit," a hollow core containing fissile material ( typically plutonium ) and containment shells of other metals .

it is surrounded by chemical explosive shaped to generate a symmetrical inward - moving ( implosion ) shock front .

when the explosive is detonated , the implosion compresses the plutonium , increasing its density so much that it becomes supercritical and can sustain a runaway nuclear chain reaction .

a neutron generator injects neutrons into the plutonium .

the neutrons drive this reaction by splitting ( fissioning ) plutonium atoms , repeatedly doubling the number of neutrons released .

but the chain reaction can last only the briefest moment before the force of the nuclear explosion drives the plutonium outward so that it becomes subcritical and can no longer support a chain reaction .

to increase the fraction of plutonium that is fissioned , boosting the yield of the primary , another system injects "boost gas" — a mixture of deuterium and tritium ( isotopes of hydrogen ) gases — into the pit before the explosive is detonated .

the intense heat and pressure of the fission chain reaction cause this gas to undergo fusion .

while the fusion reaction generates energy , its purpose is to generate a great many neutrons and thus "boost" the fission chain reaction to a higher level .

a metal "radiation case" channels the energy of the primary to the secondary , which contains fission and fusion fuel .

the energy ignites the secondary , which releases most of the energy of a nuclear explosion .

the primary , radiation case , and secondary comprise the "nuclear explosive package. .

thousands of "nonnuclear" components are also needed to make the nuclear explosive package into a militarily usable weapon , such as an arming , firing , and fuzing system , an outer case , and electrical and physical connections linking a bomb to an airplane or a warhead to a missile .

nuclear weapons were designed , tested , and manufactured by the nuclear weapons complex , which is composed of eight government - owned contractor - operated sites: the los alamos national laboratory ( nm ) and lawrence livermore national laboratory ( ca ) , which design nuclear explosive packages ; sandia national laboratories ( nm and ca ) , which designs nonnuclear components ; y - 12 plant ( tn ) , which produces uranium components and secondaries ; kansas city plant ( mo ) , which produces many of the nonnuclear components ; savannah river site ( sc ) , which processes tritium from stockpiled weapons to remove decay products ; pantex plant ( tx ) , which assembles and disassembles nuclear weapons ; and the nevada test site , which used to conduct nuclear tests but now conducts other weapons - related experiments that do not produce a nuclear yield .

these sites are now involved in disassembly , inspection , and refurbishment of existing nuclear weapons .

the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semiautonomous part of the department of energy , manages the nuclear weapons complex and program .

nnsa maintains nuclear weapons and associated expertise through the stockpile stewardship program ( ssp ) , which congress created in the fy1994 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

103-160 , section 3138 ) .

the legislation specified that the goal of ssp is "to ensure the preservation of the core intellectual and technical competencies of the united states in nuclear weapons" through "advanced computational capabilities," "above - ground experiments" ( experiments not requiring nuclear testing ) , and construction of large experimental facilities .

ssp has three main elements .

directed stockpile work involves work directly on nuclear weapons in the stockpile , such as monitoring their condition , maintaining them through refurbishment and modifications , r&d in support of specific warheads , and dismantlement .

it includes the life extension program and the rrw program .

campaigns provide focused scientific and engineering expertise in support of directed stockpile work , in such areas as pit manufacturing and certification , computation , and study of the properties of materials .

readiness in technical base and facilities funds infrastructure and operations at the nuclear weapons complex sites .

while the legislation did not specify that ssp was not to involve nuclear testing , that goal seems clear from the history , and has become a goal of the program .

nnsa does not rule out the possible need for testing , such as if a problem were to emerge in a warhead type that could not be remedied in any other way , but the united states has been able to maintain its nuclear stockpile without testing since 1992 .

