when amending the clean air act in 1977 , congress added provisions focused on protecting the quality of clean air areas , and especially of national parks and other important national sites .

codifying regulations developed by epa in 1974 and 1975 , the prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) program focuses on preventing further deterioration of air quality in pristine areas of the country by specifying how much increase in pollution levels is permitted .

mandatory class i areas — those areas that receive the maximum amount of protection — include most national parks , national wilderness areas , and national memorial parks , currently 156 areas .

psd regulations apply to emissions of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , particulates ( pm ) , and nitrogen oxides ( nox ) from new and modified sources of air pollution .

along with the psd program for new sources , the congress also added a new section 169a , setting "as a national goal the prevention of any future , and the remedying of any existing , impairment to visibility in mandatory class i federal areas...." psd and section 169a act in tandem , with psd controlling new sources of impairment and section 169a reducing emissions from existing sources of impairment .

under psd , major new or modified sources in psd areas must undergo preconstruction review and must install "best available control technology" ( bact ) ; more stringent controls can be required if modeling indicates that bact is insufficient to avoid violating an allowable psd increment or the national ambient air quality standard itself .

under section 169a , 26 categories of major stationary sources of pollution in existence on the date of enactment ( 1977 ) , but not more than 15 years old as of that date , must install "best available retrofit technology" ( bart ) if the state determines the source may reasonably be anticipated to cause or contribute to any impairment of visibility in a class i area .

included in the list are electric generating units ( egus ) .

implementing these provisions protecting visibility has not been easy , particularly section 169a respecting existing sources .

first , epa had to define what visibility was .

in general , visibility impairment from human activities manifests itself in two ways: ( 1 ) plume blight , where a clearly identifiable plume of smoke emanates from one or more sources ; and ( 2 ) regional haze , where a uniform reduction in visual range occurs , or a layered discoloration by hovering bands of air tinged brown , yellow , or red .

second , epa had to promulgate regulations within 24 months of enactment to assure that state implementation plans ( sips ) required ( 1 ) reasonable progress toward meeting the national goal mentioned earlier , and ( 2 ) compliance with several very specific provisions , including the best available retrofit technology ( bart ) requirements for existing sources .

epa promulgated rules in 1980 to address visibility impairment that was "reasonably attributable" to a single source or small group of sources ( i.e. , plume blight ) .

as with many air pollution regulations , these visibility regulations are implemented by states through sips .

in general , the 36 states with mandatory class i areas were required to revise their sips to assure reasonable progress toward the national visibility goal .

the major elements of the regulation were ( 1 ) identifying existing sources causing visibility impairment and creating procedures for determining which existing stationary sources should be subject to bart requirements ; ( 2 ) assessing potential adverse impacts from proposed new sources ( or modified old sources ) and recommending remedial actions via the new source review ( nsr ) process and the psd program ; ( 3 ) developing a 10-15 year long - term strategy to make "reasonable progress" toward the visibility goal ; and ( 4 ) conducting visibility monitoring in mandatory class i areas .

as noted , these regulations deal with plume blight only — regional haze reduction was explicitly delayed until some future date .

this lack of aggressive implementation of section 169a extended to the implementation of the 1980 regulations as well .

after 35 of 36 states missed the september 1981 deadline for final visibility plans , the environmental defense fund sued the epa in 1982 to implement the plume blight regulations .

the suit was settled in 1984 with the epa developing a phased - in schedule for compliance with a december 1986 deadline for states to revise their sips to include controls on existing sources that hinder visibility goals .

this sequential implementation of plume blight regulations actually extended through 1989 .

so far , the only bart installation to occur under the 1980 regulations has been the installation of sulfur dioxide scrubbers at the navajo generating station in arizona in 1991 .

epa's lack of initiative on visibility during the 1980s prompted the congress to revisit the issue in the 1990 amendments to the clean air act .

those actions included a new title iv , controlling precursors of acid rain and regional haze , and a new section 169b .

in some ways , section 169b was a triggering mechanism to force epa to move on section 169a with respect to regional haze .

specifically , the 1990 amendments required epa to establish a grand canyon visibility transport commission ( gcvtc ) within 12 months of enactment ( and other commissions upon its own discretion or petition from at least two states ) .

commissions were required to assess the scientific , technical , and other data available on visibility impairment from potential or projected emissions growth in the region .

based on those data , the commissions were to issue reports within four years to epa recommending what measures , if any , should be taken to remedy such impairment .

within 18 months of receiving a commission's report , epa was to carry out its responsibilities under section 169a , including criteria for measuring "reasonable progress" toward the national goal .

finally , states affected by any regulations promulgated under section 169a were required to revise their sips within 12 months of such promulgation .

in 1991 , a visibility transport commission for the region affecting visibility in grand canyon national park was established .

in june 1996 , this commission ( consisting of the governors of arizona , california , colorado , nevada , new mexico , oregon , utah , and wyoming , and the leaders of five indian tribes ) approved a set of recommendations for improving western vistas .

there were nine primary recommendations , including increased energy conservation , use of renewable energy , and emission reductions from stationary sources .

the commission's baseline forecast anticipated that current regulatory programs would reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide from stationary sources ( power plants , smelters , and other industrial sources ) 13% by the year 2000 , although additional measures under consideration might reduce emissions 20% - 30% .

in light of this uncertainty about the effects of current programs and the fact that emissions were projected to decline in the short term without additional regulation , the commission agreed to set only regional targets for sulfur dioxide emissions in the year 2000 .

the ultimate targets would be in the range of 50% - 70% reduction by the year 2040 , but "interim targets may also be needed to ensure steady and continuing emission reductions and to promote investment in pollution prevention. .

if the targets are exceeded , this would trigger a regulatory program , probably including a regional cap on emissions , with market - based trading .

the 1990 clean air act amendments required the epa administrator to take action under section 169a within 18 months of receipt of a commission report .

the proposed rule appeared in the federal register on july 31 , 1997 .

the final regional haze rule was published on july 1 , 1999 .

the regional haze program represents a nationwide effort to protect 156 psd class i areas from visibility impairment from manmade air pollution .

all 50 states are included under the program — including those that do not have any class i areas within their boundaries — since pollution causing haze can travel beyond a state's boundaries and contribute to impaired visibility in a class i area located elsewhere .

the rule encourages regional approaches .

indeed , the final rule includes special provisions ( section 309 program ) that permit the former member - states of the grand canyon visibility transport commission to implement their specific recommendations within the framework of the national regional haze program ( section 308 program ) .

states are required under section 169a to develop sips that ensure reasonable progress toward the national goal .

under section 308 of the rule , sips must contain the following: reasonable progress goals .

states must establish goals expressed in deciviews that provide for reasonable progress toward achieving natural visibility conditions in class i areas by 2064 .

calculations of baseline and natural visibility conditions .

states must determine baseline conditions expressed in deciviews for the most impaired and least impaired days during 2000-2004 .

long - term planning .

states must submit a long - term strategy to address regional haze for each class i area within the state or affected by emissions within the state .

the strategy must include compliance schedules , enforceable emission limitations , and other measures necessary to achieve reasonable progress goals .

monitor strategy .

states must submit with the sip a strategy for measuring , characterizing , and reporting regional haze .

best available retrofit technology ( bart ) .

states must submit a bart implementation plan , including emission limitations and compliance schedules for each bart - eligible source that "may reasonably be anticipated" to contribute to visibility impairment in a class i area .

states may choose to use a trading program or other alternative , if that alternative will achieve greater reasonable progress to natural visibility conditions than bart .

tracking progress .

sips must include several provisions to ensure the adequacy of the sip .

in particular , the sip must include requirements for submitting sip revisions to epa every 10 years , beginning in 2018 .

progress reports tracking the state's reasonable progress efforts are due every five years .

reports must include a determination of the adequacy of the state's sip .

an alternative program is provided in section 309 as an option for nine former members of the grand canyon visibility transport commission ( gcvtc ) .

five states chose to meet the epa deadline for inclusion under this option .

based on the commission's 1996 report , section 309 allows states to choose to follow the commission's recommendations for reducing visibility impairment in the 16 class i areas in colorado rather than the section 308 program , up to the year 2018 .

focused primarily on so 2 emissions , which are a major component of regional haze , states set voluntary "so 2 milestones," instead of requiring bart .

if the milestones are not achieved , then a back - up mandatory emissions trading program would be activated to ensure compliance with the milestones .

the successor organization to the gcvtc , the western regional air partnership ( wrap ) submitted to epa an annex to the commission's report in 2000 that identifies the voluntary so 2 reduction milestones out to the year 2018 , along with the back - up trading program details .

the 2018 milestone of 510,000 tons would represent a reduction of 320,000 tons from 1990 emissions of 830,000 tons .

epa approved the annex in 2003 .

while working on the regional haze rule , epa was also proposing to implement a new national ambient air quality standard ( naaqs ) for very fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) , which are key contributors to regional haze .

to implement the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs , a monitoring network had to be established and three years of data collected before states could identify pm 2.5 nonattainment areas and begin the development of sips .

adhering to the separate schedules could lead some states to revising sips twice , once for visibility and then , a year or two later , for pm 2.5 attainment .

as a result , epa proposed that states preparing sips for attaining the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs combine it and their submittal of the regional haze sip revisions .

in p.l .

105-178 , enacted june 9 , 1998 , congress codified this proposal and also extended deadlines for areas not designated nonattainment .

the enacted language stipulates that sips implementing the regional haze rule be submitted on the same schedule as those for pm 2.5 nonattainment areas .

this linking of the implementation schedules of regional haze and pm 2.5 rules effectively extended the regional haze actions .

under the nationwide section 308 program , states classified as attainment under the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs have one year after that designation ( which occurred on december 17 , 2004 ) to submit to epa their revisions to sips to implement the regional haze requirements .

but states classified as nonattainment under the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs will have three years after that designation to submit to epa their revised sip , allowing them to combine implementation of the regional haze rule with the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs compliance .

optional sip schedules are provided for states that chose to develop a regional , coordinated approach to regional haze .

likewise , states choosing to follow the recommendations of the gcvtc have an alternative compliance schedule .

table 1 provides a rough implementation schedule for the regional haze rule based on epa's latest estimated schedule for pm 2.5 compliance .

the regional haze and pm 2.5 programs interact with other air quality programs as well — notably epa's finalized clean air interstate rule ( cair ) .

the clean air act has evolved over time in response to a developing understanding of the environment , new technologies , and changes in the nation's transportation , energy , and industrial sectors .

the result has been a patchwork of requirements that are not always consistent — and may even be incompatible — at any given moment .

moreover , implementing regulations change and are added to over time .

although the evolution of the act has resulted in a structure that some consider unwieldy , emissions of most air pollutants have substantially declined , and the number of persons living in areas where pollution exceeds standards has diminished .

from a policy standpoint , epa has presented the clean air interstate rule — and the accompanying mercury ( hg ) rule — as a "suite of integrated air actions" to reduce emissions of three pollutants: so 2 , nox , and hg .

by promulgating guidelines to help states determine appropriate state emissions budgets for their trading program and to exempt sources subject to the cair from the individual bart determinations required by section 169a ( visibility impairment ) , epa appears to be trying to extend the "suite" to the visibility protection provisions of the caa .

in other words , epa is endeavoring to transform cair from another layer on the already multilayered cake called the clean air act to an integrative program that simplifies the layers .

as discussed , this effort to meld section 169a ( visibility ) and section 109 ( naaqs ) implementation strategies based on their common characteristic of controlling sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides raises numerous issues .

in the clean air act , their only procedural link is the sip process , but they have different scopes , purposes , and requirements .

because of the happenstance that the timing of the pm 2.5 naaqs and the regional haze rules partly coincided , epa proposed and congress legislated that the initial implementation schedules of the sip process for the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs and the sip process for the regional haze rule be coordinated .

now epa is linking the two programs by determining that certain cair program provisions can in effect substitute for related but different visibility requirements .

whether it can do this while accomplishing the express purposes and requirements of both section 109 and section169a is subject to debate and possible litigation .

by using a collective analysis designed to assist states in determining state emission budgets to justify excluding individual units from undergoing individual state - led bart review , epa concludes that the cair program adequately meets visibility requirements — a conclusion that is contentious .

indeed , opponents of the attempt have described it as regulatory "bait and switch. .

this conflict is not surprising as epa is attempting to integrate regulatory provisions that are separate in many essential respects .

it appears the administration's goal is to redirect caa compliance strategies toward a market - oriented cap - and - trade program — viewed by many observers as a more cost - effective approach to pollution control than direct regulation ( such as the bart program ) .

such a redirection of compliance approaches has been proposed — and the title iv acid rain provisions of the caa are often cited as the preeminent example of its application .

several proposals have focused on electric generating units .

one approach is a "multi - pollutant" strategy — a framework based on a consistent set of emissions caps , implemented through emissions trading .

in february 2002 , the bush administration announced a "clear skies" multi - pollutant proposal that would amend the clean air act to place emission caps on electric utility emissions of so 2 , nox , and hg .

implemented through a tradable allowance program , the emission caps would generally be imposed in two phases: 2008 and 2018 .

although different in geographic scope , the administration's clean air interstate rule and mercury rule are very similar in terms of reduction requirements as clear skies .

however , unlike epa's "suite of integrated air action," clear skies contains significant conforming language to avoid conflicts with other caa provisions such as section 169a .

the administration has stated its preference for clear skies over its regulatory approach .

however , the congress has yet to move any multi - pollutant proposal to the floor , nor has it given epa broad authority to reconstitute regulatory approaches into market - oriented ones .

epa's combining of cair and bart represents a regulatory initiative to achieve at least a partial step in coordinating regulatory programs under a market - oriented approach .

it is possible , however , that a statutory solution could be necessary .

