the judiciary committee's blue - slip policy has been a central component in its confirmationof judicial nominations .

for a large portion of its history , the blue slip gave senators the ability todetermine the fate of their home - state judicial nominations .

if a home - state senator had no objectionto a nominee , a blue slip would be returned to the chairman with a positive response .

if , however,the senator had some objection to the nominee and wanted to prevent confirmation , he / she coulddecide not to return the blue slip or return it with a negative response .

over the years , the blue - slippolicy has been modified to prevent a single senator from having such absolute power over the fateof home - state judicial nominees .

today , a blue slip can stop a judicial nomination only if bothhome - state senators return a negative blue slip and then only if the president has failed to consultwith the home - state senators .

this report provides a history of the judiciary committee blue - slip custom , a practice whichemanated from the chamber's tradition of senatorial courtesy .

it first defines "senatorial courtesy"and how the practice is related to the judiciary committee's use of the blue slip .

next , this reportdescribes the creation of the blue - slip procedure and the modifications to it .

eight sections profilethe committee's blue - slip policies during the last 43 congresses .

these profiles provide a sense ofthe stated and practiced blue - slip policy at any given time and place that policy in the context of thehistory of the blue - slip system .

case studies are provided to show how a particular congress appliedthe blue - slip policy to a given circumstance .

finally , a frequently asked questions section and aconcluding analysis on the blue - slip process are included .

it should be noted that there are currently two kinds of blue slips used by congress .

thesenate version of the blue slip ( 1 ) is a committee practice employed solely by the senate judiciarycommittee for use in the confirmation of federal judges and other positions .

in the house ofrepresentatives , the blue slip is an enforcement tool for the origination clause of the u.s.constitution .

 ( 2 ) crs report rs21236 , blue - slipping: the origination clause in the house of representatives , by jamesv .

saturno , discusses the use of the house version of the blue slip .

 ( 3 ) .

the blue slip is a manifestation of senatorial courtesy .

a layman's definition of senatorialcourtesy would be the deference with which one senator treats another .

in the context of theconstitutional responsibility of advice and consent , the term and practice are more expansive .

the american congressional dictionary defines senatorial courtesy as [t]he senate's practice of declining to confirm apresidential nominee for an office in the state of a senator of the president's party unless that senatorapproves .

sometimes called "the courtesy of the senate," the practice is a customary one and notalways adhered to .

a senator sometimes invokes the custom by declaring that the nominee ispersonally obnoxious or personally objectionable to him .

... [the senate] also usually complies with a senator'srequest for a temporary delay in considering a nomination , a request that is referred to as a hold .

 ( 4 ) the concept of senatorial courtesy goes beyond the confines of the senate and , at times,represents the courtesy a president extends , or arguably should extend , to senators .

politicalscientist harold chase describes the political ramifications of this senate tradition: senators , whether chosen by state legislatures , as theywere at an earlier time , or by the voters of the state , must continuously nurture their political supportback home ; that is , if they hope for additional terms in office - - and it is a rare senator who does not .

in this connection , senators from the first congress on have recognized that one or two senatorshave a much greater stake in a particular appointment than others .

it is , of course , exceedinglyhelpful to a senator to be able to reward supporters with good posts in the federal government .

conversely , it is enormously damaging to a senator's prestige if a president of his own party ignoreshim when it comes to making an appointment from or to the senator's own state .

what is even moredamaging to a senator's prestige and political power is for the president to appoint to high federaloffice someone who is known back home as a political opponent to the senator .

it was easy forsenators to see that if they joined together against the president to protect their individual interestsin appointments , they could to a large degree assure that the president could only make suchappointments as would be palatable to them as individuals .

out of such considerations grew thecustom of senatorial courtesy .

 ( 5 ) although the custom of using the "personally obnoxious" or personally objectionable"declaration has fallen out of use in recent years , various chairmen of the senate judiciary committeehave used the blue - slip practice as a means of providing senators with the opportunity to makeobjections to nominations formally known within the committee .

the following account of the history of the blue slip reflects research in the nationalarchives and records administration ( nara ) in washington , d.c. ( 6 ) the primary recordsresearched were the executive nominations files from the 56th through the 83rd congresses ( 1899-1953 ) and the correspondence and communications files of the senate judiciary committeeduring the same congresses .

 ( 7 ) scholarly studies as well as newspaper accounts of the origination of the blue - slip processwere also used .

most accounts placed the creation of blue slips as having occurred during theeisenhower administration: the 83rd through the 87th congresses ( 1953-1961 ) .

 ( 8 ) therefore , the research beganin that time period and then worked back through the congresses until no blue slips were found .

collection of archival records and data focused on locating blue slips for each congress andany personal correspondence between or among senators relating to their use .

the correspondencefiles contained no information on blue slips .

blue slips were , however , found for every congressstarting with the 65th ( 1917-1918 ) through the 83rd ( 1953-1954 ) .

although there were no blue slipsfor the 64th congress ( 1915-1916 ) , research was conducted as far back as the 56th congress ( 1899-1900 ) .

during this 15-year time period , no mention or evidence of blue slips was discovered .

the information collected permits a more accurate history of the blue slip in the judiciarycommittee , correcting the widespread belief that the blue - slip process originated in the 1950s .

although not mentioned in the judiciary committee rules , blue slips are an informal practiceunique to the committee , which has historically used blue slips on all u.s. attorney , u.s. marshal,u.s .

district court and u.s. court of appeals nominations .

blue slips have been employed to blocknominations in one of two ways , depending on the preferences of the judiciary chairman .

judicialnominations have been blocked by a senator either returning a negative blue slip or failing to returna blue slip altogether .

over the years , there have been various modifications to these basic practices .

in the case of u.s. district court nominations , ( 9 ) once a nomination is referred to the judiciary committee , thecounsel for the committee will send a blue slip ( so called because of its color ) to each senator of thenominee's home state , regardless of party affiliation .

the senator may then return the blue slip tothe judiciary committee with comments on the particular nominee in question .

in most cases , theblue slip is considered to be a pro forma gesture and will be given a positive review by the senator ; however , in a select number of cases a negative review may occur .

for u.s. circuit court nominations , the process is similar .

the judiciary committee will giveblue slips only to the senators of the retiring judge's home state .

this tradition comes from thepractice of reserving circuit court positions for each state to ensure proportional or equal staterepresentation for each circuit .

 ( 10 ) the president is often effectively required by this tradition toselect a circuit court nominee from the state of the retiring judge .

if a negative blue slip is received , the chairman may take the following actions on thenominee: ( 1 ) stop all committee proceedings ; ( 2 ) move forward but give added weight to theunfavorable review ; or ( 3 ) proceed without notice of the negative review .

since the late 1970s , thecommittee has generally used the latter two actions when dealing with a negative blue slip .

the precise date on which the judiciary committee first used the blue - slip procedure is notknown .

the committee has not made the blue slip part of its official rules for more than 30years , ( 11 ) and this is stillthe case in the 108th congress .

 ( 12 ) from research conducted at the national archives , evidencesuggests that the blue - slip procedure began sometime in the mid - to late 1910s under thechairmanship of senator charles a. culberson of texas .

 ( 13 ) this impression is based on the appearance of the first known blue slip in the 65th congress ( 1917-1918 ) .

at the time , senator culberson was chairman of the judiciary committee , a capacityhe served in from the 63rd through the 66th congresses ( 1913-1919 ) .

the documentary evidence ofthis time period suggests that senator culberson may have created the blue slip .

from the 65thcongress onward almost every judicial nominee's file includes a blue slip .

prior to this time ( 56th - 64th congresses ) , the files of judicial nominees reveal no evidence of blue slips .

judiciary committee materials at the national archives do not provide a specific explanationfor the creation of the blue slip ; however , they may help illuminate its early history .

for instance,although the white house and the senate were controlled by the democratic party , there wasperiodic tension between the two branches , and this condition may have been a factor in the blueslip's creation .

 ( 14 ) of particular interest is the creation of blue slips at the same time as the adoption of senaterule xxii in 1917 , which permits senators to end a filibuster by invoking cloture .

 ( 15 ) despite this apparentcoincidence , a direct link between the creation of the blue slip and the cloture rule can be dispelled,because senate rule xxii did not apply to judicial nominations until 1949 .

in that year , s.res.15 modified senate rule xxii from , "to bring to a close the debate upon any pendingmeasure is presented to the senate ..." to the following: "to bring to a close the debate upon anymeasure , motion , or other matter pending before the senate. .

 ( 16 ) therefore , the judiciarycommittee did not need to create a blue - slip policy as a result of the 1917 senate rule becausecloture at that time did not apply to filibusters on judicial nominations .

the record on the judiciary committee's formal written rule on blue slips is unclear .

evenif complete records were kept on blue slips , a chairman's policy may have been different in practicethan what was stated .

thus , determining the particular policy at any given time can be difficult .

research of historical records and newspaper accounts reveals , however , the following judiciarycommittee policies on the blue slip for each of the last 48 congresses ( 1917-2003 ) .

each sectionwill highlight the chairman's stated blue - slip policy and show , when necessary , instances where thepolicy differed , in practice from the stated blue - slip policy .

in addition , the table at the end of this report provides information on the senate judiciarycommittee's blue slip policy for each of the last 21 congresses , dating back to 1956 .

the tablebegins in 1956 because it was then that the judiciary committee began to permit senators to use theblue slip as a way to block judicial nominations .

the table is arranged chronologically by the datein which a change occurred in the blue - slip policy of the senate judiciary committee .

working fromleft to right , column one consists of the name of the judiciary committee chairman .

columns twoand three list the years and congresses that a particular blue - slip policy was in use .

finally , columnfour describes the judiciary committee's blue - slip policy for those years and congresses .

as this report indicates , there are varying nuances to the judiciary committee's blue - slippolicy .

during the tenure of different chairmen , a negative blue slip may or may not have permitteda home - state senator from stopping all committee action on a nomination .

even the failure to returna blue slip has called into question the ability of a chairman to move forward on a nomination .

thereis also the question of consultation and the degree to which a president must consult with bothhome - state senators in the selection of a nomination .

finally , even if one understands the blue - slippolicy and the requirements it places on a president , a particular chairman's own policy may bedifferent in practice than what is stated .

the following questions attempt to address some of theseproblems and concerns .

the blue slip represents an aspect of senatorial courtesy .

blue - slip policy has undergonevarious changes in its 86-year history .

the blue slip started out as a way for the judiciary committeechairman to gain information on a judicial nomination .

from 1917 to 1956 , the blue slip providedhome - state senators with a means of notifying the chairman if the president selected an individualwho was personally objectionable to them .

a negative blue slip did not stop committee action .

untilthe mid - 1950s , other senators would reject a nomination on the senate floor if the home - statesenator would stand and state that the nominee was "personally obnoxious. .

eventually , the blueslip evolved from an informal committee device once used to gain information on a nominee to animportant device for checking the executive branch in the appointment process .

since 1979 , the impact of negative blue slips has varied as leadership in the senatecommittee on the judiciary has changed .

some chairmen have permitted committee action on anomination only when both home - state senators return positive blue slips .

however , other chairmenhave proceeded to consider a nomination with receipt of only one positive blue slip .

even thoughrecent chairmen have implemented different blue - slip policies , each has communicated to thepresident the importance of pre - nomination consultation with both home - state senators .

pre - nomination consultation has been a key expectation of recent chairmen in the evaluation ofnegative blue slips .

the president is now expected to consult and involve each home - state senatorin the pre - nomination phase of the selection process .

without consultation by the white house,chairmen appear to accord greater value to a negative blue slip submitted by a non - consultedhome - state senator .

while the judiciary chairman controls the impact of a negative blue slip , individual senatorscan still determine the fate of a judicial nomination after it is reported to the senate floor .

a senator,or a group of senators , may choose to either place a hold on or filibuster a nomination .

in eachinstance , at least theoretically , a vote can be delayed indefinitely - - thus preventing confirmation ofthe president's nominee .

a negative blue slip , therefore , is not the only means available to preventthe confirmation of a judicial nomination by a home - state senator .

this report will be updated to reflect policy changes relating to blue slips .

table 1 .

senate judiciary committee blue - slip policy by committee chairman ( 1956-2003 ) a see charles r. babcock , "picking federal judges: merit system v. pork bench," washington post , november 7 , 1978 , p. a4 ; and w. dale nelsonand fred s. hoffman .

associated press , january 25 , 1979. b see u.s. congress , committee on the judiciary , selection and confirmation of federal judges: hearings before the senate committee on thejudiciary .

part i , 96th cong. , 1st sess. , ( washington: gpo , 1979 ) , p. 4. c see u.s. congress , senate committee on the judiciary , business meeting , unpublished committee transcript , 97th cong. , 1st sess. , 1981 , p. 6 .

 ( author's files ) .

d see mike robinson .

associated press , may 19 , 1989 and sen. joseph r. biden , jr. , chairman , committee on the judiciary , u.s. senate , letter topresident george h. w. bush , the white house , june 6 , 1989 .

 ( author's files ) .

e sen. orrin g. hatch , chairman , committee on the judiciary , u.s. senate , letter to counsel to the president abner j. mikva , the white house,february 3 , 1995 .

 ( author's files ) .

f see sen. orrin g. hatch , chairman , committee on the judiciary , letter to counsel to the president , charles c. f. ruff , the white house , april 16,1997 .

 ( author's files ) .

g see elizabeth a. palmer and amy fagan , "power shift at judiciary could be problem for bush," cq daily monitor , may 24 , 2001 , p. 3 ; and elizabeth a. palmer , "senate gop backs down from dispute over handing of nominees," cq weekly , june 9 , 2001 , p. 1360. h letter from senators patrick leahy and orrin hatch , inserted material , congressional record , vol .

147 , june 29 , 2001 .

see also helen dewar , "senatereorganization finalized ; democrats pledge to follow tradition on court nominees," washington post , june 30 , 2001 , p. a11 ; and audreyhudson , "republicans back bench - picks deal ; california democrats given key role," washington times , june 10 , 2001 , p. a03 .

i see jennifer a. dlouhy , "blue slip or not , hatch holds judiciary panel hearing on bush court nominee," cq today , july 31 , 2003 , p. 8 ; and helendewar , "battle over judges continues," washington post , july 31 , 2003 , p. a17 .

chase , harold w. federal judges: the appointing process ( minneapolis:university of minnesota press , 1972 ) .

denning , brannon p. "the judicial confirmation process and the blue slip. .

judicature 85:218-226 , 2002 .

 - - - - .

"the 'blue slip': enforcing the norms of the judicial confirmation process. .

william & mary bill of rights journal .

10: 75-101 , 2001 .

goldman , sheldon .

picking federal judges ( new haven , ct: yale university press,1997 ) .

grossman , joel b .

lawyers and judges: the politics of judicial selection ( newyork: john wiley & sons , 1965 ) .

harris , joseph p. the advice and consent of the senate: a study of the confirmationof appointments by the united states senate ( berkeley , ca: university ofcalifornia press , 1958 ) .

mackenzie , g. calvin .

the politics of presidential appointments ( new york: thefree press , 1981 ) .

slotnick , elliot e. "reforms in judicial selection: will they affect the senate'srole ? .

 ( part i ) " judicature 64:60-73 , 1980 .

