"one of the most divisive and contentious issues the committee has faced...." so the senate foreign relations committee described its consideration and subsequent approval of the 1985 supplementary treaty to the 1972 extradition treaty between great britain and the united states , s.ex.rept .

99-17 , at 6 ( 1986 ) .

the supplementary treaty limits the political offense bar to extradition ; it authorizes judicial inquiry into the motives behind an extradition request ; and it allows an individual sought by the british to be heard by the court on the issues of probable cause and dual criminality .

on march 31 , 2003 , attorney general john ashcroft and united kingdom home secretary david blunkett announced the signing of a new extradition treaty that reopened the matter .

the senate gave its advice and consent to the 2003 treaty on september 29 , 2006 , subject to an understanding , two declarations , and three provisos , 152 cong .

rec .

s10766-767 ( daily ed .

sept. 29 , 2006 ) .

the understanding , declarations and provisos confirm that ( 1 ) federal courts will retain the authority to bar extradition when a request fails to meet the demands of 2003 treaty ; ( 2 ) the 2003 treaty does not obligate the united states to take any action proscribed by the constitution ; ( 3 ) the parties have disclaimed any interest in prosecuting offenses committed in northern ireland prior to and addressed in the belfast / good friday agreement .

it also urges the secretary of state to consider carefully any requests for the extradition of a fugitive who was previous acquitted , and after the treaty becomes effective it requires annual reports from the secretary on the number and disposition of extradition requests under the treaty .

extradition is the process by which one country formally surrenders a person to another country for criminal prosecution or punishment .

ordinarily , extradition is governed by a treaty which operates in the nature of a contract and by implementing statutory provisions .

the united states has extradition treaties in force with most of the countries of the world and under most circumstances will extradite an individual to another country only pursuant to a treaty of extradition .

at least one early critic of the 2003 treaty contended that it: 1 .

eliminates the political offense for any offense allegedly involving violence or weapons , including any solicitation , conspiracy or attempt to commit such crimes ; 2 .

transfers responsibility for determining whether the extradition request is politically - motivated from the courts to the executive ; 3 .

allows for extradition even if no u.s. federal law is violated ; 4 .

eliminates any statute of limitations ; 5 .

eliminates the need for any showing by the united kingdom of facts sufficient to show the person requested is guilty of the crime charged—mere unsupported allegations are sufficient ; 6 .

allows for "provisional arrest" and detention for 60 days upon request by the united kingdom ; 7 .

allows for seizure of assets by the united kingdom ; 8 .

allows for extradition for one offense , and then subsequent prosecution in the uk for an unrelated offense ( thus eliminating the time - honored "rule of speciality" ) ; and 9 .

applies retroactively , for offenses allegedly committed even before the ratification of the treaty .

boyle , supra footnote 2 .

the understanding , declarations , and provisos that accompany the senate's approval of the 2003 treaty seem to reflect its concerns over some of these objections .

the 2003 treaty has other clauses , some of them a departure from our earlier benefits and obligations .

as in the case with our existing treaty with great britain , the specialty ban on prosecution of additional crimes often includes a ban on re - extradition to a third country , 1977 treaty , art.xii .

beginning in the 106 th congress , several extradition treaties submitted to the senate bar re - extradition to international tribunals without consent .

this may have been done at our behest with an eye to the international criminal court ; or at the behest of our treaty partners with an eye to our statutory provisions relating to the yugoslav and rwandan tribunals , 18 u.s.c .

3181 note ; or both ; or for some other reason .

in any event , the 2003 treaty may yield the same result through its more cryptic reference to "onward extradition"—"a person extradited under this treaty may not be the subject of onward extradition or surrender for any offense committed prior to extradition to the requesting state unless the requested state consents," 2003 treaty , art .

18 ( 2 ) .

at this juncture it is not completely clear what the parties understand "onward extradition" to mean .

in the case of multiple extradition requests , the 2003 treaty maintains essentially the same standards for dealing with requests from a third country that elects to submit a contemporaneous request to the country of refuge rather than submitting a subsequent request to the country to whom extradition has been granted: if the requested state receives requests form two or more states for the extradition of the same person , either for the same offense or for different offenses , the executive authority of the requested state shall consider all relevant factors , including but not limited to: ( a ) whether the requests were made pursuant to a treaty ; ( b ) the place where each offense was committed ; ( c ) the gravity of the offenses ; ( d ) the possibility of any subsequent extradition between the respective requesting states ; and ( e ) the chronological order in which the requests were received from the respective requesting states .

2003 treaty , art .

15 .

the only real difference is that the existing treaty specifically mentions the nationality of the individual sought as a factor to be considered , 1977 treaty , art.x , while the parties may count nationality among the unmentioned "relevant factors" that the 2003 treaty considers in play .

it may be , however , that the parties have rejected nationality as a relevant extradition factor under any circumstances .

after all , elsewhere in the 2003 treaty they have denied themselves the right to refuse to extradite on the basis of nationality , art .

3 , and have removed the identification of the nationality of the person sought from the information that must be provided with an extradition request , art.8 ( 2 ) .

ordinarily , an individual cannot be extradited on the basis of conduct for which he has already been tried .

implementation of this principle takes several forms in our various extradition treaties .

our existing treaty with great britain bars extradition if prosecution would be precluded in the country of refuge by virtue of any earlier trial there , or in the requesting country , or in a third country .

thus , the united states may not extradite an individual tried here for the same misconduct .

the united states may , however , honor requests where the individual has previously been tried in great britain or in a third country , because double jeopardy in the united states only proscribes trial by the same sovereign .

the 2003 treaty prohibits extradition where the individual has been tried in the country of refuge , and allows a country of refuge to deny a request for an individual tried in a third country , 2003 treaty , art.5 .

a senate proviso addresses the question of extradition following acquittal in the requesting country: the senate notes that , as in other recent united states extradition treaties , the treaty does not address the situation where the fugitive is sought for trial on an offense for which he had previously been acquitted in the requesting state .

the senate further notes that a united kingdom domestic law may allow for the retrial in the united kingdom , in certain limited circumstances , of an individual who has previously been tried and acquitted in that country .

in this regard , the senate understands that under u.s. law and practice a person sought for extradition can present a claim to the secretary of state that an aspect of foreign law that may permit retrial may result in an unfairness that the secretary could conclude warrants denial of the extradition request .

the senate urges the secretary of state to review carefully any such claims made involving a request for extradition that implicates this provision of united kingdom domestic law .

some nations prefer not to extradite their own citizens and have insisted that their extradition treaties preserve their right to decline requests to extradite their own nationals .

the united states opposes his view .

our existing treaty with great britain does not address the issue directly , 1977 treaty , and as a consequence the united states may not decline to extradite an american to great britain solely on the grounds of citizenship .

like several of our more recent extradition agreements with common law countries , the 2003 treaty makes this result explicit , "extradition shall not be refused based on the nationality of the person sought," 2003 treaty , art.3 .

neither federal law nor most early treaties provide any obvious mechanism under which an individual might waive extradition proceedings in this country .

this can work to the inconvenience of both countries involved in cases where the delay is of no real benefit to the individual sought .

the present treaty does not address the issue , but like most modern treaties , the 2003 treaty has a waiver clause: "if the person sought waives extradition and agrees to be surrendered to the requesting state , the requested state may surrender the person as expeditiously as possible without further proceedings," 2003 treaty , art.17 .

our extradition agreements with english - speaking countries do not ordinarily include a translation clause .

the 2003 treaty requires documentation in english , 2003 treaty , art.11 , with the cost of any translation to be borne by the requesting country as is ordinarily the case in our extradition relations with non - english - speaking countries .

our existing treaty with great britain requires deferral of an extradition request for an individual being tried or serving a sentence in the requested country for another offense , 1977 treaty , art .

vi .

the 2003 treaty affords the requested country greater flexibility ; it may defer the extradition request , the trial , or service of the sentence .

in the case of the united states , one commentator has suggested that because of constraints on stale prosecutions , the united states may be willing to postpone service of sentence but is not likely to surrender an individual pending trial unless it is willing to abandon the prospect of future prosecution .

although the present treaty is silent on the matter , most modern extradition treaties to which the united states is a party contain a transit clause that allows each country to effectuate its extradition relations with third nations by transporting individuals across each other's territory .

the 2003 treaty clause grants federal and british authorities discretionary authority to approve transfers through their respective countries , with exceptions for transportation through a party's air space and procedures in the case of unscheduled aircraft landings .

the existing extradition treaty makes special provision for capital cases , art.iv .

the 2003 treaty makes essentially the same accommodation: "when the offense for which extradition is sought is punishable by death under the laws in the requesting state and is not punishable by death under the laws in the requested state , the executive authority in the requested state may refuse extradition unless the requesting state provides an assurance that the death penalty will not be imposed or , if imposed , will not be carried out," 2003 treaty , art.7 .

resolution of advice and consent to ratification resolved ( two - thirds of the senators present concurring therein ) , section 1 .

senate advice and consent subject to understanding , declarations , and provisos the senate advises and consents to the ratification of the extradition treaty between the united states of america and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland , and related exchanges of letters , signed at washington on march 31 , 2003 ( hereinafter in this resolution referred to as the "treaty" ) ( treaty doc .

108-23 ) , subject to the understanding in section 2 , the declarations in section 3 , and the provisos in section 4 .

section 2 .

understanding the advice and consent of the senate under section 1 is subject to the following understanding: under united states law , a united states judge makes a certification of extraditability of a fugitive to the secretary of state .

in the process of making such certification , a united states judge also makes determinations regarding the application of the political offense exception .

accordingly , the united states of america understands that the statement in paragraphs 3 and 4 of article 4 that "in the united states , the executive branch is the competent authority for the purposes of this article" applies only to those specific paragraphs of article 4 , and does not alter or affect the role of the united states judiciary in making certifications of extraditability or determinations of the application of the political offense exception .

section 3 .

declarations the advice and consent of the senate under section 1 is subject to the following declarations: ( 1 ) nothing in the treaty requires or authorizes legislation or other action by the united states of america that is prohibited by the constitution of the united states .

 ( 2 ) the treaty shall be implemented by the united states in accordance with the constitution of the united states and relevant federal law , including the requirement of a judicial determination of extraditability that is set forth in title 18 of the united states code .

section 4 .

provisos the advice and consent of the senate under section 1 is subject to the following provisos: ( 1 ) ( a ) the senate is aware that concerns have been expressed that the purpose of the treaty is to seek the extradition of individuals involved in offenses relating to the conflict in northern ireland prior to the belfast agreement of april 10 , 1998 .

the senate understands that the purpose of the treaty is to strengthen law enforcement cooperation between the united states and the united kingdom by modernizing the extradition process for all serious offenses and that the treaty is not intended to reopen issues addressed in the belfast agreement , or to impede any further efforts to resolve the conflict in northern ireland .

 ( b ) accordingly , the senate notes with approval— ( i ) the statement of the united kingdom secretary of state for northern ireland , made on september 29 , 2000 , that the united kingdom does not intend to seek the extradition of individuals who appear to qualify for early release under the belfast agreement ; ( ii ) the letter from the united kingdom home secretary to the united states attorney general in march 2006 , emphasizing that the "new treaty does not change this position in any way," and making clear that the united kingdom "want[s] to address the anomalous position of those suspected but not yet convicted of terrorism - related offences committed before the belfast agreement" ; and ( iii ) that these policies were reconfirmed in an exchange of letters between the united kingdom secretary of state for northern ireland and the united states attorney general in september 2006 .

 ( 2 ) the senate notes that , as in other recent united states extradition treaties , the treaty does not address the situation where the fugitive is sought for trial on an offense for which he had previously been acquitted in the requesting state .

the senate further notes that a united kingdom domestic law may allow for the retrial in the united kingdom , in certain limited circumstances , of an individual who has previously been tried and acquitted in that country .

in this regard , the senate understands that under u.s. law and practice a person sought for extradition can present a claim to the secretary of state that an aspect of foreign law that may permit retrial may result in an unfairness that the secretary could conclude warrants denial of the extradition request .

the senate urges the secretary of state to review carefully any such claims made involving a request for extradition that implicates this provision of united kingdom domestic law .

 ( 3 ) not later than one year after entry into force of the treaty , and annually thereafter for a period of four additional years , the secretary of state shall submit to the committee on foreign relations of the senate a report setting forth the following information with respect to the implementation of the treaty in the previous twelve months: ( a ) the number of persons arrested in the united states pursuant to requests from the united kingdom under the treaty , including the number of persons subject to provisional arrest ; and a summary description of the alleged conduct for which the united kingdom is seeking extradition ; ( b ) the number of extradition requests granted ; and the number of extradition requests denied , including whether the request was denied as a result of a judicial decision or a decision of the secretary of state ; ( c ) the number of instances the person sought for extradition made a claim to the secretary of state of political motivation , unjustifiable delay , or retrial after acquittal and whether such extradition requests were denied or granted ; and ( d ) the number of instances the secretary granted a request under article 18 ( 1 ) ( c ) .

appendix home office , london sw1p 4df , march 31 , 2006 .

alberto gonzales , attorney general , u.s. department of justice , washington , dc .

dear al: at our meeting on 6 march i said that i would write to clarify the uk government's position relating to the extradition of individuals wanted or convicted of terrorist offences associated with the troubles in northern ireland who are currently in the united states .

in september 2000 the government decided that it was no longer proportionate or in the public interest to seek the extradition of individuals convicted of terrorist offences committed prior to 10 th april 1998 , the date of the belfast agreement .

the new treaty does not change this position in any way .

we have also made it clear that we want to address the anomalous position of those suspected but not yet convicted of terrorism - related offences committed before then .

had these individuals been convicted at the time of their offences they would , by now , have been able to apply for early release and so find themselves in a similar position to those already covered by the agreement .

unfortunately , the legislation that would have resolved this anomaly had to be withdrawn due to a lack of cross - party support .

however , the british government remains keen to make progress on this and i can assure you that when the new treaty was being negotiated , there was no intention on our part to make it easier to target these people , whose position we accept to be anomalous .

charles clarke , home secretary .

northern ireland office , belfast bt4 3tt , september 4 , 2006 .

alberto gonzales , attorney general , u.s. department of justice , washington , dc .

dear attorney general: i am writing to reiterate the uk government's position relating to the extradition of individuals from the united states in relation to terrorist offences committed during the troubles in northern ireland .

in september 2000 , the government decided that it was no longer proportionate or in the public interest to seek the extradition of individuals convicted of terrorist offences prior to 10 th april 1998 , "who appear to qualify for early release under the good friday agreement scheme , and who would , on making a successful application to the sentence review commissioners , have little if any of their original prison sentence to serve. .

i attach a copy of the statement made by the then secretary of state for northern ireland when this decision was announced .

i know that the former home secretary reiterated this when he wrote to you in march this year .

i can confirm , on behalf of the uk government , that this remains the case .

we have also made it clear that we want to address the anomalous position of those suspected but not yet convicted of terrorism - related offences committed before the belfast agreement .

had these individuals been convicted at the time of their offences they would , by now , have been able to apply for early release and so find themselves in a similar position to those already covered by the agreement .

the uk government introduced legislation to resolve this anomaly last year .

unfortunately , that legislation had to be withdrawn due to a lack of cross - party support .

however , the uk government continues to accept that the position of these people is anomalous and i can assure you , as the former home secretary did in march , that when the new treaty was being negotiated there was no intention on our part to make it easier to target them .

i attach a short note which explains in more detail the provisions of the early release scheme and the position of various groups of people .

it remains a matter of great importance to the uk government that the extradition treaty should be ratified by the united states , so that its benefits can be fully realised .

this is not because of any agenda related to northern ireland , but because of the improvements that the updated treaty will bring to the extradition process in general in both countries .

my colleague , john reid , the home secretary , has seen this letter and agrees fully with its contents .

i am copying this letter to senator lugar .

both you and he are welcome to share it with other members of the senate if that would be helpful .

the rt .

hon .

peter hain mp , secretary of state for northern ireland .

enclosures .

us - uk extradition treaty—northern ireland issues political background the political and security situation in northern ireland has been transformed following the 1998 good friday agreement .

a huge amount of progress has been made since then , including the historic statement from the provisional ira in july 2005 , in which they made clear that their armed campaign was over .

the focus in northern ireland today is on restoring devolved government and continuing to build a prosperous and peaceful society .

good friday agreement and early release scheme as part of the good friday agreement ( gfa ) , individuals convicted of terrorist - related offences committed before 1998 were able to apply for early release after serving only two years of their sentences .

over 400 prisoners have been released on license under this scheme .

the license requires that individuals do not become re - engaged in terrorism or serious crime .

those released include many members of the provisional ira , which has maintained a ceasefire during this time .

the early release scheme was a very difficult part of the good friday agreement for many people to accept , but it demonstrated the uk government's commitment to moving forward with the peace process .

the early release scheme is part of uk law and remains in force .

any individuals who are convicted of qualifying , pre - 1998 offences in the future , including any individuals extradited to the uk , will be able to apply for the scheme .

individuals convicted of pre - gfa offences in 2000 , the uk government announced that it would no longer pursue the extradition of individuals convicted of pre - 1998 offences who had escaped from prison and who would , if they returned to northern ireland and successfully applied for early release , have little if any of their time left to serve .

that remains the position .

individuals suspected of pre - gfa offences ( " on the runs " ) whilst the early release scheme addressed the situation of individuals who had been convicted of past offences , there remained an anomaly in relation to individuals suspected of past offences , who had gone "on the run" before they were tried .

the british government accepts that these individuals are in an anomalous position since , if they had been convicted before 1998 they could have been released by now under the terms of the good friday agreement .

in 2003 , the british government therefore published proposals for a scheme which would have allowed suspects " on the run " to be tried in their absence and to return to northern ireland without arrest or imprisonment .

following the ira's statement that its armed campaign was over in july 2005 , legislation was introduced to implement that commitment .

agreement could not be reached on that legislation during its passage through parliament and it was withdrawn in january 2006 .

the british government is currently reflecting on the way forward .

however , as the 2003 proposals and the subsequent legislation demonstrate , the british government is committed to addressing these cases in a way which resolves the anomaly .

in the absence of any change in the law , decisions on whether to seek the extradition of suspects " on the run " for pre - 1998 offences are still taken by the prosecuting authorities , in line with the legal obligations on them , as part of the normal criminal justice process .

but , as the uk government's decision in 2000 not to pursue the extradition of convicted fugitives ( including in the united states ) who would qualify for early release under the gfa illustrates , there is no "political" agenda to pursue the extradition and trial of these people .

and any suspects who were extradited and subsequently convicted would be able to apply for early release after two years , under the terms of the good friday agreement .

other individuals anyone convicted of an offence unconnected with terrorism , or an offence committed after the good friday agreement , will not be eligible for the early release scheme .

the uk law enforcement authorities continue to seek the extradition of such individuals in line with uk law .

outstanding warrants when home office minister baroness scotland visited the us , she explained that there were currently no outstanding warrants for the extradition of individuals from the us to northern ireland .

secretary of state , northern ireland office , september 29 , 2000 .

statement by peter mandelson on extradition of convicted fugitives on 28 july , all remaining prisoners eligible under the early release scheme who had completed 2 years of their sentences were released as envisaged in the good friday agreement .

the completion of these remaining releases has implications for a number of people who were sentenced to imprisonment for offences committed before the good friday agreement , but who failed to complete these sentences .

in most cases those concerned escaped from custody and fled to other countries up to 20 years ago .

in many cases , extradition proceedings were initiated and in some of these the government is now being pressed by court authorities to clarify its position .

whether to pursue an extradition request depends on the public interest at stake , including the remaining sentence which the fugitive would stand to serve if he or she were returned .

it is clearly anomalous to pursue the extradition of people who appear to qualify for early release under the good friday agreement scheme , and who would , on making a successful application to the sentence review commissioners , have little if any of their original prison sentence to serve .

in view of this and the time that has elapsed , i do not believe that it would now be proportionate or in the public interest to continue to pursue such cases .

if these individuals wish to benefit from the early release scheme , they will be able to return to northern ireland and make an application to the sentence review commissioners .

if this is granted , normal licence conditions , including liability to recall to prison , will apply .

the decision has no implications for the prosecution of other offences where sufficient evidence exists .

it is not an amnesty .

as with the rest of the early release programme , i do not under - estimate the hurt this decision may cause the victims of those whose extradition will no longer be pursued , and the onus it places on all of us to ensure that the good friday agreement does result in a permanent peace in which there are no more victims .

office of the attorney general , department of justice , washington , dc , september 5 , 2006 .

the rt .

hon .

peter hain , secretary of state for northern ireland , northern ireland office , london sw1p 4pn .

dear secretary hain: i am writing in response to your recent letter regarding the 2003 united states - united kingdom extradition treaty .

i appreciate your reconfirmation of the position of the government of the united kingdom ( originally taken in september 2000 ) that it is "no longer proportionate or in the public interest to seek the extradition of individuals convicted of terrorist offences prior to 10 th april 1998 , 'who appear to qualify for early release under the good friday agreement scheme , and who would , on making a successful application to the sentence review commissioners , have little if any of their original prison sentence to serve.' .

additionally , you have reconfirmed that it was not the intention of your government , in negotiating this treaty , to make it easier for the uk to seek extradition of individuals suspected of committing terrorist offenses in northern ireland prior to april 10 , 1998 .

please accept this letter as my acknowledgement of your government's official position and our mutual understanding of these matters .

i believe that we share the view that the 2003 treaty is critical to our mutual security in this age of global terrorism and transnational crime .

accordingly , the bush administration has made it a priority to seek the senate's advice and consent to ratification of this treaty .

to that end , i will ask the senate foreign relations committee to include your letter , and this reply , in the official record of the committee's consideration of the treaty .

sincerely , alberto r. gonzales , attorney general .

