on march 10 , 2005 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued its final rule toaddress the effects of interstate transport of air pollutants on nonattainment of the national ambientair quality standards ( naaqs ) for fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) and ozone ( specifically , the eight - hourstandard ) .

 ( 1 ) the clean airinterstate rule ( cair ) was first proposed as the interstate air quality ( iaq ) rule and appeared inthe federal register january 30 , 2004 .

 ( 2 ) for pm 2.5 , cair finds that the interstate transport of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) and nitrogen oxides ( nox ) from 23 states and the district of columbia contributessignificantly to downwind nonattainment ; for ozone , cair finds that interstate transport of noxfrom 25 states and the district of columbia contributes significantly to downwind nonattainment ofthe eight - hour standard .

to remedy the situation , the rule generally follows ( with some important exceptions ) themethodology epa employed in an earlier regulation that addressed interstate transport of ozonepollution , the nox sip call .

 ( 3 ) in the nox sip call , epa found 21 states and the district ofcolumbia significantly contributed to nonattainment of the 1-hour ozone naaqs .

 ( 4 ) to remedy the situation , epaset statewide emissions budgets for nox emissions , and recommended that states achieve thosebudgets through "highly cost - effective" controls on electric generators and large industrial facilitiesunder a regional cap - and - trade program .

states began implementing controls on may 31 , 2004 .

with cair , epa creates regional emissions caps for nox and so 2 to be implemented in twophases - - 2010 ( 2009 for nox ) and 2015 .

two caps ( annual so 2 emissions and annual noxemissions ) apply to the region of 23 states ( and district of columbia ) found to contribute to pm 2.5 nonattainment , and one cap ( seasonal nox emissions ) applies to the region of 25 states ( and districtof columbia ) found to contribute to eight - hour ozone nonattainment .

the regional caps for theaffected states are as follows: so 2 annual caps: 3.6 million tons in 2010 and 2.5 million in2015 nox annual caps: 1.5 million tons in 2009 and 1.3 million in2015 nox ozone season caps: 580,000 tons in 2009 and 480,000 tons in2015 based on methodology centered on reductions from electric generating facilities and adjustedfor type of fossil fuel burned , each affected state is assigned a portion of the regional cap in the formof a statewide "emissions budget" or cap .

each covered state is required to submit a revised stateimplementation plan ( sip ) identifying measures it intends to implement to achieve its emissionsbudget .

states are free to choose whatever means they deem appropriate , subject to epa approval .

however , epa strongly believes that the regional emissions caps can be most cost - effectivelyachieved through regional cap - and - trade programs focused on electric generators and stronglyencourages that states choose that option .

a model cap - and - trade scheme for states to adopt isincluded in the final rule .

that model scheme achieves a state's emissions budget through emissionlimitations solely on electric generating units .

as noted above , epa decided in its final rule to create three emissions caps: two are annualemissions caps that address the interstate contribution of so 2 and nox to pm 2.5 nonattainment ; thethird is a seasonal cap to address interstate nox contribution to ozone nonattainment .

each of thesecaps and their accompanying model trading schemes has to be integrated into the existingmultilayered fabric of the clean air act ( caa ) .

as discussed below , each cap faced uniqueproblems in meshing with the caa .

the final cair rule reflects several changes from the proposed iaq resulting from improvedmodeling and other considerations .

changes include: inclusion of a seasonal nox emissions cap separate from the proposed annualnox emission cap .

accelerating compliance with phase 1 of the two nox caps from 2010 to2009 .

five states - - arkansas , kansas , delaware , new jersey , and massachusetts - - were removed from the list of states contributing to pm 2.5 nonattainment .

epa has proposed thatdelaware and new jersey be re - included under a separate rulemaking .

four states - - arkansas , delaware , massachusetts , and new jersey - - joinedconnecticut as states determined only to contribute to eight - hour ozonenonattainment .

one state - - kansas - - was removed from the rule .

one state - - georgia - - was removed from the list of states contributing toeight - hour ozone nonattainment , but remained on the list of states contribution to pm 2.5 nonattainment .

one state - - florida - - was added to the list of states contributing to eight - hourozone nonattainment in addition to remaining on the list of states contributing to pm 2.5 nonattainment .

creation of a 200,000 annual nox compliance supplement pool ( csp ) to allowstates to reward early reductions or assist needy participants .

inclusion of a fuel - type adjustment factor to the nox allocation formula thatprovides more nox allowances to states that burn coal for electricitygeneration .

decision not to finalize any determinations with respect to section 126petitions or bart .

although these changes may be important in specific cases , they do not represent a majorshift in the thrust and scope of cair .

unlike the recently promulgated mercury ( hg ) rule , ( 48 ) cair has not beenparticularly controversial , so major changes were not anticipated .

that the rule has not had the visibility of the hg rule should not be interpreted to mean thatthe underlying issue of pm 2.5 and eight - hour ozone compliance has been solved .

in particular , epais currently reviewing the stringency of the pm 2.5 naaqs , a process that could result in a morestringent standard and more counties out of compliance .

given the lengthy time frame of cair , itseems likely that efforts will be made to strengthen its provisions well before 2015 , if the pm 2.5 standard is strengthened .

likewise , cair does not address the most potent environmental issue surroundingfossil - fuel - fired electric generating facilities - - global warming and the possibility of carbon dioxidereductions .

movement on that issue over the next decade could result in a modification of cair,or a new multipollutant control regime .

bills have been introduced in congress to impose such asystem .

 ( 49 ) finally , the promulgation of cair may raise questions about the future of the bushadministration's legislative initiative - - clear skies .

clear skies represents a complete rewrite oftitle iv of the clean air act and would impose a comprehensive cap - and - trade system on utilityso 2 , nox , and hg emissions .

in addition , it would have altered , deleted , or held in abeyance forsome time existing sections of the clean air act with respect to affected electric generating unitsand industrial sources that chose to opt into the program .

 ( 50 ) with the promulgation of cair that achieves nox and so 2 emissions reductions from most of the country's electricity generating facilities , and of the final hgrule , it is unclear what impetus remains for clear skies .

