on december 30 , 2005 , president bush signed the fy2006 department of defense appropriations bill ( p.l .

109-148 ) , which included a one percent across - the - board rescission of non - emergency federal discretionary funding for fy2006 .

this bill also provided supplemental funding to several federal agencies to respond to the consequences of hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma , including $2.8 billion for the department of transportation , $11.9 billion for the department of housing and urban development , $38 million for the general services administration , and $18 million for the judiciary .

on november 30 , 2005 , president bush signed h.r .

3058 into law ( p.l .

109-115 ) .

the bill was passed by congress on november 18 .

the bill provided $137.6 billion in net budgetary resources , less than either the house or senate versions , but $4.1 billion ( 3.0% ) more than the fy2005 enacted level and $7.3 billion ( 5.6% ) more than the administration requested .

on november 2 , 2005 , the house committee on appropriations published a revised suballocation of budget allocations for fy2006 ( h.rept .

109-264 ) .

among the changes made by this report were a reduction in the suballocation ( "302 ( b ) allocation" ) for the house appropriations committee transportation - treasury - hud - the judiciary - dc subcommittee .

the revised suballocation for discretionary budget authority was $65.9 billion , $1 billion less than the previous suballocation ( and $1 billion less than the discretionary funding level in the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 , the departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill ) .

on october 20 , 2005 , the senate passed h.r .

3058 , the fy2006 departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill .

the senate added the text of s. 1446 , the senate's fy2006 appropriations bill for the district of columbia , to the bill , and approved an overall funding level of $141.6 billion , 6% more than provided in fy2005 and 9% more than the administration request .

the senate bill includes provisions that would restrict outsourcing of federal work and ease restrictions on agricultural exports to cuba .

on june 30 , 2005 , the house passed h.r .

3058 , the fy2006 departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill .

the house approved an overall funding level of $139.1 billion , a 6% increase over comparable fy2005 funding and a 7% increase over the administration's request .

the house approved the appropriations committee's recommendations to provide the same pay raise ( 3.1% ) to federal civilian workers as that requested for uniformed military personnel for calendar year 2006 , and to ease restrictions on u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

the house approved several amendments to the bill , including ones increasing funding for amtrak and the department of housing and urban development , and restricting outsourcing of federal work .

the president's fy2006 request for the programs covered by this appropriations bill was $126.1 billion .

this was $1.6 billion ( 1% ) below the fy2005 enacted level of $127.7 billion ( after a 0.83% rescission ) .

the fy2006 request included cuts from the fy2005 funding level for the department of housing and urban development ( $2.8 billion , a 9% reduction ) and the department of transportation ( $1.4 billion , a 2% reduction ) .

the fy2006 request for the executive office of the president was $300 million less than the fy2005 figure ; that reduction was largely due to the proposed transfer of the high intensity drug trafficking areas program ( $227 million in fy2005 ) from the executive office of the president to the department of justice , and to an fy2005 supplemental appropriation of $70 million to the executive office of the president ( p.l .

108-324 ) for unanticipated needs ( for hurricane disaster relief assistance through the american red cross ) .

the president's fy2006 budget request proposals included: zeroing out of funding for amtrak , the provider of intercity passenger rail service , which received $1.2 billion in fy2005 ; reducing funding for the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) airport improvement program ( aip ) to $3.0 billion , $600 million below its 'guaranteed' authorization level , which would make the entire appropriations bill subject to a point of order .

the proposed level is also below the aip formula threshold of $3.2 billion , which could result in a halving of most aip formula distributions ; eliminating the community and economic development programs under the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , along with those of several other agencies , and replace them with a new program administered by the department of commerce .

the proposed funding for the new program is $1.9 billion ( 34% ) less than the aggregate fy2005 funding for the programs proposed for elimination ( reduced from $5.6 billion for fy2005 to $3.7 billion for fy2006 ) ; reducing the funding for housing for disabled persons under hud by $118 million ( 50% ) , from $238 million for fy2005 to $120 million for fy2006 ; eliminating the annual $29 million payment to the united states postal service for revenue forgone , as well as the absence of any funding requested for postal service security measures .

neither the house nor the senate supported most of these proposed changes .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3058 , the fy2006 departments of transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies appropriations bill , provided $140.0 billion , $6.5 billion ( 5% ) over comparable fy2005 enacted levels and $9.7 billion ( 7% ) over the administration's request .

the bill generally reflected the house committee on appropriations recommendations , including the overall funding level ; the house did approve amendments increasing amtrak's fy2006 funding from $550 million to almost $1.2 billion , delete the house committee's provision barring federal assistance for amtrak's routes whose subsidy per passenger exceeds $30 , and approve amendments increasing funding for several programs within the department of housing and urban development .

the white house objected to several provisions in the bill , and issued a veto threat against a provision easing a restriction on agricultural exports to cuba .

the senate - passed version of h.r .

3058 , to which was added s. 1446 , the fy2006 appropriations bill for the district of columbia , provided $142.0 billion .

the bill generally reflected the senate committee on appropriations recommendations , including the overall funding level ; among the amendments approved by the senate were amendments deleting senate appropriations committee provisions which restricted amtrak service and allowed amtrak to charge commuter authorities for track access , and an amendment limiting the use of eminent domain powers by public authorities for economic development projects that result in primarily private gain .

the white house objected to several provisions in the bill , and issued veto threats against some of them .

the conference version of h.r .

3058 was passed by the house on november 18 , and by the senate on november 21 , 2005 .

it was signed into law on november 30 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-115 ) .

the conference bill provided $137.6 billion in net budgetary resources .

this was $2.4 billion less than the house bill and $4.4 billion less than the senate bill , but $4.1 billion ( 3.0% ) more than the fy2005 enacted level and $7.3 billion ( 5.6% ) more than the administration requested .

the largest increases went to hud ( $2.1 billion over fy2005 funding and $4.8 billion more than requested ) and dot ( $1.0 billion over fy2005 funding and $2.4 billion more than requested ) .

conferees included directives to amtrak ( the administration had threatened to veto the bill if it provided funding for amtrak in the absence of any reform measures ) and language that limits outsourcing of federal jobs performed by more than ten people unless the savings would exceed the lesser of 10% of or $10 million .

conferees did not include provisions passed by both chambers easing restrictions on agricultural exports to cuba , which had elicited veto threats from the administration .

conferees also did not include house language that would have prohibited the use of federal or d.c. funds to enforce certain gun laws in the district of columbia .

conferees added language prohibiting the use of funds in this bill for projects using eminent domain to acquire land for projects that primarily benefit private entities .

conferees also added language that amended provisions in the recently - passed surface transportation reauthorization legislation ( safetea - lu , p.l .

109-59 ) regulating household moving companies .

safetea - lu allowed state consumer protection agencies to enforce federal laws regulating moving companies ; conferees added language limiting the ability of state agencies to enforce these laws ( the limitation would expire after one year ) .

the transportation , treasury , et al. , appropriations act customarily includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs .

there also may be general provisions at the end of each individual title within the appropriations act which relate only to agencies and accounts within that specific title .

the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions is included in the fy2006 budget , appendix .

most of the provisions continue language which has appeared under the general provisions title for several years .

for various reasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language is preferable to making the provisions permanent .

presented below are some of the government - wide general provisions that were proposed for elimination in the fy2006 budget .

inclusion of the provisions in the house - passed and senate - passed bills and the conference report is noted .

section 609 , which prohibits payment to political appointees functioning in jobs for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed .

included as section 909 of the house bill as passed , section 807 of the senate bill as passed , and section 809 of the conference report .

section 619 , which prohibits the obligation or expenditure of appropriated funds for employee training when it ( 1 ) does not meet identified needs for knowledge , skills , and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties ; ( 2 ) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants ; ( 3 ) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end - of - course evaluation ; ( 4 ) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi - religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems ; or ( 5 ) is offensive to , or designed to change , participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace .

included as section 919 of the house bill as passed , section 817 of the senate bill as passed , and section 819 of the conference report .

section 620 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to require and execute employee non - disclosure agreements without those agreements having whistle - blower protection clauses .

included as section 920 of the house bill as passed , section 818 of the senate bill as passed , and section 820 of the conference report .

section 623 , which requires that the committees on appropriations approve the release of any "non - public" information , such as mailing or telephone lists , to any person or any organization outside the federal government .

the administration also requested repeal of this requirement in its fy2003 and fy2005 budget requests .

included as section 923 of the house bill as passed , section 821 of the senate bill as passed , and section 823 of the conference report .

section 628 , which prohibits using appropriated funds to contract independently with private companies to provide online employment applications and processing services .

the administration also proposed eliminating this prohibition in its fy2005 budget request .

included as section 928 of the house bill as reported , but not included in the house bill as passed and not included in the senate bill as passed .

section 635 , which states that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states .

included as section 934 of the house bill as passed , section 832 of the senate bill as passed , and section 834 of the conference report .

section 637 , which prohibits the purchase of a product or service offered by the federal prison industries , inc. , unless the agency making such purchase determines that such product or service provides the best value .

the administration also proposed repealing this prohibition in its fy2005 budget request .

included as section 936 of the house bill as passed and not included in the senate bill as passed or in the conference report .

among new government - wide general provisions in the fy2006 bill are those on ( 1 ) public - private competitions for activities not inherently governmental ( section 941 of house - passed , section 840 of senate - passed , and section 842 of the conference report ) , ( 2 ) requirements for transfers or reimbursements to the e - government initiatives ( section 942 of house - passed , and section 841 of the conference report ) , and ( 3 ) a 3.1% pay adjustment for federal civilian employees , including those in the departments of homeland security and defense ( section 943 of house - passed , section 836 of senate - passed , and section 843 of the conference report ) .

omb's statement of administration policy on the house version of the legislation reflects strong opposition to the government - wide pay adjustment provision and states that recruitment or retention problems "are limited to a few areas and occupations. .

the omb statement that accompanies the senate version of the legislation expresses strong opposition to any provision providing a government - wide pay adjustment in excess of the 2.3% recommended by the president in the fy2006 budget .

the administration's proposed fy2006 budget includes $573.3 million in federal payments to the district of columbia .

the courts and criminal justice system ( court operations , defender services , and offender supervision ) represent $470.1 million , or 82% , of the request .

on june 2 , 2005 , the district's city council approved the city's $8.8 billion operating budget for fy2005 , and $2.7 billion in capital outlays including $534 million to finance a new baseball stadium .

the district's budget also includes a request for $635 million in special federal payments , which is $62 million more than the $573 million proposed by the president and $32 million more than the amount that was passed by the house .

the house provided $603 million for the district , $30 million more than the administration request and $48 million more than enacted for fy2005 .

the house approved the $470 million in fy2006 court and criminal justice funding requested by the administration .

the house also provided $75 million in special federal payments in support of elementary , secondary , and post - secondary education initiatives , as requested by the administration .

this includes $13.525 million in special federal assistance to improve the city's public schools , $13.525 million in support of public charter schools , $14.566 million in assistance in support of scholarships to private and religious schools , and $33.2 million for the district's college tuition assistance program , $7 million more than appropriated in fy2005 .

the house also provided $20 million in special federal payments to the district's chief financial officer for various , but unspecified , education , economic development , health and social service activities , and $10 million in federal payments to the district water and sewer authority .

in addition to recommending $603 million in special federal payments to the district of columbia , the bill also contains a number of general provisions , including a number of so - called "social riders. .

consistent with provisions included in previous appropriations acts , the bill would prohibit the use of federal and district funds to finance or administer a needle exchange program intended to reduce the spread of aids and hiv ; or provided abortion services except in instances of rape , incest , or the health of the mother is threatened .

the bill would also prohibit the city from decriminalizing the use of marijuana for medical purposes , and limit the city's ability to use district funds to lobby for congressional voting representation or statehood .

the house also approved an amendment banning the use of funds to enforce a district law requiring guns in homes to be disassembled or secured by a gun lock .

on july 21 , 2005 , the senate appropriations committee reported the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2006 , s. 1446 ( s.rept .

109-106 ) .

the bill would appropriate $593 million in special federal payments for the district and would approve the district $8.8 billion fy2006 operating budget .

as reported by the committee , the bill recommends $33.2 million for the city's college tuition assistance program .

this is the same amount recommended by the house and represents a $7.8 million increase above the program's fy2005 funding level .

the bill also includes $40 million in special federal payments in support of continued efforts to strengthen public schools and expand elementary and secondary education choices , including funds for public charter schools and private school scholarships .

this is $1.6 million less than recommended by the house .

the bill includes $17.2 million in support of security planning ( $12 million ) and bioterrorism preparedness ( $5.2 million for bioterrorism and forensic laboratory ) .

this is $5 million less than approved by the house .

it would continue congressional support ( $3 million — $2 million less than the house - passed level ) for the construction of a nature trail along the anacostia river .

these proposed funding reductions , which total $8.6 million , would be offset by three new initiatives not included in the house bill: $3 million for marriage development accounts and life skills training for low income persons ; $2 million for a latino youth education and health initiative ; and $3 million for a housing initiative for recently released ex - offenders .

the senate bill includes a provision not included in the house bill .

it would transfer 15 acres of federal land at robert f. kennedy stadium to the district .

unlike the house bill , the senate measure would allow local funds to be used for lobbying for district voting representation in congress and to fund or operate a needle exchange program .

consistent with the provisions included in the house bill , the senate bill would prohibit the use of district and federal funds to implement the district medical marijuana initiative , or to provide abortion services except in cases of rape or incest , or the mother's life is endangered .

the senate added the text of s. 1446 to h.r .

3058 and approved the committee's recommendations .

the conference version of h.r .

3058 was approved by the house on november 18 , 2005 , and by the senate on november 21 , 2005 .

it appropriated $603 million in special federal payments to the district , including $75 million in special federal payments in support of elementary , secondary , and post - secondary education initiatives .

in addition to appropriating $603 million in special federal payments to the district of columbia , h.r .

3058 contained a number of general provisions , including several so - called social riders .

consistent with provisions included in previous appropriations acts , the bill prohibited the use of federal and district funds to finance or administer a needle exchange program intended to reduce the spread of aids and hiv ; or for abortion services except in an instance of rape or incest , or when the life of the mother is threatened .

a provision not included in the final version of the act , but included in a senate version , would have allowed the use of local , but not federal , funds for a needle exchange program .

the conference bill restricted the use of district and federal funds for abortion services and prohibited the implementation of the city's medical marijuana initiative , which would decriminalize the use of marijuana for medical purposes .

it did not include a house provision that would have prohibited the district from enforcing a section of its gun control laws that requires registered owners of handguns to keep such weapons unloaded , disassembled , or trigger - locked in their homes .

the conference bill included two new initiatives: it provided $3 million for marriage development accounts for low - income persons , and transferred 15 acres of federal land at robert f. kennedy stadium to the district for construction of a public charter boarding school .

conferees did not include two initiatives present in the senate version of h.r .

3058 : a $2 million latino youth education and health initiative and a $3 million housing initiative for recently released ex - offenders .

since 2000 , either one or both houses have approved provisions in the annual treasury department appropriations bill that would ease u.s. economic sanctions on cuba ( especially on travel and on u.s. agricultural exports ) but none of these provisions was enacted .

this year , the house - passed and senate - passed versions of the fy2006 transportation - treasury - housing appropriations bill , h.r .

3058 , included identical provisions ( section 945 in the house version and section 719 in the senate version ) that would have prevented treasury department funds from being used to implement a february 2005 amendment to the cuba embargo regulations that tightened restrictions on "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

the tightened restrictions require that cash payment for the exports is received prior to the shipment of the goods from the port at which they are loaded .

the administration's statements of policy on the bill maintained that the president would veto the bill if it contained this provision .

ultimately the provision was not included in the conference report to the bill ( h.rept .

109-307 ) .

press reports indicated that the white house also rejected , during conference , language that would have denied $5 million to the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) until the treasury department changed the tightened restrictions .

several house amendments to h.r .

3058 that would have eased cuba sanctions further failed during june 30 , 2005 floor consideration: h.amdt .

420 ( davis ) on family travel , by a vote of 208-211 ; h.amdt .

422 ( lee ) on educational travel , by a vote of 187-233 ; and h.amdt .

424 ( rangel ) on the overall embargo , by a vote of 169-250 .

an additional amendment on religious travel , h.amdt .

421 ( flake ) , was withdrawn , and an amendment on family travel by members of the u.s. military , h.amdt .

419 ( flake ) , was ruled out of order for constituting legislation in an appropriations bill .

during senate consideration , s.amdt .

2133 ( dorgan ) , proposed on october 19 , 2005 , would have prohibited funds from being used to enforce restrictions on travel .

the amendment was withdrawn the following day after a second - degree amendment , s.amdt .

2158 ( ensign ) , related to abortion ( and unrelated to cuba ) was proposed .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward communist cuba under fidel castro has consisted largely of efforts to isolate the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including prohibitions on u.s. financial transactions — the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) — that are administered by the treasury department's ofac .

restrictions on travel have been a key and often contentious component of u.s. efforts to isolate the cuban government .

the regulations have not banned travel itself , but have placed restrictions on any financial transactions related to travel to cuba .

in 2004 , the bush administration significantly tightened restrictions on travel , and there was considerable reaction to the administration's tightening of restrictions for family visits and educational travel .

under u.s. sanctions , commercial agricultural exports to cuba have been allowed since 2001 under the terms of the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 or tsra , but with numerous restrictions and licensing requirements .

exporters are denied access to u.s. private commercial financing or credit , and all transactions must be conducted in cash in advance or with financing from third countries .

earlier this year , the administration tightened u.s. economic sanctions against cuba by further restricting how u.s. agricultural exporters may be paid for their sales .

on february 22 , 2005 , ofac amended the cacr to clarify that the term "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural sales to cuba means that the payment is to be received prior to the shipment of the goods .

this differs from the practice of being paid before the actual delivery of the goods , a practice that had been utilized by most u.s. agricultural exporters to cuba since such sales were legalized in late 2001 .

u.s. agricultural exporters and some members of congress strongly objected that the action constituted a new sanction that violated the intent of tsra , and could jeopardize millions of dollars in u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

ofac director robert werner maintains that the clarification "conforms to the common understanding of the term in international trade. .

on july 29 , 2005 , ofac clarified that , for "payment of cash in advance" for the commercial sale of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba , vessels can leave u.s. ports as soon as a foreign bank confirms receipt of payment from cuba .

ofac's action would reportedly ensure that the goods would not be vulnerable to seizure for unrelated claims while still at the u.s. port .

supporters of overturning ofac's february 22 , 2005 amendment , such as the american farm bureau federation , were pleased by the clarification but indicated that they would still work to overturn the february rule .

since late 2001 , cuba has purchased over $1 billion in agricultural products from the united states .

overall u.s. exports to cuba amounted to about $7 million in 2001 , $146 million in 2002 , $259 million in 2003 , $400 million in 2004 , and $245 million in the first eight months of 2005 , the majority in agricultural products .

u.s. exports to cuba for january to august 2005 declined about 22% from the same time period in 2004 .

for additional information , see crs report rl32730 , cuba: issues for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs issue brief ib10061 , exempting food and agriculture products from u.s. economic sanctions: status and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl31139 , cuba: u.s .

restrictions on travel and remittances , by [author name scrubbed] .

key policy staff ald = american law division dsp = domestic social policy division fdt = foreign affairs , defense , and trade division g&f = government & finance division rsi = resources , science , and industry divisio .

