since 1992 , the united states has provided more than $28 billion in assistance to the 12 states of the former soviet union ( fsu ) .

it continues to provide nearly $2 billion annually .

over the years , various aspects of the program have drawn strong congressional interest and sponsorship ; some country programs have been the subject of controversy and debate .

the 110 th congress is likely to scrutinize these assistance programs as it seeks to address the range of u.s. foreign policy , strategic , and economic interests in the region .

this report describes the broad framework of u.s. assistance programs and policies in the former soviet union and then focuses on the foreign operations freedom support act ( fsa ) account which , encompassing all u.s. objectives in the region , has often been the means by which congress has expressed its views and sought to influence policy .

several concerns have been raised in recent years regarding u.s. assistance for democracy and economic reform .

 ( for non - proliferation aid issues see footnote 1 ) .

the fy2008 administration fsa account request under the foreign operations appropriations continues , even accelerates , an effort to cut aid to the region — the account would be cut by 22% from the previous year regular budget to $351 million , continuing a decline from levels which in the past 10 years averaged $725 million .

with democracy challenged in russia , and ongoing reform efforts in georgia , ukraine , moldova , and kyrgyzstan , as well as important u.s. interests in central asia , some observers have questioned the decline in aid to the region .

the administration's proposed fy2008 cuts from fy2006 levels ( fy2007 country levels have not been identified yet , following february passage of the final continuing resolution for that year ) would fall most heavily on six countries — armenia ( 49% ) , azerbaijan ( 47% ) , georgia ( 26% ) , kazakhstan ( 42% ) , russia ( 38% ) , and uzbekistan ( 52% ) .

cuts in the russia program .

each year since fy2001 , aid to russia has been decreased .

under the fy2008 request , fsa assistance would again be cut to $50 million from a level of $80 million in fy2006 .

these cuts are meant to lead to a total "phase - out" of the russia fsa account aid program in the next several years .

there are no current plans to eliminate the dod or doe non - proliferation programs to russia .

although the fsa program was not established with any firm deadline in mind , most observers assumed that the program was "transitional" and would not run as long as programs in developing countries .

a state department strategy in 1994 suggested the russia program would end around 1998 .

in 1997 , the partnership for freedom initiative , which chiefly sought to reverse a sharp decline in russia aid , made explicit a plan to wind down large - scale technical assistance to the whole fsu in 2002 , but with smaller grassroots cooperation programs continuing beyond then to about 2006 .

in 2003 , the bush administration decided to phase out russia programs over several years , beginning with economic sector programs by 2006 .

the questions these or any proposed cuts raise is whether they are desirable or justified in terms of what has been accomplished or remains to be achieved in each country .

in the case of russia , the administration argued that economic reform programs were not required now that russia has achieved strong economic growth .

the administration claim that democracy activities would be maintained , however , appears not to hold up to scrutiny .

in fy2002 and fy2003 , russia fsa - funded democracy programs amounted to $63 and $61 million respectively .

however , in subsequent years , funding declined to $33 million in fy2004 , $43 million in fy2005 , and $43 million in fy2006 .

the administration request for fy2008 contains $26 million for democracy programs in russia .

although from the beginning declared a major u.s. policy objective in the region , democracy has never risen above 15% of total all - spigots spending in any year .

it is , however , now a significant part of fsa account spending , rising from 15-18% in most of the 1990s to 24% by 1998 , 34% in 2003 , and 30% in 2006 .

however , as overall account levels have fallen , democracy funding actually declined significantly between 2003 and 2006 — in the fsa account , from $254 million to $152 million .

the fy2008 request would provide about $128 million for democratization , 36% of the total account .

the recent rise of democracy in ukraine and georgia and its evident decline in russia have highlighted the role and possible need for u.s. democratization assistance .

the latter case , in particular , has elicited repeated calls for increased aid by expert observers during the last six years as putin has chipped away at democratic institutions and practices .

congress indicated its concern by passing the russian democracy act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-246 ) which called for increased aid and emphasized the role of ngos and independent media in democratization .

one aspect in the creeping diminution of democratic practices in russia is the attacks on aid recipients in civil society and especially ngos that promote democracy .

in mid - 2005 , a u.s. - supported human rights organization found itself accused of evading taxes , even though its u.s. foreign aid income is supposed to be tax free .

similar problems occurred in the early 1990s until they were resolved diplomatically by formal agreement with the u.s. embassy .

this time , however , they are combined with attacks from the head of the federal security service on other ngos — as well as the peace corps which left russia several years ago amid similar attacks — and a statement by president putin that foreign funding of political activities would not be permitted .

legislation to control russian ngos and severely restricting the ability of foreign organizations to assist them was approved by the duma in december 2005 and signed into law by president putin .

it took effect on april 13 , 2006 .

analysts suggest that russian authorities fear a ukraine - like situation which has been blamed on u.s. and other donor - funded ngos .

it is not possible to say to what degree u.s. assistance is responsible for the positive developments in georgia , ukraine , and kyrgyzstan .

although the united states had previously pumped $807 million in fsa account aid to georgia , $2.1 billion to ukraine , and $408 million to kyrgyzstan ( including $138 million , $453 million , and $94 million respectively in democracy aid ) , these countries remained corrupt , economically stagnant , and authoritarian up to the time of their democratic revolutions .

u.s. programs , however , may have planted seeds of change , especially in support for civil society and political party training , both of which emphasize ways in which advocacy groups can make their voices heard .

all u.s. democratization support carries the danger of charges of u.s. interference in a country's internal affairs .

implementors have been careful , especially in providing aid to political parties , to be evenhanded and open to all comers .

but , if the government is authoritarian , then democracy aid may be viewed as inherently subversive .

accordingly , ngos throughout central asia are reportedly being harassed , some u.s. officials believe , at the instigation of russia .

aid to the fsu has always come with conditions .

both the freedom support act and annual foreign operations bills contain general and specific conditions that all the states of the fsu are expected to meet in order to receive assistance .

conditions left to the broad discretion of the president include whether these countries are undertaking economic and political reform , are following international standards of human rights , are adhering to international treaties , and are denying support to terrorists .

other conditions established by congress have been more firm and specific .

among these is section 907 of the fsa which for a decade prevented , with some exceptions , policy reform and other direct assistance to the government of azerbaijan unless it took steps to cease blockades and other uses of forces against armenia and nagorno - karabakh .

beginning in 2002 and in each year following , the president has waived this prohibition .

the majority of specific restrictions have been aimed at russia .

these include directions that aid be cut or withheld if russia implemented a law discriminating against religious minorities , if its troops remained in the baltics , if it did not provide ngo access to chechnya , or if it did not cooperate with war crime investigations in chechnya .

since fy1996 , direct assistance to the government of russia has hinged on its continuing sale of nuclear reactor technology to iran .

as a result , in most years as much as 60% of planned u.s. assistance to the federal russian government has been cut .

the new millennium challenge account compacts also come with their own conditionality .

to become eligible for the program , countries must meet certain standards of behavior related to governance , social development , and economic freedom .

while armenia , for example , appears to have met those standards sufficient to warrant a compact agreement , it also has been warned that it must maintain them or risk losing aid .

even as its $236 million award was announced in december 2005 , a letter from the mcc to armenia's president kocharian suggested that steps be taken to correct problems , particularly with regard to charges of electoral fraud and media restrictions in the november 2005 constitutional referendum .

currently , the most difficult conditionality issue arises with respect to human rights in central asia .

the authoritarian governments of the so - called "stans" were not seen as fertile territory for u.s. assistance in the 1990s .

consequently , most received minimal aid .

however , after 9 / 11 , these states became potential targets for muslim radicalism as well as front lines in the war on terrorism .

in fy2002 , they received an additional $174 million in fsa account funds from anti - terrorism supplemental appropriations .

although their strategic value has increased , their poor record in supporting human rights has raised concerns reflected in succeeding appropriations bills .

in the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations , for example , aid to the central government of uzbekistan was conditioned on its making "substantial and continuing" progress in human rights and democratization .

aid to the government of kazakhstan similarly depended on its improvements in protection of human rights , although the condition could be waived on national security grounds ; secretary of state rice most recently employed the waiver in may 2006 .

although the house version of the fy2007 foreign operations bill , h.r .

5522 , did not contain the uzbekistan or kazakhstan language , foreign assistance appropriators reportedly expect the administration to respect fy2006 terms and conditions under the fy2007 continuing resolution .

in 2004 , the secretary of state was unable to make a determination allowing uzbek government aid to go forward , and $18 million planned for the central government was withheld .

at the same time , dod waived a human rights requirement under the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction legislation to allow non - proliferation aid to uzbekistan .

following a violent uzbek government response to unarmed demonstrators in mid - may 2005 and critical comments by the united states , relations between the united states and uzbekistan have been strained .

although the united states had been negotiating for long - term use of the base there , the administration was forced to consider whether a military relationship was viable in a situation of authoritarian rule and civil unrest .

the decision appears to have been made for it when , on july 31 , 2005 , the uzbek government formally evicted u.s. forces from the base , effective within six months , and , reportedly , has stopped cooperating with the united states on counterterrorism activities .

in 2005 and 2006 , the secretary of state was again unable to make the determination that would allow some kinds of aid to the government of uzbekistan to go forward .

increasingly , non - democratic countries in the region have placed constraints on civil society and other non - governmental organizations that u.s. assistance targets .

in june 2005 , the peace corps suspended the program in uzbekistan , because the uzbek government did not renew the visas of volunteers .

in september 2005 , the fsa account - funded organization irex , which had been working in the country since 1994 , was ordered by a uzbek court to stop its programs — exchanges , internet access , and community development — for six months .

and , in march 2006 , the u.s. human rights group freedom house was ordered to end operations .

expecting a similar action , the eurasia foundation announced it would close its office .

counterpart international's office was closed by the government in may 2006 .

in addition to u.s. organizations , thousands of local ngos have been forced to disband , raising the question of how the united states can implement democracy programs in uzbekistan without appropriate partners .

