this report focuses on the interplay between federal and state and local tax systems through the federal deductibility of state and local taxes .

generally , individual taxpayers who itemize deductions are allowed to deduct real and personal property taxes and state and local income taxes paid from federal taxable income .

in 2004 , the 108 th congress modified the deductibility of state and local taxes to include sales tax for the 2004 and 2005 tax years .

this provision was extended by each congress up through the 113 th , and was made permanent by division q of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

in addition to the sales tax deduction option , congress previously enacted a provision that allowed non - itemizers to deduct up to $500 ( $1,000 for joint filers ) of property taxes paid .

the special deduction was available for the 2008 and 2009 tax years and was in response to the housing crisis .

unlike the sales tax deduction option , the special property tax deduction was not extended beyond 2009 .

the tax savings from the special property tax deduction likely benefited taxpayers that did not have other potentially deductible expenses that were high enough to merit itemizing .

taxpayers with no mortgage ( or low mortgage debt ) in states with relatively low state and local tax burdens were the most likely to have benefited the most from this expired tax provision .

previously , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided for an above - the - line deduction for sales and excise taxes paid on new vehicle purchases for non - itemizers .

this deduction also expired after the 2009 tax year .

the deduction from federal income for state and local taxes paid originates from the revenue act of 1913 .

a provision in that act allowed the deduction for "all national , state , county , school and municipal taxes paid within the year , not including those assessed against local benefits. .

state sales taxes , however , were not introduced until 1932 ( mississippi was the first ) and a deduction for those taxes for individuals was not explicitly stated in the tax code until passage of the revenue act of 1942 ( p.l .

77-753 ) .

the deductibility provision was frequently modified over the years , including the introduction of the standard deduction in lieu of itemizing deductions in 1944 , but significant revision did not occur until 1964 with enactment of the revenue act of 1964 ( p.l .

88-272 ) .

before the 1964 act , a deduction was allowed for all state and local taxes paid or incurred within the taxable year except those taxes explicitly excluded .

after the 1964 act , only taxes explicitly mentioned were deductible .

included in the list of deductible taxes were state and local taxes on real and personal property ; income ; general sales ; and the sale of gasoline , diesel fuel , and other motor fuels .

a new subsection in the 1964 act spelled out the test for deductibility of general sales taxes .

first , the tax must be a sales tax ( a tax on retail sales ) and second , it must be general , that is , imposed at one rate on the sales of a wide range of classes of items .

"items" could refer either to commodities or services .

the deductibility provision remained largely unchanged until the deduction for sales taxes was repealed by the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra 1986 , p.l .

99-514 ) .

one of the primary goals of tra 1986 was to broaden the base of the federal income tax .

eliminating the deduction for all state and local taxes paid was one of the policy options considered to broaden the tax base .

the final version of tra 1986 repealed the deduction for general sales taxes but preserved the deduction for ad valorem property taxes and income taxes .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) summary of tra 1986 suggested that congress chose to repeal the sales tax deduction and not income or property taxes , because: only general sales taxes were deductible and not selective sales taxes ( eg , tobacco and alcohol taxes ) , which created economic inefficiencies arising from individuals changing consumption patterns in response to differential taxation ; the deduction was not allowed for taxes paid at the wholesale level ( and passed forward to the consumer ) , thus creating additional inequities and inefficiencies ; the sales tax deduction was administratively burdensome for taxpayers who chose to collect receipts to justify sales tax deduction claims ; and the alternative sales tax deduction tables generated by the internal revenue service ( irs ) did not accurately reflect individual consumption patterns , thereby diminishing the equitability of the tax policy .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca 2004 , p.l .

108-357 ) reinstated deductible sales tax in lieu of income taxes .

the in lieu of treatment in ajca 2004 is in contrast to the "in addition to" treatment in pre - tra 1986 tax law .

the concerns noted above would still hold .

a secondary concern — presented during the debate before repeal in 1986 — that states would alter their tax structures in response to the elimination of sales tax deductibility , would not arise .

the ajca 2004 sales tax deductibility provision expired after the 2005 tax year , but was extended on multiple occasions: through 2007 by the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) ; through the 2009 tax year by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) ; through the 2011 tax year by the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) ; through the 2013 tax year by the american taxpayer relief act ( p.l .

112-240 ) ; and through the 2014 tax year by the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) permanently incorporated the deduction of state and local sales taxes in lieu of state and local income taxes into the tax code .

the remainder of this report will describe and analyze the deduction for the following state and local taxes: ( 1 ) real estate property taxes ; ( 2 ) personal property taxes ; ( 3 ) income taxes ; and ( 4 )  sales and use taxes .

as congress considers possible modifications to the deductibility of state and local taxes as part of fundamental tax reform , a better understanding of the existing policy may be useful .

generally , taxpayers may deduct state and local taxes paid from income .

individual taxpayers must itemize deductions ( rather than use the standard deduction ) on their income tax return to claim the deduction for state and local taxes paid .

business taxpayers , in contrast , may deduct state and local taxes as a cost of doing business .

the federal tax savings from the deduction is equal to the taxpayer's marginal tax rate multiplied by the size of the deduction .

because the federal income tax rate regime is progressive , a deduction for itemizers , in contrast to a tax credit for all taxpayers , favors taxpayers in higher income tax brackets .

for example , in 2010 , 88% of all benefits from the deduction of state and local taxes paid went to individuals with adjusted gross incomes greater than $100,000 .

table 1 reports the number and percentage of returns with itemized deductions for the four state and local taxes described and analyzed in this report .

the 1986 tax year is included in table 1 to exhibit the utilization of the deduction for sales taxes paid , which was repealed by tra 1986 .

in 1986 , before repeal , the sales tax deduction was the most common itemized deduction for taxes paid .

more taxpayers would claim a sales tax deduction because all but five states imposed a sales tax and , in contrast to property taxes , paying the tax is not conditioned on owning property , real or personal .

the current sales tax deduction is not as common because it is in lieu of income taxes .

in 2014 , 9.8 million ( or 6.6% ) of taxpayers claimed a deduction for sales taxes paid , and the percentage of taxpayers who claimed a deduction for income taxes paid dropped from 25.8% in 2006 to 21.8% in 2014 .

the percentage of itemizers has remained relatively stable since 2003 ( see table 1 ) .

the decline in 2003 likely is in response to the lower marginal tax rates and more generous standard deduction for married taxpayers filing joint returns .

the percentage of itemizers increased from 33.7% in 2003 to 35.0% in 2004 , likely reflecting the introduction of the sales tax deduction option .

the decline in 2009 may be related to the economic downturn that began in 2008 .

generally , the percentage of itemizers and the taxes they deduct has been consistent since 2003 .

under the federal income tax , taxpayers can deduct ad valorem property taxes ( taxes levied as a percentage of assessed value ) from taxable income .

for example , an itemizing individual owning a home with an assessed value of $100,000 and who pays a 1% property tax can deduct the $1,000 in taxes paid from his or her adjusted gross income .

if this taxpayer is in the 28% marginal tax bracket , taking $1,000 out of taxable income reduces taxes by $280 ( $1,000 multiplied by 28% ) .

in most cases , both the taxpayer's tax bracket and home value increase with income .

thus , higher - income taxpayers in higher tax brackets receive a greater tax savings than low - income taxpayers because of the typically progressive state income tax .

the effect is even greater because of the assumed positive relationship between home value ( and property tax bill ) and income .

in the 110 th congress , p.l .

110-289 included a provision that allowed non - itemizers to deduct up to $500 ( $1,000 for joint filers ) of property taxes paid .

the special deduction was first available for the 2008 tax year and was extended through 2009 by p.l .

110-343 .

this special deduction has since expired .

the real estate property tax deduction was claimed on approximately 25.1% of all tax returns , and of those returns that itemized , approximately 85% claimed a real estate property tax deduction in 2014 .

table 1 above provides data for the years 1986 , and 2003 through 2014 on the number of returns that claimed a property tax deduction , the most common itemized deduction claimed .

property taxes are a major source of local government revenue and thus allow for a substantial federal transfer through their deductibility .

state governments , in contrast , are less dependent upon property tax revenue and instead rely more upon income and sales taxes .

nationally , property taxes comprised 46.8% ( $452.2 billion in fy2014 ) of all local government general own - source revenue and 1.2% ( $14.2 billion in fy2014 ) of all state government general own - source revenue .

about 41% of the combined $466.4 billion in property taxes collected by state and local governments in fy2014 was deducted by individual taxpayers who itemized on their federal income tax returns or by businesses as a business expense .

in 2014 , $190.2 billion of real estate property taxes paid were claimed as itemized deductions on individual federal income tax returns .

in 2009 , an additional 15.7 million non - itemized returns were filed that claimed $11.3 billion in deductions for real estate taxes paid , as part of the temporary additional standard deduction .

personal property taxes , such as annual car taxes ( based on the value of the car ) , generated $9.2 billion in deductions in 2014 .

the amount collected and the amount deducted differ because only about 30% of taxpayers itemize on individual returns and businesses ( including landlords ) pay a large share of property taxes that would not appear as itemized deductions on individual income tax returns .

the federal tax expenditure estimated by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) approximates the amount of federal revenue lost ( or approximately the amount taxpayers benefit ) as a result of the deductibility .

table 2 presents the tax expenditure over the fy2016-fy2020 estimating window for taxpayers who itemize and claim a deduction for state and local real estate property .

the five - year total expenditure is estimated by the jct to be approximately $180.0 billion .

the annual expenditure for deduction by itemizers increases from $31.2 billion in 2016 to $40.5 billion in 2018 .

the increase likely reflects changes in economic conditions and housing prices .

in theory , if the property tax paid deduction were eliminated , taxpayers would gradually reduce their level of housing consumption , and thus their property tax bill would also change .

this shift would be gradual as housing consumption choices are not as responsive as other expenditures to changes in after - tax price given the relatively illiquid nature of housing assets .

as noted earlier , state and local governments may lower tax rates and shift to other revenue sources if the relative tax price of raising revenue through property taxes increases .

local governments would have more at stake than state governments because the real property tax is primarily a local source of revenue .

across taxpayers , high - income property owners in states with relatively high local property values ( and taxes ) would likely see the greatest increase in total tax burden if property tax deductibility were repealed .

as with local property taxes , the federal deduction for state and local income taxes is equal to the taxpayer's individual tax rate multiplied by the amount of state and local income tax paid .

the income tax is a source of revenue primarily for states , not local jurisdictions .

in fy2014 , state governments collected $311.5 billion in individual income taxes and local governments collected $29.6 billion ( $341.1billion combined ) .

federal deductions claimed on federal income tax forms for both state and local income taxes in the 2012 tax year totaled $311.2 billion .

the difference between what was collected and what was claimed on federal returns stems from taxpayers who did not itemize or individuals who were not required to file federal returns .

both groups are significantly more likely to be relatively low - income .

estimates of the tax expenditure for the deduction of state and local taxes are included in table 3 .

in december of 2010 , the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the sales tax deduction option through 2011 , and the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) again extended the provision through 2013 .

the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) extended the sales tax deduction through the 2014 tax year .

and finally , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) permanently extended the deduction of state and local sales taxes in lieu of state and local income taxes .

the deduction for state and local income taxes affects the distributional burden of both state and federal taxes .

first , the deduction could increase the progressivity of state taxes if it causes states to rely more on progressive taxes such as the income tax .

the cost of the deduction for high rate taxpayers is effectively "exported" to all federal taxpayers .

a state that collects a relatively larger share of income taxes from taxpayers in high federal income tax brackets is most effective at exporting a portion of its state tax burden to all federal taxpayers .

the federal tax burden , however , could be shifted to the majority of taxpayers who do not itemize deductions .

due to the expiration of the alternative sales tax deduction , taxpayers in states without an income tax are more likely to be non - itemizers ; thus , taxpayers in these states bear a relatively higher tax burden than taxpayers in states with an income tax .

the sales tax deductibility provision had partially muted this shift in tax burden .

the deduction for state and local sales taxes was temporarily reinstated in 2004 with enactment of the ajca .

this provision was extended a number of times before being made permanent by the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 .

unlike the pre - tra 1986 deduction , the most recent version allowed for a deduction of sales taxes in lieu of , as opposed to in addition to , income taxes .

taxpayers who itemized could choose between reporting actual sales tax paid , verified with receipts indicating sales taxes paid , or an estimated amount from tables provided by the irs .

the table amounts do not include the sales taxes paid for cars , motorcycles , boats , aircraft , or a home , and local sales taxes paid .

taxpayers may add taxes paid for these items to the table amount .

taxpayers are asked to calculate the ratio of the local sales tax rate to the state sales tax rate , and then multiply the result by the table amount to arrive at an estimate of local sales taxes paid .

the estimated local sales taxes paid are then added to the state sales taxes paid table amount .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) included a special deduction for the sales tax and excise tax paid on new vehicle purchases through 2009 .

this deduction was available only for those taxpayers that chose not to claim a deduction for general sales taxes paid .

thus , both non - itemizers and itemizers claiming a state or local income tax deduction could take this special deduction .

the dollar value of the deduction is limited in two ways .

first , only the first $49,500 of the purchase price is eligible and second , the deduction is phased out for taxpayers with adjusted gross income between $125,000 and $135,000 ( for joint filers the phase - out range is $250,000 to $260,000 ) .

allowing the deduction for state and local sales taxes in lieu of income taxes likely diminishes the progressivity of the federal income tax system for two reasons .

firstly , the deduction from income is available only to taxpayers who itemize .

secondly , this provision takes the form of a deduction , as opposed to a credit , so that the value of the deduction is greater for individuals facing higher income tax rates .

itemizers in states that do not impose an income tax ( and also levy a sales tax ) benefited the most from the optional sales tax deduction ( see table 4 , footnote "a" for these states ) .

the gradual reduction in allowable itemized deductions for wealthy taxpayers and the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) limited the benefit at the highest end of the income distribution .

states without an income tax rely more on sales and property taxes than do states with an income tax .

as a result , itemizers in states without an income tax could deduct proportionately more of their state and local taxes than taxpayers in states with both an income and sales tax .

as shown in table 4 , in states without an income tax , state and local governments rely on sales and property taxes for 72% of total tax revenue .

in contrast , in states that levy an income tax , state and local governments rely on income and property taxes for 51% of total tax revenue .

the differential treatment of states based on the reliance on the income tax was likely unintended .

nevertheless , states without an income tax are considerably better off with the sales tax deduction option relative to income tax states .

the level and distribution of income across states may also influence itemized deduction behavior .

table 5 shows federal itemization activity across states in 2014 .

itemization rates are affected by the amount of municipal taxes levied in each jurisdiction ( with greater taxation increasing the odds of itemization ) and individual income levels in each state ( with itemization increasing with income levels ) .

deductions as a share of adjusted gross income ( agi ) , meanwhile , represent the percentage of taxable income available deducted through federal subsidies for state and local taxes , with higher percentages representing a greater value from such deductions .

about 29.7% of all u.s. taxpayers itemized deductions in 2014 , with state level amounts varying from 17.1% in west virginia to 45.2% in maryland .

the value of itemized deduction claims was equal to 41.6% of total agi , ranging from 30.2% in alaska to 48.0% in mississippi .

president obama's fy2016 budget plan proposed limiting the tax rate at which itemized deductions would reduce tax liability .

this proposal would reduce the value of the deduction for state and local taxes for upper income individuals .

under current law , the value of an itemized deduction is the taxpayer's marginal tax rate multiplied by the amount of the taxes paid .

the obama administration's proposal would cap the value of the deduction at 28% multiplied by the amount of the taxes paid .

clearly , the cap would not affect taxpayers at or below the 28% rate .

for the 2017 tax year , the three higher rates are 33% , 35% , and 39.6% .

if deductibility were eliminated and state and local governments are policy neutral ( i.e. , do nothing in response to the federal changes ) , then the impact on the distributional burden of state and local taxes will remain essentially unchanged .

the federal tax burden , however , will shift from low tax state taxes toward high tax states .

under current tax rules , taxpayers in high tax states can deduct more from federal income than can those in low tax states .

for example , in 2011 , potentially deductible state and local taxes in new york comprised approximately 11.8% of total personal income whereas deductible taxes in nearby delaware accounted for approximately 4.4% of total personal income .

thus , taxpayers in new york can deduct significantly more from federal income than can taxpayers in delaware .

assuming that other federal taxes were maintained after the elimination of the federal deduction for state and local taxes , the tax burden would shift toward high - tax states from low - tax states .

if the federal government reduces tax rates to maintain revenue neutrality — the base is larger with the elimination of the deductibility allowing for lower rates to yield the same revenue — then the effect is even more pronounced .

some have estimated that individual income tax rates could be reduced by 50% after the elimination of state and local tax deductibility , while remaining revenue neutral .

the higher the state and local tax burden ( as a percentage of total income ) , the lower the new federal tax rate would be under revenue neutrality .

more generally , if state and local tax deductibility were eliminated , the federal tax burden would shift from all federal taxpayers toward itemizers .

as noted earlier , itemizers tend to be higher income , thus , federal income taxes may become more progressive if the deduction for state and local taxes were eliminated .

estimates suggest that after - tax income for upper - income individuals could decrease by an estimated 2.9% with the elimination of state and local tax deductions , while lower - income individuals would see no change in their after - tax income .

if the deductibility of state and local taxes were eliminated , some secondary effects would likely occur at the state and local level .

if deductibility were eliminated , state and local governments might be less willing to finance projects that generate benefits that extend beyond their taxing jurisdiction .

the tax price to a community of these projects would increase as the federal "contribution" through deductibility is lost .

these projects and initiatives would likely be the most sensitive to changes in the tax price as the benefits are more widely dispersed .

a reduction in state and local public good provision may adversely affect low - income individuals relative to high - income individuals .

quantifying the magnitude of the state and local spending response is difficult , however , because many other factors influence state and local spending decisions , such as state and local political considerations and overall economic conditions .

nevertheless , most research has found that state spending declines or would decline , but by how much ? .

before sales tax deductibility was eliminated in 1987 , one researcher estimated that "the overall responses are on the order of zero to ten percent , much less than estimates used in the political debate. .

in contrast , another economist found that the "level of state and local spending is significantly affected by deductibility. .

in addition to possible spending changes , some researchers have found preliminary empirical evidence that state taxes became more progressive in response to changes in the federal tax structure .

as part of the tax reforms of the 1980s , individual income tax rates were reduced significantly — top marginal rates were reduced from 70% in 1980 to 28% in 1988 — which effectively reduced the value of the deduction for state and local taxes .

states responded to this change by reducing statutory tax rates , but did not fully reverse the increase in progressivity in the effective state tax burden resulting from the changes at the federal level .

deductions for state and local taxes are only available to taxpayers who itemize their deductions , who were recently estimated to comprise of roughly 30% of all taxpayers .

alternatively taxpayers may take a standard deduction , which is a constant deduction value available to all taxpayers that varies with filing status .

the standard deductions available for tax year 2017 are $6,350 for single households , $9,350 for head of household returns , and $12,700 for married households filing jointly .

some recent tax reform plans have proposed an expansion of the standard deduction , including the "a better way" tax plan published by the house budget committee in june 2016 and h.r .

1 from the 113 th congress .

all else equal , increasing the value of the standard deduction would increase the federal tax code's simplicity , as more filers would benefit from taking the standard deduction instead of using a combination of deductions available through itemization .

standard deduction expansion would , all else equal , reduce revenues ( and increase budget deficits ) relative to current law .

that change results from the fact that rational taxpayers would only switch from itemizing deductions to an expanded standard deduction if it would lower their total tax liability .

two concepts or issues were not directly addressed in this report yet will likely arise during the debate surrounding the federal income tax treatment of state and local taxes .

one , are the tax expenditures for state and local taxes paid truly federal tax "expenditures ? .

or , do these "expenditures" represent a return of taxpayer income that never belonged to the federal government to begin with ? .

two , would the absence of a federal deduction for state and local taxes paid amount to "taxing a tax ? .

the foundation of these arguments can be traced to the difference between a theoretically ideal income tax and the federal income tax as it currently exists .

the ideal federal income tax would include wage income plus all accretions to wealth ( including imputed income ) over a designated time period — one calendar year , for example .

this definition of income should , theoretically , accurately measure an individual's ability to pay income taxes .

any exclusions or deductions from this definition of income would represent a departure from the rule and thus generate a tax "expenditure" or federal subsidy .

there are two ways to view taxes paid for state and local government services under an ideal income tax .

if one views state and local taxes paid as payment for government provided services which could be privately provided , then the federal deduction for state and local taxes is not appropriate .

in contrast , if one views state and local taxes as lost income resulting in a reduced ability to pay federal income taxes ( a loss ) , then a deduction for those taxes seems reasonable .

the more tangible , less theoretical , tax - on - a - tax issue arises from this last observation .

there is not a clear consensus on which view is "correct. .

for some state and local taxes and taxpayers , the fee - for - specific - services view is more accurate .

taxpayers with government - provided trash collection who pay property taxes for government spending on trash collection , for example , are receiving a tangible quasi - private benefit .

similar federal taxpayers in two otherwise equivalent jurisdictions — except that one jurisdiction provides garbage collection and the other does not — would face different federal tax burdens .

generally , this would contradict the concept of horizontal equity across federal taxpayers .

the reduction - in - ability - to - pay view seems more reasonable for those paying general sales taxes for general government provision of public goods such as fire and police protection .

note that a federal deduction for sales taxes and not property taxes would theoretically seem more desirable .

