the major sources of federal tax revenue are individual income taxes , social security and other payroll taxes , corporate income taxes , excise taxes , and estate and gift taxes .

this report describes the federal tax structure , provides some statistics on the tax system as a whole , and presents analysis of selected tax concepts .

the individual income tax is the major source of federal revenues , followed closely by social security and other payroll taxes .

as a revenue source , the corporate income tax is a distant third .

estate and gift and excise taxes play only minor roles as revenue sources .

the final sections of this report review a number of important tax concepts .

first , tax expenditures are discussed .

tax expenditures represent revenue losses from tax deductions , credits , and other tax benefits .

tax expenditures are used to provide incentives or disincentives regarding various behavior via the tax code .

capital gains are reviewed in further detail , as there is ongoing debate surrounding the preferred tax treatment of this form of income .

the tax consequences of marriage are also discussed .

while marriage tax penalties have been reduced ( and bonuses increased ) in recent years , the possibility that marriage can change a couple's tax liability still exists .

the concepts of tax deferral and depreciation are also reviewed , as changes in policies here can have broad implications for tax liability .

the final sections note how forms of business organization can impact tax liability , and assess the possibility of tax policy enhancing firm or industry competitiveness .

tax expenditures are revenue losses from special tax deductions , credits , and other tax benefits .

the joint committee on taxation lists revenue losses from these tax provisions by functional spending categories .

table 6 lists the top individual tax expenditures .

these 10 expenditure categories account for 70% of total tax expenditures on individuals .

in 2013 , the sum of individual tax expenditures was $1,140 billion .

while it is not precisely correct to add up all tax expenditures , which are estimated individually yet have some interactive effects , these totals provide some notion of the magnitude of these provisions .

individual income tax receipts are projected to be $1,264 billion in 2013 .

thus , tax expenditures are large relative to total receipts .

it is also important to note that tax expenditures measure the revenue effects of provisions on a cash flow basis , so they may not reflect the true benefit to the taxpayer ( eg , when the value of a benefit arises from a deferral of taxes ) .

the initial revenue effects of a repeal of a provision may differ from the costs reflected in the tax expenditure budget .

under current income tax law , a capital gain or loss can result from the sale or exchange of a capital asset .

if the asset is sold for a higher price than its acquisition price , then the sale produces a capital gain .

if the asset is sold for a lower price than its acquisition price , then the sale produces a capital loss .

under current law , capital assets held for more than 12 months are considered long - term assets , while assets held 12 months or less are considered short - term assets .

the holding period to qualify for long - term capital gain tax treatment was reduced to 12 months in 1998 .

capital gains on short - term assets are taxed at regular income tax rates .

in 2003 , the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra ; p.l .

108-27 ) reduced the maximum tax rate on long - term capital gains income .

for 2008 through 2010 , the tax rate on capital gains is 0% for those in the 10% and 15% tax brackets .

jgtrra reduced the maximum capital gains tax rate to 15% for taxpayers in marginal income tax brackets exceeding 15% .

these changes were initially effective for assets sold or exchanged on or after may 6 , 2003 , and before january 1 , 2009 , but the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-222 ) extended the applicability of reduced rates through 2010 .

the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the reduced rates through 2012 .

reduced rates on long - term capital gains were permanently extended for most taxpayers as part of the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) .

the top tax rate on long - term capital gains was increased from 15% to 20% for single taxpayers with taxable income above $400,000 ( $450,000 for married joint filers ; $425,000 for head of household filers ) .

beginning in 2013 , taxpayers with modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) above $200,000 ( $250,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly ) will be subject to a 3.8% tax on net investment income .

the $200,000 and $250,000 thresholds are not adjusted for inflation .

net investment income includes taxable net capital gains , as well as interest , dividends , non - qualified annuities , royalties , and rents .

this unearned income medicare contribution tax was enacted as part of the heath care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) .

some economists argue that lowering capital gains taxes would significantly reduce "lock - in" effects , allowing capital to flow more freely to where it can be used most efficiently .

reducing capital gains taxes could lead to more capital gains realizations , potentially offsetting some of the cost of cutting capital gains taxes .

there is , however , considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of this unlocking effect .

as an alternative to reduced capital gains tax rates , lock - in could be reduced by taxing capital gains on an accrual basis ( as opposed to the current system , which taxes capital gains when they are realized ) or by taxing capital gains passed on at death .

these alternative solutions , however , face a variety of technical problems , and the idea of taxing gains at death has been unpopular .

arguments have also been made that cutting capital gains taxes could increase saving and investment , thus stimulating economic growth .

while evidence on the effect of tax cuts on savings rates and , thus , economic growth is difficult to obtain , most evidence does not indicate a large response of savings to an increase in the after - tax rate of return on assets .

further , many economists argue that reduced capital gains tax rates are unlikely to provide short - run economic stimulus .

a case might be made for cutting capital gains taxes on corporate stock since corporate equity capital is subject to taxation both under the corporate and individual income taxes .

this double taxation encourages corporations to take on debt and directs capital to the non - corporate sector .

on the other hand , reducing the capital gains tax would increase the relative penalty that applies to dividends and introduce tax distortions into the decisions of firms to retain earnings .

a major complaint made by some is that cutting capital gains taxes would primarily benefit very high - income individuals .

capital gains are concentrated among higher - income individuals both because these individuals tend to own capital and because they are especially likely to own capital that generates capital gains income .

defining the married couple as a single tax unit under the federal individual income tax violates the principle of marriage neutrality .

some married couples pay more income tax than they would as two unmarried singles ( a marriage tax penalty ) while other married couples pay less income tax than they would as two unmarried singles ( a marriage tax bonus ) .

this can be viewed as a violation of the principle of horizontal equity , whereby individuals with equal income should have similar tax burdens .

the most important structural factors affecting the marriage neutrality of the income tax are the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , the marginal tax rate schedules , and the phaseout of credits and deductions for higher - income individuals .

under the current tax system , single individuals , heads of households , and married couples are subject to different tax rate schedules .

in addition , the eitc amounts and phaseout ranges vary based on the number of dependents claimed .

these differences give rise to structural marriage tax bonuses and penalties .

generally , the more evenly divided the earned income of the two spouses , the more likely they are to have a structural marriage tax penalty .

hence , married couples in which each spouse earns 50% of the total earned income have the largest marriage tax penalties .

specifically , two individuals having $80,000 each in taxable income would be in the 25% marginal tax bracket when being taxed as individuals .

their federal income tax liability would be $15,928.75 each ( or $31,857.50 jointly ) .

however , were these same persons taxed as a married couple , they would be in the 28% marginal tax bracket and have a joint federal income tax liability of $32,265.50 .

the marriage tax penalty for this couple would be $408 .

on the other hand , married couples where one spouse earns all the earned income have the largest marriage tax bonuses .

for example , an individual with a taxable income of $100,000 would have a federal income tax liability of $21,283.25 .

if that individual took a spouse who had no earnings , the tax liability for a couple with $100,000 in taxable income is $16,857.50 .

hence , this couple would have a marriage tax bonus of $4,435.75 .

in 2003 , the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra ) accelerated provisions initially introduced in the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) aimed to reduce the marriage tax penalty .

specifically , the 2001 and 2003 legislation made the standard deduction for married couples filing jointly twice that of the standard deduction for individuals .

the 2001 and 2003 legislation also increased the 15% bracket for married couples filing jointly to extend to twice the income level as for single individuals .

both of these measures were initially temporary for the 2003 and 2004 tax years but were extended through 2010 by the working family tax relief act of 2004 ( wftra ) .

these measures were extended through 2012 by the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) and made permanent as part of the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) .

while these changes did reduce the marriage tax penalty for some , higher - income couples and low - to middle - income couples with children are still likely to face a marriage tax penalty .

it is widely accepted that achieving equity in the individual income tax should involve ( 1 ) not influencing the choice of individuals regarding their marital status , ( 2 ) being progressive , and ( 3 ) taxing couples with equal income ( whether that income comes from one or two earners ) equally .

regardless of how these three concepts of equity are juggled , under current definitions an income tax can achieve only two of the goals ; it cannot simultaneously achieve all three .

the current income tax has chosen progressivity and equal taxation of couples with equal incomes at the expense of marriage neutrality .

a critical point in this debate is that there are no unambiguous answers to the question of which of these three competing goals of equity is the most important .

one perplexing problem associated with taxing income involves the issue of tax deferral .

ideally , a tax levied on income should be assessed when the income accrues to the taxpayer .

however , as a result of many factors , taxes are often deferred into the future .

this can happen when income is taxed when it is realized , rather than when it accrues or when there is a mismatch between when income is earned and the expenses associated with earning that income .

since money has a time value ( a dollar today is more valuable than a dollar in the future ) , tax deferral effectively lowers the tax rate on the income in question .

income from capital gains can be used to illustrate the benefits of tax deferral .

for capital gains , the tax is assessed when the gain is realized rather than as it accrues .

if a capital asset is acquired for $100 and appreciates at a rate of 10% per annum , by the end of the first year it has appreciated in value to $110 and by the end of the second year it is worth $121 .

assuming a marginal tax rate of 15% , if the gain were realized at the end of the second year , then a tax of $3.15 ( $21 times 15% ) would be levied on the realized appreciation .

the after - tax return would be $17.85 .

in contrast is the case of a $100 investment in an interest - bearing account earning a 10% rate of return with no deferral .

at the end of the first year , the account would yield $10 in interest .

tax on the interest , assuming a 15% marginal income tax rate , would be $1.50 , leaving $108.50 in the account .

by the end of the second year , the account would yield $10.85 in interest .

tax on the second year's interest would be $1.63 , leaving $117.72 in the account , for an after - tax return over the two - year period of $17.72 .

it is apparent from the examples above that the investment in the asset yielding capital gains income earns a higher after - tax return than the comparable investment in an interest - bearing account .

in essence , the reason for this result is simply that , for the asset producing a capital gain , the tax on the appreciation in the first year was deferred , with the deferred tax remaining in the account and earning interest .

the benefits of tax deferral increase the longer an asset is held and tax can be deferred .

tax deferral not only affects the taxation of assets producing capital gains income , but also is of concern in other areas of tax policy , such as the taxation of contributions to retirement accounts , depreciation allowances , and the taxation of foreign source income of u.s. multinational corporations .

when a business purchases a tangible asset such as a machine or structure , it is not incurring a cost .

rather , the business is simply exchanging one asset — for example , cash — for another .

the full purchase price of an asset is therefore usually not tax deductible in the year the asset is bought .

assets do , however , decline in value as they age or become outmoded .

this decline in value ( depreciation ) is a cost .

because assets gradually depreciate until they are worthless , the tax code permits firms gradually to deduct the full acquisition cost of an asset over a number of years .

the tax code contains a set of rules that govern the rate at which depreciation deductions can be claimed .

the rules determine the tax depreciation rate by specifying a recovery period and a depreciation method for different types of assets .

an asset's recovery period is the number of years over which deductions for the asset's full cost must be spread .

the applicable depreciation method determines how depreciation deductions are distributed among the different years of the recovery period .

the slowest method is straight - line , in which equal deductions are taken each year .

declining balance methods , in which a fixed fraction of the cost less prior depreciation is deducted , cause larger shares to be taken in earlier years .

because of the time value of money , a tax deduction of a given dollar amount is worth more to a business the sooner it can be claimed .

further , the sooner a tax deduction can be claimed , the sooner the tax savings it generates can be invested and earn a return .

it follows that the tax rules governing when depreciation deductions can be claimed are quite important to businesses .

if depreciation deductions can be claimed faster than an asset actually declines in value , a tax benefit exists ; depreciation is said to be accelerated .

if , on the other hand , depreciation deductions can be claimed more slowly than the corresponding asset actually depreciates , a tax penalty occurs .

only if depreciation deductions are claimed at the rate an asset actually depreciates do taxes confer neither a tax benefit nor a tax penalty .

according to some estimates , current tax depreciation for some types of equipment is somewhat accelerated compared to economic depreciation .

"bonus" depreciation allowances that recent tax acts have provided for temporary periods may have further accelerated depreciation for certain equipment .

generally , depreciation for most structures is probably not accelerated .

thus , firms have a tax incentive to use more equipment and fewer of other types of assets in their production process than they otherwise would .

this influence of taxes in the allocation of capital can reduce economic efficiency .

the internal revenue code recognizes several different forms of business organization and their tax treatment varies .

the principal forms are c corporations , s corporations , partnerships , and sole proprietorships .

apart from taxes , corporations are a legally defined form of business organization , with ownership stakes represented by shares that may or may not be publicly traded .

shareholders' liabilities are limited to their stake in the corporation .

the internal revenue code normally subjects corporate profits to the corporate income tax under its subchapter c ; corporations subject to income tax are thus often referred to as "c corporations. .

as explained more fully above , in the report's section on the corporate income tax , the part of c corporation income generated by equity investment is subject to two layers of tax: the corporate income tax and the individual income tax .

in contrast , corporations that qualify as "s corporations" are not subject to the corporate income tax .

instead , their net profits are passed on a pro rata basis through to the individual shareholders who are taxed on the profits under the individual income tax .

to be classified as an s corporation , the organization may have no more than 100 shareholders .

taxes aside , partnerships are like corporations in that they have multiple owners .

in contrast to corporations , some partnerships convey a liability for debts that is not limited to partners' contributions to the enterprise .

partnerships are also less likely than corporations to be publicly traded , although some forms of partnerships ( "master limited partnerships" ) are .

like s corporations , partnerships are not subject to the corporate income tax ; partners are subject to their share of partnership earnings under the individual income tax .

limited liability companies ( llcs ) have some of the characteristics of both partnerships and corporations .

under irs "check the box" regulations , llcs can elect to be taxed either as corporations or as partnerships .

other specially defined business entities include real estate investment trusts ( reits ) , which are required to engage primarily in passive investment in real estate and securities .

qualifying reits are permitted to deduct dividends they pay to shareholders , which effectively exempts reits from the corporate income tax .

regulated investment companies ( rics ) , who invest primarily in securities and distribute most income , are also permitted to deduct dividends .

the simplest forms of business organization are sole proprietorships .

sole proprietorships have only one owner ; there is no legal distinction between the business and the business's owner .

for tax purposes , business profits earned by a sole proprietor are taxed to the owner under the individual income tax .

the corporate income tax does not apply .

competitiveness can be defined in a variety of ways ( indeed , some would argue that it has no concrete meaning at all , at least at the national level ) .

but regardless of how competitiveness is defined , standard economic analysis suggests that most tax measures can do little to enhance it .

indeed , some observers argue that many of the tax provisions designed to improve u.s. performance in the world economy actually reduce u.s. economic welfare , world economic welfare , or both .

an individual firm or its employees might defend competitiveness as its ability to withstand the threat of foreign competition .

if asked , they might recommend some manner of tax benefit targeted at their industry: perhaps favorable depreciation rules or tax credits for consumers who buy their product .

economic analysis predicts that such measures might well improve the position of the targeted industry: its costs would fall because its taxes have fallen , introducing the possibility of reduced prices , larger market shares , and more jobs .

economic theory , however , also predicts that the effects of a targeted tax benefit will ripple through the economy and ultimately confound the policy's competitiveness goals for the economy as a whole .

because the nation's resources are limited , the theory holds , a narrowly targeted tax benefit will simply reshuffle the way resources are employed , drawing them into the favored industry and away from alternative uses .

while exports in the favored sector may rise ( or imports fall ) , theory predicts that the performance of other sectors will decline .

further , economics predicts that the effect of taxes on how the economy's resources are deployed diminishes the nation's economic vitality: market forces , not tax rules , are usually the best way to guarantee that resources are used efficiently .

policy makers or others at the national level may take a broader view of competitiveness and define it as the ability of the country as a whole to sell its exports — not just the performance of one sector .

such a view might recommend , for example , a tax incentive for exporting , regardless of the product .

but in this case , economic theory suggests that exchange rate adjustments will stymie any effect the export subsidy may have in improving the trade balance .

although implementation of an export subsidy may initially increase exports , the increase in exports raises the price of the dollar in currency markets , which , in turn , makes u.s. exports more expensive and imports cheaper .

as a result , exports are predicted to fall and imports increase until any initial improvement in the balance of trade that may have occurred disappears .

further , to the extent that part of the export tax benefit is passed on to foreign consumers as lower prices , analysis indicates that the measure transfers economic welfare from u.s. taxpayers to foreign persons .

many economists would argue that taxes can alter the balance of trade in the short and medium term , but not in the way that is perhaps commonly thought .

if a country runs a trade deficit , it is using more than it produces ; and to do so , it must , in effect , borrow from abroad , importing the foreign investment that finances the deficit .

the trade balance thus mirrors the balance on capital account , and it follows that taxes alter the trade balance not by their direct application to exports or imports , but by altering capital flows .

for example , a cut in taxes on business investment in the united states increases the u.s. appetite for investment ; foreign capital inflows accordingly increase and net u.s. exports ( imports minus exports ) fall .

or , a tax cut that increases the federal budget deficit can be expected to exert upward pressure on real interest rates , thereby attracting additional foreign capital and expanding the trade deficit .

conversely , a tax increase that reduces the budget deficit can also reduce the trade deficit .

finally , there are questions regarding whether tax preferences on capital rather than trade can enhance competitiveness for u.s. firms .

for example , can taxes improve the economy by making u.s. firms that operate abroad more competitive , cutting their costs and helping them compete more effectively against foreign firms ? .

again , economic theory is doubtful , holding that economic performance is enhanced by a neutral tax policy that neither discourages nor encourages overseas investment .

