in this section , a description of the state survey data collection instruments andimplementation issues is provided , followed by important data caveats that affect interpretation ofthe survey findings presented in the subsequent section .

comparing benefit limits under medicaid and schip must be done with care because theterm "limits" does not have the same meaning across these two programs .

this difference in themeaning of "limits" has implications for both the relative breadth or scope of care available undereach program as well as efforts to collect uniform , comparable data on benefit restrictions .

in addition to defining the amount , duration and scope of all covered services , states alsoelect the service delivery systems under which benefits are made available to medicaid and schipbeneficiaries .

there are two primary service delivery systems under each program: fee - for - service ( ffs ) and managed care .

generally , under ffs , state medicaid and schip agencies monitor andcontrol all service delivery .

in contrast , under managed care , mcos under contract to states monitorand control all service delivery .

these two systems of care are not entirely independent of eachother .

there are hybrid models across states that combine various features of ffs and managed carefor a given population or set of interrelated services .

at any given point in time , beneficiaries mayobtain all their services under a single system or different sets of services under both systemssimultaneously .

under medicaid , specific limits on benefits have grown out of the fee - for - serviceenvironment in which medicaid began .

state medicaid agencies determine which optional serviceswill be covered , and set limits on both mandatory and optional services .

such agencies alsoestablish other utilization controls ( eg , prior authorization ) to ensure that beneficiaries do notreceive services they do not need or in amounts greater than that needed to serve their medicalpurpose .

providers receive payments from the state based on rates established by the state for agiven benefit or type of provider .

under ffs , health care providers must obtain special permission or approval from the stateto continue delivery of medically necessary services beyond the pre - defined , standard upper limitset by the state for a given benefit .

for example , a state medicaid plan may limit coverage ofoutpatient mental health services to 24 visits per year .

but children who need more than 24 suchvisits in a year can obtain additional visits , as long as the provider of care demonstrates the medicalnecessity for more visits .

stated limits on benefits reflect what providers can generally expect to bepaid for in the absence of official clearance for more services , rather than definitive limits on whatbeneficiaries may receive .

the fee - for - service delivery system is generally used by individualswhose medicaid eligibility group ( eg , the aged and individuals with disabilities ) or geographiclocation ( eg , rural areas ) is not served through managed care , or for persons who opt out whenmanaged care is voluntary .

most medicaid children without disabilities receive services in the managed care setting .

under this system of care , state medicaid agencies negotiate different benefit plans with one or morecontracted managed care organizations ( mcos ) .

mcos may be commercial plans ( eg , kaiserpermanente ) that serve private sector beneficiaries as well as medicaid and / or schip enrollees .

insome cases , states also contract with medicaid - only plans .

state medicaid agencies generally payeach mco a fixed , prospectively determined , monthly fee for each beneficiary enrolled .

in turn , themcos establish networks of participating providers to deliver the agreed - upon covered services andpay those providers negotiated rates .

benefit plans may be comprehensive or limited in scope ( eg,behavioral health services only , also referred to as "carve out" plans ) .

there are likely to bevariations in coverage of , and limits placed on , specific benefits across medicaid managed care planswithin a given state .

managed care plans also employ utilization controls to monitor service deliveryand to insure that benefits provided are medically necessary ( similar to the point at which priorauthorization begins in the fee - for - service delivery system in medicaid ) .

even though most medicaid programs provide services through managed care plans,especially for children without disabilities and families , most states continue to operate significant,parallel fee - for - service programs .

under a medicaid managed care plan , if benefit limits are met bya medicaid child and additional services are medically necessary beyond the contractual agreementbetween the mco and the medicaid agency , additional funding may be provided to the mco forextended services , or that child may continue to receive such services in the fee - for - service setting .

coverage policies and benefit limits described in state medicaid plans are seldom absolute,especially for children , due to the medical necessity criterion , but also because of epsdt .

underboth fee - for - service and managed care , for nearly all medicaid children , states are required toprovide all federally - allowed treatment to correct identified problems , even if the specific treatmentneeded is not otherwise covered under a state's medicaid plan .

as a result , when a medicaid agencyreports that a specific benefit is not covered for children , that means the service is only availablewhen delivery of that service meets the epsdt requirement .

in these circumstances , providerstypically go through a prior authorization process to receive payment for what are sometimes called"epsdt extended benefits. .

unlike medicaid , but consistent with federal statute , separate schip programs are modeledafter private sector , commercial insurance products .

the requirement to use benchmark plans ( oractuarial equivalents of those plans ) , most of which are state employee health plans or commercialhmo plans , provides the framework for defining benefit limits .

under schip , managed care is the predominant service delivery system .

at the time of thecrs - sponsored survey ( june , 2000 ) , all but five schip programs ( alabama , north carolina , northdakota , west virginia , and wyoming ) contracted with one or more managed care or indemnity plansto deliver care to schip children .

california contracted with 23 comprehensive health plans .

somestates also use a ffs delivery system .

under commercial insurance products , benefits are alwayslimited by medical necessity , but other limits , when applicable , vary by insurance product , as do thepoints at which each insurer monitors service delivery for medical need and appropriateness .

payments to providers participating in these plans may be altered based on the outcome of suchservice utilization reviews , which can in turn affect access to care .

in the crs - sponsored survey , some of the benefits for which data on limits were collected ( i.e. , residential treatment centers ) are commonly covered under medicaid , but not routinely includedin commercial insurance products , and hence , schip .

there is no federal epsdt requirement underschip that would guarantee the availability of uncommon , but coverable benefits .

in sum , a small , but significant proportion of children have mental health problems .

somealso suffer from the consequences of substance abuse .

medicaid and schip provide access to anarray of inpatient and outpatient services that can help such children in low to moderate incomefamilies overcome these difficulties .

however , the breadth of benefits available under these twoprograms likely differs within and across states .

limits on benefits for the lowest income childrenunder medicaid are seldom absolute , while restrictions on services for higher income children underschip may be .

schip children have access to the same types of benefit packages available in theprivate sector as intended by congress .

notes: in the two "programs" columns ( one for medicaid and one for schip ) , stateabbreviations are used .

for schip , 28 states had a single separate schip programrepresented by the state abbreviation .

the remaining five states with separate schipprograms each had two or three such programs with different benefit plans .

in thiscase , an a , b , or c extension was added to the state abbreviation ( eg , ct - a , ct - b,ct - c ) to distinguish multiple programs as needed .

in the "covered groups" column for medicaid , "cn only" means this benefit iscovered for categorically needy beneficiaries only , and "cn+mn" means this benefitis covered for both categorically needy and medically needy beneficiaries .

under the schip columns , n / a means that the state had no separate schip programat the time of the survey , and thus , coverage of this benefit is not applicable .

definition of other terms ( in alphabetical order ) : bho - - behavioral health organization ( also see php below ) cy - - calendar year day treatment - - see partial hosp ( below ) eval - - evaluation ffs - - fee - for - service icf / mr - - intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded imds - - institutions for mental disease ip - - inpatient mc - - managed care mco - - managed care organization md - - physician med eval - - medical evaluation med management - - medication management ( eg , monitoring use of prescribeddrugs to treat mental illness or substance abuse ) mh - - mental health op - - outpatient pa - - prior authorization partial hosp - - also called day treatment or partial care ; is a structured environmentfor youth during the day that does not involve an overnight stay ; may include anintegrated curriculum that includes education , counseling and family interventions ; setting of care may be a hospital , school or clinic ; may be a transitional service afterinpatient psychiatric or rtc care for youth who no longer require institutionalizationbut who are not ready to be placed back in the school system due to on - going needsfor extensive treatment and supervision .

php - - prepaid health plan ; typically these are managed care plans that provide lessthan a comprehensive set of benefits ( such as behavioral health services that mayinclude only mental health care or mental health and substance abuse services only ) rtc - - residential treatment centers ( facilities ) sa - - substance abus .

