open ocean aquaculture is broadly defined as the rearing of marine organisms in exposed areas beyond significant coastal influence .

open ocean aquaculture operations would be located at a considerable distance from shore and subject to relatively harsh environmental conditions resulting from wind and wave action .

open ocean aquaculture employs less control over organisms and the surrounding environment than do inshore and land - based aquaculture , which are often undertaken in enclosures such as ponds .

development of offshore aquaculture has become a controversial topic for aquaculturalists , environmentalists , recreational fishermen , and commercial fishermen .

many environmentalists and fishermen have asserted that poorly regulated aquaculture development could degrade the environment and have negative affects on wild fish populations .

proponents of open ocean aquaculture believe it is the beginning of the "blue revolution" — a period of broad advances in culture methods and associated increases in production .

potential outcomes are difficult to characterize because of the diverse nature of potential operations and the lack of aquaculture experience in open ocean areas .

however , most agree that industry regulation is needed for orderly development of aquaculture while minimizing its effects on the environment .

during the 110 th congress , the national offshore aquaculture act of 2007 was introduced as h.r .

2010 in the house and as s. 1609 in the senate , both by request of the administration .

both bills focused on developing a framework to regulate aquaculture in the exclusive economic zone ( eez ) , generally 3 to 200 miles from the coastline .

a hearing concerning h.r .

2010 was held before the house committee on natural resources , subcommittee on fisheries , wildlife , and oceans , but no further action was taken on either of these bills .

on january 28 , 2009 , the gulf of mexico fishery management council voted to approve a plan to issue aquaculture permits and regulate aquaculture in the gulf of mexico .

on september 3 , 2009 , the plan took effect because the secretary of commerce declined to oppose it within the required statutory period .

environmentalists and some fishing industry representatives have opposed the plan because of concerns related to environmental protection and potential negative effects on wild fish populations .

many who oppose the plan support a precautionary approach and development of national aquaculture standards .

on september 8 , 2009 , h.r .

3534 , the consolidated land , energy , and aquatic resources act of 2009 , was introduced .

section 704 of the bill would have rescinded the authority of the secretary of commerce , the administrator of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , or regional fishery management councils to develop or approve fishery management plans to permit or regulate offshore aquaculture .

on july 30 , 2010 , h.r .

3534 was passed by the house , but the section related to offshore aquaculture was removed from the bill .

on december 16 , 2009 , h.r .

4363 , the national sustainable offshore aquaculture act of 2009 , was introduced .

the bill would establish a regulatory system for offshore aquaculture in the u.s .

exclusive economic zone .

on may 25 , 2010 , s. 3417 , the research in aquaculture opportunity and responsibility act of 2010 was introduced .

it would prohibit offshore aquaculture until three years after the submission of a report on the impacts of offshore aquaculture .

several terms for open ocean aquaculture are used interchangeably , including offshore aquaculture and offshore fish farming .

open ocean aquaculture facilities generally consist of systems ( eg , cages , net - pens , longline arrays ) that can be free - floating , secured to a structure , moored to the ocean bottom , or towed by a vessel .

currently operating commercial aquaculture farms in nearshore waters and estuaries use a variety of methods including ponds with earthen dikes , cages and net - pens moored to the ocean bottom , enhancement and seeding of the bottom , and suspended lines .

there has been some experimentation in offshore shellfish culture on the seabed and from suspended ropes and longlines .

internationally , research and commercial open ocean aquaculture facilities are in operation or under development in australia , chile , china , france , ireland , italy , japan , mexico , and norway .

currently , four commercial open ocean facilities are operating in u.s. state / territorial waters .

cates international , inc. , cultivates moi ( pacific threadfin ) near hawaii , and snapperfarms , inc. , cultivates cobia ( ling ) near puerto rico .

in september 2005 , kona blue water farms of hawaii celebrated its first harvest of kahala reared in deepwater pens in state waters .

in 2007 , a. e. lang fisheries began cultivating blue mussels off the coast of new hampshire in collaboration with the university of new hampshire's atlantic marine aquaculture center .

although these are open ocean operations , all four are currently sited in waters under state or territorial jurisdiction .

thus far , only a few aquaculture research facilities have operated farther offshore in the u.s. eez .

should such operations be located beyond coastal state jurisdiction within the eez , they would be regulated primarily by federal agencies .

development of commercial aquaculture facilities in federal waters is hampered by an unclear regulatory process in the eez and technical uncertainties related to working in offshore areas .

regulatory uncertainty has been identified by the administration as the major barrier to developing offshore aquaculture in the united states .

uncertainty is one of the main barriers to commercial investment in many new industries .

potential environmental and economic impacts and associated controversy have also likely contributed to slowing potential expansion .

proponents of open ocean aquaculture position it as the beginning of the "blue revolution" — broad advances in culture methods and application with resulting increases in marine aquaculture production .

they tout open ocean aquaculture as an option for meeting consumer demand for marine products , providing new employment opportunities , decreasing the u.s. trade deficit in seafood products , and developing a new economically viable industry .

it is also asserted by proponents that development of open ocean sites would have the advantages of avoiding inshore user conflicts and reducing environmental impacts .

opponents raise a number of concerns related to environmental protection and potential impacts on existing commercial fisheries .

they point to inshore aquaculture where mangrove forests have been replaced by shrimp ponds , and to waste from salmon culture that has harmed the seabed environment .

their environmental concerns include pollution from unused feed , fish wastes , and treatments ( eg , antibiotics ) ; entanglement of marine wildlife in aquaculture gear ; introduction of nonnative species ; and escape of organisms that might affect the genetic makeup of wild species .

they say that open ocean aquaculture could also have direct and indirect effects on commercial fisheries , such as degradation of wild fish habitat , preemption of commercial fishing grounds , and market competition between wild and cultured fish products .

the future of aquaculture in the eez is still an open question .

a complex and unpredictable mix of technological , biological , and economic elements will likely determine the profitability of open ocean aquaculture .

however , the future will also likely depend on the tradeoffs between benefits associated with aquaculture production and costs of potential environmental and social impacts .

a broad array of questions is associated with the viability and impacts of open ocean aquaculture initiation and expansion .

these concerns are further complicated by factors such as evolving production technology , uncertain economic costs and benefits , and environmental and social impacts .

generalizations are also difficult to make because of the variety of candidate species , associated technologies , and potential scales of operation .

major categories of concerns related to open ocean aquaculture development include ( 1 ) biological , operational , and business concerns related to development of a new industry ; ( 2 ) potential social and economic impacts ; ( 3 ) potential environmental impacts ; and ( 4 ) the legal and regulatory environment .

in 2005 , the pew charitable trusts and lenfest foundation requested the woods hole oceanographic institution to convene a task force to examine the potential risks and benefits of open ocean aquaculture .

the nine - member panel developed a set of national policy recommendations to guide future development of the industry .

the panel concentrated on potential environmental impacts with recommendations related to: escapes resulting in introduction of nonnative species ; disease and parasite spillover into natural ecosystems ; aquacultural waste resulting in water pollution ; and market - based incentives to reward environmental protection .

the panel also provided a general governance framework to address environmental impacts that would provide clear federal leadership and standards to protect the marine environment .

the framework would assign noaa a lead role in planning aquaculture in federal marine waters , with emphasis on related activities such as evaluating environmental risks , consulting with regional and state bodies , and developing environmental standards .

proponents of aquaculture development questioned what might have happened if alaska — with its processing plants , distribution system , infrastructure , excellent water quality , and extensive coastline — had decided to embrace rather than prohibit intensive salmon aquaculture .

these proponents suggest that , if alaska had decided differently , alaska might still "own" the world salmon market and enjoy a major source of employment and economic development , rather than having to watch wild alaskan salmon compete with aggressive salmon aquaculture development by chile , norway , and others .

the alaska case is cited to illustrate that regardless of whether the united states permits or denies open ocean aquaculture development , some of the potential socioeconomic impacts of open ocean aquaculture production on wild fisheries ( eg , changes in prices and markets ) are likely to result from greater production , whether domestic or foreign .

however , environmentalists and commercial fishermen might view the absence of salmon aquaculture in alaska differently .

potential environmental and social problems may have been avoided by concentrating on traditional wild fisheries .

wild salmon populations have been maintained at high levels and much of the alaska coastline is pristine .

although competition from aquaculture salmon imports may have hurt alaska salmon fisheries , improvements in marketing and product quality have kept many market segments competitive .

the future of aquaculture in the u.s. eez is still an open question .

setting a regulatory framework might be necessary but not necessarily sufficient to spur development of an open ocean aquaculture industry .

aquaculture in other countries may have advantages related to lower costs and superior sites .

although it might be argued that a highly regulated u.s. industry is unlikely to be competitive with aquaculture in other countries , minimal regulation does not guarantee that the u.s. aquaculture industry will succeed .

a complex and unpredictable mix of technological , biological , and economic factors will also determine the future profitability of open ocean aquaculture .

although government may play a role in funding research and pilot projects , large - scale production will likely depend on private initiatives and innovation .

environmental effects of aquaculture in coastal and inland areas have been documented , especially in other parts of the world , and potential environmental concerns related to development of aquaculture in open ocean areas will need to be addressed .

one of the main challenges for policy makers is to balance the need to provide flexibility for the aquaculture industry with public concerns related to environmental and social impacts .

