during the cold war , the focus of u.s. nuclear policy was deterring or retaliating in responseto a soviet nuclear attack .

u.s. nuclear forces were designed and sized for that contingency .

othercontingencies in which the united states might have used nuclear weapons were much more remote,and would have required far fewer nuclear weapons , than responding to a soviet attack .

defenseplanners dealt with them , but as "lesser included cases" not requiring new weapons .

the end of the cold war led to a reduction of the u.s. nuclear weapons development effort .

the first bush administration halted nuclear testing except for safety and reliability of the nuclearstockpile , canceled weapons that were under development , and withdrew most u.s. battlefieldnuclear weapons .

numbers of personnel in the nuclear weapons complex - - the facilities managedby the department of energy ( doe ) to develop , test , manufacture , and maintain nuclear weapons - - dropped sharply .

at congressional direction , the united states began a moratorium on nucleartesting in october 1992 that is still in effect and worked to negotiate the comprehensive test bantreaty ( ctbt ) , a ban on all nuclear explosions .

before the moratorium , the united states conductednuclear tests on an ongoing basis ; with the end of testing , the clinton administration changed thetest readiness posture to 24 to 36 months .

the george w. bush administration came into office with a different stance on nuclear weapons policy , which the september 11 attacks stiffened .

it delivered a nuclear posture review ( npr ) to congress in december 2001 .

 ( 3 ) thisclassified study , mandated by legislation , ( 4 ) spelledoutthe administration's views on the role of nuclear weapons .

a strategic relationship with russiabased on the threat of mutual annihilation had become "very inappropriate," ( 5 ) according to j.d.crouch , assistant secretary of defense for international security policy , and the threat had becomemore diffuse .

the npr focused on nuclear capabilities deemed needed for various contingenciesrather than mainly to counter the soviet nuclear threat .

that is , the administration perceived a widerrange of possible uses for nuclear weapons quite different than the u.s. - soviet nuclear war scenariosthat dominated cold war strategy .

crouch said , "the capabilities - based approach argues that theremay be multiple contingencies and new threats that we have to deal with .

we're focusing on howwe will fight ... not who or when. .

 ( 6 ) to support thisapproach , the npr envisioned a "new triad" - - strike forces ( nuclear and nonnuclear ) ; defenses ; and an infrastructure better able to respond tomilitary needs - - tied together by command and control , intelligence , and planning .

the goal wasto "assure allies and friends" that the united states had "credible non - nuclear and nuclear responseoptions," "dissuade competitors" through a "diverse portfolio of capabilities [that] denies payofffrom competition," "deter aggressors," and "defeat enemies. .

 ( 7 ) the npr called for retaining the capability to deter or respond to a variety of contingencies , and for retaining cold war - era nuclear weapons , at lower levels , to do so .

with the demise of the sovietunion and the september 11 attacks , a subset of targets - - terrorist - related facilities , some of whichhad existed for decades - - assumed greater prominence .

one example is hardened and deeplyburied facilities .

rogue ( and many other ) states have built such facilities , which might house leadersand key communications facilities .

another example is facilities - - some deeply buried , others not - - for producing or storing weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

the end of the cold war also led to changed constraints on use of nuclear weapons .

in anuclear war with the soviet union , assuring the immediate destruction of thousands of targets of allsorts would have been critical to national survival .

reducing fallout and "collateral damage," ordamage to people and things that were not the intended targets , was secondary in importance toachieving required probabilities of damage on targets .

warheads were typically designed to achievethat primary goal .

now , nuclear weapons to hold at risk specific , limited targets in rogue states ina credible manner are judged to need several characteristics: they would need to be able to counter threats that rogue states might pose , such as hard and deeply buried facilities or production facilities for wmd .

weapons to attack buriedfacilities would have different characteristics than weapons to defeat chemical and biologicalagents .

they would be better able to minimize ( not eliminate ) collateral damage consistent with military objectives .

while this has long been a goal of u.s. nuclear policy , earthpenetration and increased accuracy sharply reduce the yield needed to destroy a target , making itmore feasible to attain that goal .

they would need to be available readily , if not immediately , because thespecific threat might become known with little warning .

they could be few in number .

while an all - out nuclear attack on the soviet union would have struck thousands of targets , the option of an attack on a rogue state might involvea handful of targets .

according to the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , ( 8 ) "the administrationbelieves the broader range of capabilities of a nuclear stockpile with these weapons will serve as amore credible , and hence more effective , deterrent than the cold war stockpile we have today .

thismore effective deterrent will make the use of nuclear weapons less likely. .

 ( 9 ) some critics believe that the only use for nuclear weapons should be to deter and , if necessary , respond to the use of nuclear weapons against the united states .

 ( 10 ) they oppose attempts to developnuclear weapons with lower yield and reduced collateral damage as blurring the distinction betweenconventional and nuclear weapons .

even u.s. use of a low - yield atomic bomb , they assert , wouldresult in a firestorm of protest and worldwide opprobrium .

further , they believe that the u.s. nuclear arsenal has long been sufficient against a range of threats .

hardened and deeply buried targets ( hdbts ) , for example , have existed for decades , yetthe first bush administration halted work on nuclear weapons then under development and haltednuclear testing except for safety and reliability , effectively bringing work on new weapon types toa close .

presumably that administration would not have taken these steps had it envisioned a needfor new weapon types .

the united states needs the active support of the entire international community in the war against terrorism , many observers believe .

assistance may take many forms: providing informationto the cia on suspicious individuals , safeguarding shipping containers , securing radioactivematerial , or closing bank accounts of suspected terrorists .

other nations will be more likely tocooperate on issues important to the united states , it is argued , if the united states cooperates withother nations on issues important to them .

one such issue is nuclear nonproliferation .

the unitedstates pledged in the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( article vi ) "to pursue negotiations in goodfaith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and tonuclear disarmament. .

in addition , as an inducement in securing international support for extendingthe treaty indefinitely , the united states and other nuclear weapon states pledged in 1995 to supportthe ctbt .

 ( 11 ) they made a similar statement atthe 2000 npt review conference .

 ( 12 ) critics maintain that the administration's nuclear initiatives are at odds with these pledges .

they argue that developing new or modified weapons runs counter to the npt pledge and that suchweapons will ultimately require nuclear testing to ensure that they work .

reducing the time toconduct a nuclear test supports a future decision to test and , to the critics , implies an intent to test .

these positions may harm u.s. security by undermining efforts to make worldwide cooperation onnonproliferation of nuclear and other wmd more effective .

even if some steps might be innocuousby themselves , critics believe that many around the world will see the confluence of them as piecesof a single policy and will infer that the united states is now much more willing to consider usingnuclear weapons .

as an example of international concern over the new u.s. policies , the foreignministers of the new agenda coalition ( brazil , egypt , ireland , mexico , new zealand , south africa,and sweden ) issued a statement that said in part , 4 .

the ministers stressed that each article of the npt is binding on the respective states parties , at all times and in all circumstances... 7 .

the ministers reiterated their deep concern at emerging approaches to the broader role of nuclear weapons as part of security strategies , includingrationalizations for the use of , and the development of new types of nuclearweapons .

 ( 13 ) these positions may undermine u.s. security , critics fear , by spurring nations that might be targets of a u.s. nuclear attack to step up their efforts to acquire nuclear weapons .

of the three"axis of evil" nations , iraq , the first target of a u.s. attack , did not have nuclear weapons as far asis currently known .

having nuclear weapons to deter the united states may be a consideration fornorth korea and iran , both of which apparently have active programs to produce fissile material .

north korea has stated that it has several nuclear weapons ; while iran has declared that its nuclearprogram is for peaceful purposes , few in the united states believe that assertion .

even in military terms , critics argue , nuclear use would offer marginal to negative value .

deeply buried targets could be defeated ( not necessarily destroyed ) with conventional weapons,destruction of entrances and air shafts , or demolition by special forces .

the effectiveness oflow - yield nuclear weapons for destroying biological or chemical agents is uncertain , as discussedbelow , and intelligence might be unable to locate targets in underground complexes , as recent effortsto find iraqi wmd showed , rendering nuclear weapons of any yield of little use .

nations couldcounter earth penetrators by burying facilities more deeply .

even low - yield or earth penetratingweapons would throw a large amount of radioactive debris into the atmosphere .

substitutingradioactive materials for biological or chemical agents may offer little advantage to the localpopulation or u.s. troops .

debate over the four nuclear initiatives will in all likelihood continue for some years .

thisreport concludes by discussing some substantive and logical aspects of the debate that cut across thefour initiatives .

the topics below speak to the nature of the debate in 2003 and may bear on it infuture years .

four small issues , or one large one ? .

supporters of the four initiatives argue that opponents are reading too much into the initiatives .

they are , in thisview , unexceptional elements of a nuclear weapons program , each with its own justification .

supporters argue: lifting the ban on low - yield r&d simply permits scientists to study the full rangeof weapon issues , as is the case for scientists in all other nuclear weapon states ; aci is forearly - stage studies ; and rnep is just a study that at most could lead merely to adding a second typeof earth penetrator weapon to the u.s. inventory .

a three - year test readiness posture is much toolong , and testing may be needed for other purposes , such as to check on a fix to a warhead type thatdeveloped a defect .

as secretary of energy spencer abraham said , we are not planning to resume testing ; nor are we improving test readiness in order to develop new nuclear weapons .

in fact , we are not planning todevelop any new nuclear weapons at all .

our goal is designed to explore the full range of weaponsconcepts that could offer a credible deterrence and response to new and emerging threats as well asallow us to continue to assess the reliability of our stockpile withouttesting .

 ( 242 ) domestic and foreign critics see these measures as parts of a whole - - a military policy with a lowered threshold against nuclear use .

they contend: lifting the low - yield ban will enable pursuitof more - usable weapons ; and , aci will present the military with new weapon options .

in turn,military requirements for these new weapons will lead to testing , and enhanced test readiness willpermit expedited testing and deployment of these weapons .

they view rnep as redundant , sincethe united states has another nuclear penetrator ( the b61-11 ) , conventional penetrators , and othernonnuclear options , but believe rnep will make nuclear use that much more likely by giving theunited states yet another nuclear option .

from this perspective , these initiatives are consistent withother policy decisions , such as the administration's policy of preemption , its willingness to use "allof our options," its disregard for negative security assurances , and its refusal to pursue the ctbt .

critics see this policy as extremely insensitive to world opinion at best , and potentially dangerous .

nuclear preemption and use: ambiguities and uncertainties .

the administration's policy statements leave a crucial uncertainty .

in september 2002 , the national security strategy of the united states of america stated , "toforestall or prevent ... [attacks with wmd] by our adversaries , the united states will , if necessary,act preemptively. .

 ( 243 ) and in december 2002,the national strategy to combat weapons of massdestruction stated , "the united states will continue to make clear that it reserves the right torespond with overwhelming force - - including through resort to all of our options - - to the use ofwmd against the united states , our forces abroad , and friends and allies. .

 ( 244 ) these two statementsdo not specifically declare that the united states will use nuclear weapons preemptively againstpossible wmd attacks .

nonetheless , critics take them together as a sign that the administration iscontemplating just such a course .

is the administration willing to rule out preemptive use of nuclearweapons ? .

it may prefer ambiguity on this issue , whether because it has not reached a decision oras a tactic to extend deterrence .

but by removing ambiguity , declaring that it would not use nuclearweapons preemptively , the administration could reduce fears worldwide about possible nuclear war .

at issue for the administration is deciding whether the benefits of resolving this ambiguity outweighthe costs .

will the new weapons deter ? .

the administration , expressing concern about the terrorist wmd threat , discusses a purpose of new ormodified nuclear weapons as being to counter wmd facilities .

the administration may wish toclarify how the nuclear initiatives - - or any military means , for that matter - - could deter or retaliateagainst a terrorist wmd threat .

if the perpetrator is unknown , or is known but has no knownaddress , what targets would be attacked , and would new weapons offer any advantage for suchattacks ? .

are any assets of sufficient value to terrorists that holding them at risk might deter terroristattacks ? .

if so , would current u.s. nuclear and conventional forces suffice for that purpose ? .

couldthe united states perhaps deter terrorist use of wmd by threatening to overthrow ( usingconventional forces ) regimes that support terrorism , or by threatening to destroy ( using nuclear orother forces ) facilities that these regimes see as critical ? .

there is a more fundamental deterrence issue .

deterrence depends on holding at risk assets of great value to the leadership .

but while the united states was able to calculate what assets neededto be held at risk to deter the soviet union ( and vice versa ) , the united states cannot simply assumethat what deterred the soviet union would deter rogue states .

the leaders of a nuclear - armed roguestate might calculate that the united states would not use nuclear weapons against them because ofthe risk of international opprobrium , or that u.s. nuclear weapons would not have a decisive effecton the regime because it could hide or bury its own wmd and the facilities of highest value to theleaders .

they might be willing to accept the use of several nuclear weapons against their country,especially if they follow the u.s. debates and come to believe that the united states would only usea few low - yield weapons of limited effectiveness .

will research lead to testing , acquisition , and use ? .

a key concern of opponents of nuclear testing is the prospect that aci , rnep , and low - yieldweapons development could lead to nuclear tests .

one could imagine various ways in which theseprograms could lead to tests .

lifting the ban on low - yield r&d , for example , might lead to acideveloping new types of low - yield warheads: earth penetrators , chemical and biological agentneutralizers , warheads with reduced neutron or enhanced gamma radiation output , and warheads withreduced electromagnetic pulse .

future military interest in these warheads would , in this view , leadinexorably to testing .

yet there are plausible arguments that testing would not be needed .

the b61-11 penetrator was converted from a b61-7 bomb without testing , and the rnep conversion anticipates converting anexisting b61 or b83 without testing .

those warheads are available in a number of yields ; it may bethat a lower - yield option exists that would eliminate the need to develop a new - design epw .

theadministration has enough confidence in nonnuclear interceptors to withdraw from the abm treatyin order to deploy a system using them .

nuclear weapons tailored to destroy chemical and biologicalagents may not be needed .

the ability to destroy these agents is arguably much more dependent onprecise intelligence than on weapon characteristics , some doubt the efficacy of nuclear weapons todestroy such targets , and some doubt that the advantages of avoiding contamination by chemical orbiological agents outweigh the disadvantages of contaminating an area with radiation .

beyond that,whether enhancing nuclear test readiness will lead to testing depends on policy rather than technicaljudgments on future weapons r&d .

some critics of the administration's nuclear initiatives fear that studying nuclear weapon concepts or new weapons will lead to their use , but that result is far from inevitable , supporters reply .

nuclear weapons are an option available to the united states , but so are conventional forces,diplomacy , and economic leverage .

the united states has had low - yield nuclear weaponscontinuously since the 1950s , and might have benefitted tactically from using them in the koreanwar , cuba , and the vietnam war .

yet despite these military benefits and options , presidentsrefrained from using these weapons .

it appears , then , that nuclear weapons would only be used asa last resort .

on the other hand , any new weapon would provide a president with a wider range ofoptions for nuclear use .

a president might find options made available by current nuclear weaponsto be unacceptable , but a new weapon might tilt the tradeoff between costs and benefits in favor ofnuclear use .

any new weapon has limits to its military value .

the claim that epws may be the only way to destroy certain hardened and deeply buried targets doesnot mean that any nuclear epw will destroy any such target .

rather , nuclear epws would make adifference only against some specified range of targets .

a bunker hardened to a given level andburied to depth x could be destroyed by a conventional epw , and buried more deeply at depth ycould not be destroyed by a nuclear epw of 5 kilotons yield .

only if the facility is buried betweendepths x and y would that epw make a difference .

the united states could increase the weapon'syield , permitting it to destroy the bunker at greater depth , but the target nation could counter byincreasing the hardness of the bunker , burying it deeper , or camouflaging its location .

further , theu.s .

intelligence may not know details of the geology above the bunker or of the layout of a tunnelcomplex , both of which may greatly affect the weapon's effectiveness .

thus the weapon addsmilitary value over only a specific range of targets .

