ukraine's "orange revolution" has sparked a great deal of interest in congress andelsewhere .

some hope that ukraine may finally embark on a path of comprehensive reforms andeuro - atlantic integration after nearly 15 years of half - measures and false starts .

others are interestedin the geopolitical implications of a pro - western ukraine in the former soviet region and in relationsbetween russia and the west .

some analysts detect a new wave of democracy sweeping thepost - soviet region , from the "rose revolution" in georgia in november 2003-january 2004 , to the"orange revolution" in november 2004-january 2005 , and possibly to the overthrow of the regimein kyrgyzstan in march 2005 .

in 2004 , many observers believed that ukraine was at a key period in its transition that couldshape its geopolitical orientation for years to come , in part due to presidential elections held onoctober 31 , november 21 , and december 26 , 2004 .

in their view , the elections could move ukrainecloser to either integration in euro - atlantic institutions , real democracy and the rule of law , and agenuine free market economy ; or they could move ukraine toward a russian sphere of influence,with "managed democracy" and an oligarchic economy .

for the past decade , ukraine's politicalscene had been dominated by president leonid kuchma and the oligarchic "clans" ( regionally basedgroups of powerful politicians and businessmen ) that supported him .

the oligarchs chose primeminister viktor yanukovych as their candidate to succeed kuchma as president .

the chiefopposition candidate , former prime minister viktor yushchenko , was a pro - reform , pro - westernfigure .

international observers criticized the election campaign and the first and second rounds ofthe election as not free and fair , citing such factors as government - run media bias in favor ofyanukovych , abuse of absentee ballots , barring of opposition representatives from electoralcommissions , and inaccurate voter lists .

nevertheless , yushchenko topped the first round of the voteon october 31 by a razor - thin margin over yanukovych .

other candidates finished far behind .

after the november 21 runoff between the two top candidates , ukraine's central electioncommission proclaimed yanukovych the winner .

yushchenko's supporters charged that massivefraud had been committed .

hundreds of thousands of ukrainians demonstrated against the fraud,in what came to be known as the "orange revolution," after yushchenko's chosen campaign color .

they blockaded government offices in kiev and appealed to the ukrainian supreme court toinvalidate the vote .

the court invalidated the runoff election on december 3 , and set a repeat runoffvote on december 26 .

yushchenko won the december 26 re - vote , with 51.99% of the vote toyanukovych's 44.19% .

after several court challenges by yanukovych were rejected , yushchenkowas inaugurated as president of ukraine on january 23 , 2005 .

on february 4 , 2005 , the ukrainianparliament approved president yushchenko's appointment of yulia tymoshenko as prime ministerof ukraine by a vote of 373-0 .

tymoshenko is an energetic , charismatic leader with a sometimescombative political style who campaigned effectively on yushchenko's behalf .

she is a controversialfigure due in part to her alleged involvement in corrupt schemes as a businesswoman and agovernment minister during the kuchma regime .

 ( 1 ) during the campaign , yushchenko accused the authorities of trying to poison him .

onseptember 6 , 2004 , he fell seriously ill , shortly after attending a dinner with the chief of theukrainian security services .

after his condition worsened , he was rushed to the rudolfinerhausmedical clinic in austria .

doctors were unable to determine the cause of the illness at the time .

yushchenko soon resumed campaigning , but his face was , and remains , severely pockmarked .

ondecember 11 , doctors at rudolfinerhaus , reportedly with the help of american experts , confirmedthat yushchenko had been poisoned with a massive dose of the toxic substance dioxin .

ukrainianlaw enforcement officials are investigating the poisoning plot , and say they have developedinformation on who was behind the plot and who carried it out , but have not disclosed details .

ukrainian officials have hinted that the poison may have come from russia , although the ukrainiangovernment has not accused the russian government of complicity in the plot .

president yushchenko has set an ambitious set of domestic priorities for the new government.yushchenko has said that his key domestic priorities include reducing the size of the unofficial,"shadow" economy , especially by reducing taxes and eliminating loopholes and exemptions forfavored businesses .

another key goal is to maintain macroeconomic stability , although this effortmay be challenged by campaign promises to increase social spending .

yushchenko has pledged tofight corruption , a critical problem in ukraine , including through administration and civil servicereforms .

other priorities include improving the independence and effectiveness of the judiciary ; andattracting foreign investment .

 ( 2 ) yushchenko has vowed to prosecute those guilty of crimes,including fraud during the election , the 2000 murder of ukrainian journalist georgi gongadze , andthe attempt on yushchenko's own life .

yushchenko has said that he does not envision wholesale reversal of the sometimes dubiousprivatization deals of the past 15 years ( a possible relief to some oligarchs ) but that he will revisithighly questionable privatizations that have occurred in recent years , which he has estimated at about20-30 firms .

in addition , he has raised the possibility that current owners could keep the companies,if they paid the government an additional amount to make up the difference between the fair marketprice of the firm and what they originally paid for it .

one privatization , the huge kryvrizhstal steelworks , has already been overturned .

according to press reports , international steel companies,including u.s. steel and russian firms , may be interested in bidding on the firm if it is re - privatized .

however , prime minister tymoshenko has resisted limiting the number of deals under investigationand has launched a much broader inquiry that could involve hundreds or even thousands of firms .

western observers have expressed concern that the current uncertainty over privatization andother government policies is having an unsettling effect on ukraine's investment climate .

effortsto overturn previous privatizations could result in lengthy court battles .

in addition , potentiallong - term investors could fear that their property could be expropriated if politically - determined"rules of the game" are changed once again in the future , instead of firmly establishing the rule oflaw .

some western observers are also concerned that the government seems focused on boostingtax collection to pay for increased social spending promised during the campaign rather than onreforms that would attract more foreign investment .

indeed , such efforts , undertaken withoutconsultation with investors and in the hands of corrupt bureaucrats , could actually discourageinvestment , they say .

ukraine's new leaders have several things in their favor in their efforts to reform ukraine andmove it closer to the west .

ukraine's new leadership has many competent figures , is fairly young,and highly motivated .

yushchenko enjoys strong public support at present .

the former regime'ssupporters have been thrown into disarray by their unexpected defeat , and many of them appear tobe currying favor with the new regime .

with the exception of the communist party , which hasdeclined in importance since independence , the opposition does not have a set of principles toprovide cohesion .

ukraine is also benefitting from substantial goodwill from the united states andother western countries , in marked contrast to the former regime , which had isolated itself fromwest by its actions and had become more dependent on russia .

u.s. officials supported the "orange revolution" in ukraine , warning the former regime ofnegative consequences if it engaged in fraud , sharply criticizing fraud in the november 21 runoffvote , and hailing yushchenko's ultimate victory .

the united states also provided assistance toukrainian non - governmental organizations that monitored the election and conducted exit polls todetect fraud .

 ( 5 ) in a showof support for the new leadership , president bush and other nato leaders met presidentyushchenko at a nato summit on february 22 , 2005 .

president yushchenko visited the unitedstates from april 4-7 , and had meetings with president bush and secretary of state rice .

yushchenko's address to a joint session of congress on april 6 was interrupted by several standingovations .

the two leaders signed a joint statement that hailed ukraine's democratic revolution and saidthe two countries would work to spread freedom in the region , as well as throughout europe andbeyond , including in belarus and cuba .

it restates the long - standing u.s. policy goal of ademocratic , secure ukraine integrated in european and euro - atlantic institutions .

in the statement,the united states pledged its assistance to help ukraine make the necessary reforms to join the wtoin 2005 and its support for ukraine's nato aspirations .

the administration also called for"immediately" ending the application of the jackson - vanik amendment to ukraine .

the two sideswill establish an "energy dialogue" to help ukraine achieve greater energy independence .

thestatement underlines the cooperation of the two sides to fight terrorism and weapons proliferation,especially in ballistic missiles , an area in which ukraine is a world leader .

in the statement , theunited states pledges to help kiev fight aids / hiv , a serious problem in ukraine , and to providean additional $45 million to the chernobyl shelter fund , which collects funds to repair the protectiveshelter over the reactor destroyed in the 1986 nuclear accident .

current u.s. aid levels for ukraine are relatively modest .

according to the fy2006 budgetsubmitted by the president , ukraine will receive an estimated $93.5 million in u.s. aid in fy2005 .

the administration proposed $115.9 million in aid for ukraine in fy2006 .

the president soughtan additional $60 million to aid reform in ukraine in an iraq / afghanistan fy2005 supplementalappropriations request .

u.s. aid is focused on anti - corruption and rule of law efforts , media andngo development , and election monitoring and other democracy - building programs .

the unitedstates also seeks to increase exchange programs between the two countries .

as noted in the april 2005 bush - yushchenko joint statement , the united states will beinterested in seeing how the new government tackles such issues as weapons proliferation andhuman trafficking .

during the kuchma era , several arms trafficking scandals damaged ukraine'sinternational reputation .

in september 2002 , the administration announced that it had authenticateda conversation taped in kuchma's office in july 2000 , in which kuchma gave approval for the saleof four kolchuga early warning radar systems to iraq , a sale banned by a u.n. security council armsembargo .

the yushchenko government has recently opened investigations into other arms sales,including the sale of 18 nuclear - capable long - range cruise missiles to iran and china in 1999-2000 .

the united states is leading a nato effort to help ukraine destroy its vast stocks of obsolete smallarms and man - portable surface - to - air missiles .

the 2005 state department trafficking in persons report says that ukraine is a sourcecountry for women and girls trafficked for purposes of sexual exploitation .

the report designatesukraine as a "tier 2" country , which means that it does not comply with minimum standards for theelimination of trafficking , but is making "significant efforts" to do so .

the report says ukraine hasincreased the number of prosecutions and convictions of traffickers , but that shortcomings exist inseveral areas , including government corruption .

the report notes that the new government aims toimprove ukraine's performance on this issue .

the report recommends that ukraine "create a specialwitness protection program for trafficking victims , expand the legal definition of trafficking toconform with international requirements , ensure the appropriation of consistent resources for theanti - trafficking unit , and conduct sensitivity training to reduce victim blaming and breaches of victimconfidentiality. .

during the ukranian presidential election campaign and during the ensuing electoral crisis,the 108th congress approved legislation calling for free and fair elections in ukraine and urged theadministration to warn ukraine of possible negative consequences for ukraine's leaders and foru.s. - ukraine ties in the case of electoral fraud .

on july 22 , 2004 , the senate passed s. con .

res.106by unanimous consent .

the resolution noted the violations against osce standards for free and fairelections that took place during the ukrainian election campaign .

the resolution pledged congress'ssupport for ukraine's establishment of democracy , free markets , and a place in the westerncommunity of democracies .

h.con.res .

415 was passed by the house on october 4 .

it was identical to s.con.res .

106 , except that it added two clauses that "stronglyencourage" the president to fully employ u.s. government resources to ensure a free and fair electionand to stress to the ukrainian government that the conduct of the elections would be "a central factorin determining the future relationship between the two countries. .

on november 18 , 2004 , justbefore the second round of the election , the senate passed s.res .

473 by unanimousconsent .

as in the case of h.con.res .

415 , it warned ukrainian leaders againstconducting a fraudulent election .

however , it went further than h.con.res .

415 in thatit "strongly encourages" the administration to impose sanctions against persons encouraging orparticipating in fraud .

senator richard lugar , chairman of the senate foreign relations committee , monitored thenovember 21 , 2004 runoff at the request of president bush .

he said after the vote that "it is nowapparent that there was a concerted and forceful program of election day fraud and abuse enactedwith the leadership or cooperation of the authorities. .

senator lugar said that he had carried a letterfrom president bush to president kuchma that warned that a "tarnished election" will cause theunited states to "review" its relations with ukraine .

senator lugar stressed that kuchma "has theresponsibility and the opportunity for producing even at this point an outcome which is fair andresponsible. .

 ( 10 ) the 109th congress passed resolutions after president yushchenko was inaugurated .

onjanuary 25 , 2005 , the house passed h.con.res .

16 , and the senate passed s.con.res .

7 on the 26th .

the identical resolutions include clauses congratulatingukraine for its commitment to democracy and its resolution of its political crisis in a peacefulmanner ; congratulating yushchenko on his victory ; applauding the candidates , the eu and othereuropean organizations and the u.s. government for helping to find that peaceful solution ; andpledging u.s. help for ukraine's efforts to develop democracy , a free market economy , and integrateinto the international community of democracies .

if the "orange revolution" continues to show progress , congress could consider furtherlegislation on ukraine , including ending the application of the jackson - vanik amendment toukraine .

the jackson - vanik amendment bars permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status forcountries with non - market economies that do not permit freedom of emigration .

the amendmentwas originally intended to pressure the soviet union to permit jewish emigration .

the success oflegislation on granting permanent ntr status may depend on issues not directly related to theprovisions of jackson - vanik , such as the assessment of ukraine's efforts in fighting anti - semitismand returning communal property to jewish groups .

ukraine currently enjoys ntr status , subjectto annual determinations by the president that it permits free emigration .

pntr and u.s. supportfor wto membership for ukraine may also be held up by intellectual property rights concerns , highukrainian agricultural tariffs , and other trade disputes .

several bills have been introduced that would authorize the president to grant ukraine pntrstatus .

three bills - - h.r .

1053 , offered by representative gerlach ; h.r .

885 , introduced by representative hyde ; and s. 410 ( identical to h.r .

885 ) , offered by senator mccain - - would authorize the president to determine that jackson - vanikwould no longer apply to ukraine and to grant permanent normal trade relations status to ukraine .

s. 46 , sponsored by senator levin , and h.r .

1170 , sponsored byrepresentative levin , would also terminate jackson - vanik for ukraine but add other provisions.these include affirming that the united states retains to right to impose safeguard measures againstimport surges from ukraine and that congress may express its view that a u.s. - ukrainian bilateralagreement on conditions of ukraine's accession to the wto "does not adequately advance theinterests of the united states. .

 ( 11 ) congress also faces the issue of u.s. aid to the new government in ukraine .

on march 16,the house approved h.r .

1268 , the iraq / afghanistan supplemental appropriations bill .

the bill reduced the administration's $60 million request for ukraine to $33.7 million .

in its report ( h.rept .

109-16 ) , the house appropriations committee "lauds the democratic initiative of theukrainian people and intends this funding to be used for projects that will quickly show support forthe yushchenko government , as well as for costs associated with supporting the upcomingparliamentary elections. .

the report did not address why the committee had decided to reduce thepresident's request for ukraine , but the committee criticized the request in general for containingitems that did not constitute true emergencies , which therefore should be handled in the regularappropriations process .

however , the senate restored the $60 million in its version of the bill .

theconference version of the bill , signed by president bush on may 11 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) , alsocontained $60 million for ukraine .

on june 28 , the house passed h.r .

3057 , the fy2006 foreign aid appropriationsbill .

the bill provides no earmark for ukraine and provides $477 million for the former sovietcountries as a whole .

this amount is $5 million below the president's request and $78.5 millionbelow the fy2005 aid amount .

the report accompanying the bill says the committee "stronglysupports" president yushchenko's reform efforts .

another bill , h.res .

44 , calls for astaff exchange program between the house of representatives and the ukrainian parliament .

