health care flexible spending accounts ( fsas ) are employer - established benefit plans to reimburse employees for specified health care expenses as they are incurred .

they arose in the 1970s as a way to provide employees with a flexible benefit at a time when the cost of health care was a growing concern .

in contrast to traditional insurance plans , fsas generally allow employees to vary benefit amounts in accordance with their anticipated health care needs .

fsas can be used for unreimbursed medical expenses , and contributions to fsas have tax advantages .

however , fsa contributions are generally forfeited if not used by the end of the year , although employers may extend the deadline for using unspent balances up to 2½ months after the end of the plan year ( i.e. , march 15 for most plans ) .

this report describes fsas , the basis for their tax treatment , and data on their use .

it also includes a discussion of the changes made to fsas by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

fsas are employer - established benefit plans that reimburse employees for specified expenses as they are incurred .

they usually are funded through salary reduction arrangements under which employees receive less take - home pay in exchange for contributions to their accounts .

employees each year choose how much to put in their accounts , which they may use for dependent care , adoption assistance , or for medical and dental expenses .

however , there must be separate accounts for these three purposes , and amounts unused at the end of the year must be forfeited to the employer .

if fsas meet these and other rules , contributions are not subject to either income or employment taxes .

the focus of this report is on the fsas devoted to health care .

to illustrate the tax savings , consider a health care fsa funded for an employee through a salary reduction arrangement .

before the start of the year , the employee elects to reduce his salary by $75 a month in exchange for contributions of that amount to the fsa .

other employees might choose to contribute more or less than $75 .

throughout the year , as the employee incurs medical and dental expenses not covered by insurance or other payments , he may use funds in the account to pay them .

his total draw , which must be available at the start of the year , is limited to $900 ( the sum of his monthly contributions for the year ) .

if all $900 is used the first nine months , for example , he cannot replenish the account until the next year .

any amount that remains unspent at the end of the year ( or after the 2 ½ month extension , if available ) is forfeited to the employer .

if the fsa was funded by the employer , as sometimes is the case , the employee's draw must similarly be available at the start of the year .

it is possible for fsas to be funded both by salary reductions and employer contributions .

if the employee were in the 25% tax bracket , the federal income tax savings from the $900 salary reduction used to fund the account generally would be $225 ( i.e. , $900 x 0.25 ) ; in addition , the employee could save $69 in social security and medicare taxes ( i.e. , $900 x .0765 ) .

there could be state income tax savings as well .

if the employee were in the 15% tax bracket , the federal income tax savings would be $135 , three - fifths as large , while if he were in the top 35% bracket they would be commensurately greater , $315 .

the employer would also save $69 in employment taxes from the $900 salary reduction .

employers often use these savings to help pay the expenses of administering an fsa .

tax savings can exceed losses due to forfeiture of a remaining balance at the end of the year ; thus , not all of an account must be used for employees to come out ahead financially .

since tax savings are greater in the higher tax brackets , higher income employees may be less concerned about forfeitures ( assuming they recognize they could still be better off ) than lower income employees .

the tax savings associated with a health care fsa are not unlike those for traditional comprehensive health insurance , which also allows employer payments to be excluded from the income and employment taxes of the employees as well as from the employment taxes of the employer .

fsas are one way that employment benefits can be varied to meet the needs of individual employees without loss of favorable tax treatment .

flexible benefit arrangements generally qualify for tax advantages as "cafeteria plans," under which employees choose between cash ( typically take - home pay ) and certain nontaxable benefits ( in this case , reimbursements for health care expenses ) without paying taxes if they select the benefits .

the general rule is that when taxpayers have an option of receiving cash or nontaxable benefits they are taxed even if they select the benefits ; they are deemed to be in constructive receipt of the cash since it is made available to them .

section 125 of the internal revenue code provides an express exception to this rule when certain nontaxable benefits are chosen under a cafeteria plan .

fsas and cafeteria plans are closely related , but not all cafeteria plans have fsas and not all fsas are part of cafeteria plans .

fsas are considered part of a cafeteria plan when they are funded through voluntary salary reductions ; this exempts the employee's choice between cash ( the salary subject to reduction ) and normally nontaxable benefits ( such as health care ) from the constructive receipt rule and permits the latter to be received free of tax .

thus , instead of receiving a full salary ( for example , $30,000 ) , the employee can receive a reduced salary of $29,100 with a $900 fsa contribution and will need to treat only $29,100 as taxable income .

however , if fsas are funded by nonelective employer contributions then their tax treatment is not governed by the cafeteria plan provisions in section 125 ; in this situation , the employee does not have a choice between receiving cash and a normally nontaxable benefit .

instead , the benefits are nontaxable since they are directly excludable under some other provision of the code .

for example , nonelective employer - funded fsas for dependent care are tax - exempt under section 129 , while nonelective employer - funded fsas for health care are tax - exempt under sections 105 and 106 .

regardless of how they are funded , rules regarding fsas are not spelled out in the internal revenue code ; rather , they were included in proposed regulations that the internal revenue service ( irs ) issued for cafeteria plans in 1984 and 1989 .

final rules regarding circumstances in which employers may allow employees to change elections during a plan year were issued in march 2000 and january 2001 .

to be exempt from the constructive receipt rule , participants must not have cash or taxable benefits become "currently available" ; they must elect specific benefits before the start of the plan year and be unable to change these elections except under specified circumstances .

with respect to health care fsas , the maximum amount of reimbursement ( reduced by any benefits paid for covered expenses ) must be available throughout the coverage period ; coverage periods generally must be 12 months ( to prevent employees from contributing just when they anticipate having expenses ) ; reimbursements must be only for medical expenses allowable as deductions under section 213 of the code ; claims must be substantiated by an independent third party ; expenses must be incurred during the period of coverage ; after year - end forfeitures , any "experience gains" ( the excess of total plan contributions and earnings over total reimbursements and other costs ) may at the employer's discretion be returned to participants or used to reduce future contributions , provided individual refunds are not based on participants' claims ; and health care fsas must exhibit the risk - shifting and risk - distribution characteristics of insurance .

the effect of the irs rules is to allow only forfeitable fsas under which employees lose whatever they do not spend each year .

the rules disallow three other types of fsas that had started to spread before 1984: benefit banks , which refunded unused balances as taxable compensation at the end of each year ; zebras , or zero - based reimbursement accounts , under which reimbursements were subtracted from salaries each month ( thus reducing taxable compensation at the time it was paid ) ; and ultimate zebras , under which salaries already paid were recharacterized at the end of the year into reimbursements and taxable compensation .

neither zebras nor ultimate zebras had accounts that were funded , and they were criticized as abusive arrangements .

in august 2007 , the irs issued new proposed rules for cafeteria plans that have not been finalized .

the proposed rules generally preserve rules set out in regulations from 1984 and 1989 that were also never finalized .

the new rules also reflect changes in tax law from the past 20 years .

one key area of the proposed rules is detailed requirements for nondiscrimination testing .

nondiscrimination testing measures whether a plan disproportionately favors highly compensated employees .

all cafeteria plans will have to comply with these rules even those that currently do not undertake such testing .

the august 2007 proposed rule , however , has not yet been finalized .

the irs rules lay out what is permissible with respect to fsa plans , but employers may add their own requirements .

for example , prior to aca , the irs did not limit the amount that an employee can be reimbursed through a health care fsa , but employers established their own ceiling .

 ( one reason they might do so is to limit the financial risk that employees might resign having received reimbursements that exceed their contributions. ) .

employers may exclude certain elective expenses from their plans .

beginning in 2013 , however , aca will limit contributions to fsas to $2,500 , which will be adjusted for inflation in subsequent years .

fsas can provide tax savings for the first dollars of health care expenditures that people have each year , similar to the tax savings associated with comprehensive insurance plans having negligible deductibles and copayments .

however , taxpayers normally are allowed to deduct out - of - pocket medical expenses only to the extent they exceed 7.5% of adjusted gross income , and then only if the taxpayer itemizes deductions .

the more favorable treatment for fsas might be justified since participants generally assume additional financial risk for their health care .

some might question , however , whether the savings are proportional to the risk and whether they are equitable among people of similar incomes .

few surveys ask about fsas , and those that do obtain only limited information .

the two surveys that are available report different measures of access .

the first survey from the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) reports the percent of workers who have access to health care fsas .

according to the bls survey , 39% of all workers in 2010 had access to a health care flexible spending account .

when viewed by firm size , 56% of workers in firms with more than 100 workers had access to one .

the accounts were not as common for workers in small businesses .

in establishments with fewer than 100 employees , 20% of the workers had access to a health fsa .

the second survey from mercer reports the share of employers offering fsas .

according to the mercer employer benefit survey , more than four - fifths of large employers ( 85% ) offered a health care fsa to their employees in 2009 .

among small employers ( those with less than 500 employees ) , 29% offered a health care fsa .

the federal government began to offer fsas to its employees in july 2003 .

as of september 2008 , there were about 240,000 federal health care fsas .

despite high percentage of employers offering fsas , the average participation rate among employees has been much lower .

according to the mercer survey , 37% of employees offered an fsa chose to participate in 2009 .

the average annual contribution was $1,420 .

reasons for low fsa participation include employee perceptions of complexity , concerns about end - of - year forfeitures , and limited employer encouragement .

younger employees , particularly if single , may not have enough health care expenses to make participation worthwhile .

for lower income employees , the tax savings may be inconsequential .

on june 7 , 2012 , the house passed h.r .

436 , the health care cost reduction act of 2012 , which would allow up to $500 of unused balances in health fsas to be distributed back to the account holder after the plan year ends and to allow over - the - counter prescriptions to be a qualified medical expense ( thus repealing the provision introduced in aca ) .

according to jct , the fsa provisions of h.r .

436 would reduce revenues by about $8 billion over a 10-year period .

the bill has been sent to the senate for its consideration .

in the senate , two similar bills have been referred to the senate finance committee .

s. 1368 , restoring access to medication act , was read twice and referred to the senate committee on finance on july 14 , 2011 .

in addition , s. 1404 , medical fsa improvement act of 2011 , would allow all amounts that are not spent for qualified medical expenses to be distributed to the fsa participant in taxable income after the close of the plan year .

this differs slightly from h.r .

1004 , which limits the amount refunded to $500 .

