trends in u.s. foreign assistance to latin america generally reflect the trends and rationalesfor u.s. foreign aid programs globally .

u.s. assistance spiked in the 1960s during presidentkennedy's alliance for progress , reflecting an interest in preventing the spread of soviet and cubaninfluence in the region , and recognizing poverty as one possible root cause of popular discord .

inthe 1980s , the u.s. focus shifted to the central american isthmus where leftist insurgencies werechallenging friendly governments , and where a leftist movement in nicaragua had taken control ofgovernment through armed combat .

substantial amounts of u.s. assistance were provided to supportcentral american governments and the u.s. - backed contras seeking to overthrow the sandinistagovernment in nicaragua .

in the aftermath of the 1989 u.s. military intervention in panama , and the 1990 electoraldefeat of the sandinista government in nicaragua , u.s. assistance to these two countries increasedsubstantially .

central america resolved many of its political problems since the 1980s , although itis still one of the least developed areas in the hemisphere .

with the dissolution of the soviet unionin 1991 , u.s. concerns about spreading communist influence lessened , and so too did levels of u.s.assistance .

since 2000 , u.s. assistance has focused on support for counter - narcotics activities,largely in the andean region .

figure 1 indicates trends in u.s. assistance since 1960 in 2007 constant u.s. dollars .

u.s.assistance has not reached levels attained during the alliance for progress .

the annual average since1990 is approximately half of what it was in the 1960s .

the amounts requested for fy2007represent the lowest level in more than four decades .

some countries are benefitting from two newpresidential foreign aid initiatives .

haiti and guyana - - identified as focus countries by thepresident's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) - - have received increased assistance forhiv / aids programs .

nicaragua and honduras have signed millennium challenge compacts .

u.s. support for development is identified by president bush as one of the three pillars , withdefense and diplomacy , of the national security strategy , developed after the terrorist attacks ofseptember 11 , 2001 .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) identifies fivechallenges to which u.s. assistance programs are designed to respond: promoting transformationaldevelopment ; ( 1 ) strengthening fragile states ; providing humanitarian relief ; supporting u.s. geostrategic interests ; andmitigating global and transnational ills .

usaid identifies the main security threats to the unitedstates as the confluence of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and globalcriminal networks .

the focus has shifted to strengthening the institutions of weak states , rather thanon just economic growth , because weak states are seen as permissive environments for terrorist andcriminal activities .

figure 1 .

u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and caribbean annualaverage , 1960 to 2007 source: u.s. agency for international development , u.s. overseas loans andgrants ( greenbook ) , latin america and the caribbean , u.s. department of state,congressional budget justification , summary tables , fy2006 and fy2007 .

with regard to latin america and the caribbean , u.s. assistance levels requested for fy2007 show a marked decrease compared to the annual average from fy2000 to fy2006 , although itrepresents just a 3% decrease from fy2006 appropriated levels .

the largest decrease occurs in thedevelopment assistance account , which sustains a 28% reduction .

the largest increase is foreconomic support funds ( up 26% ) and the global hiv / aids initiative ( up 35% ) .

the childsurvival and health account would be cut by 9% .

when compared to other regions of the world,latin america has received between 9.5% and nearly 12% annually since fy2002 .

in addition totraditional economic and military assistance , two countries - - nicaragua and honduras - - have signedcompacts with the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) worth $175 million and $215 millionrespectively over five years .

these two countries would also see the largest cuts in developmentassistance in the fy2007 budget request .

table 1 .

u.s. foreign assistance , western hemisphere: majorassistance accounts , fy2004-fy2007 ( millions of current u.s .

dollars ) source: congressional budget justification , foreign operations , summary tables , fiscal years2004-2007 .

the table does not include all assistance ; it excludes peace corps , p.l .

480 food aid,and some disaster assistance .

in congress , the annual foreign operations appropriations bills have been the vehicles by which congress provides funding for , and exercises oversight of foreign assistance programs .

congress has not enacted a comprehensive foreign assistance authorization bill since 1985 .

forfy2006 , congress provided $20.9 billion out of the president's $22.8 billion international affairsrequest in the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations act ( p.l .

109-102 ) .

increases in thefy2006 budget request were due mainly to the new millennium challenge account ( mca ) and theglobal hiv / aids initiative .

the mca , that was unveiled in 2002 and became operational in 2004,links u.s. assistance with good governance and measures of performance of recipient nations .

themca program , if fully funded , represents one of the few marked increases in u.s. foreign assistancesince the marshall plan after world war ii , and the alliance for progress in latin america duringthe 1960s .

for fy2006 , u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean is estimated at about $1.68billion , including peace corps and p.l .

480 food aid .

the total does not include two millenniumchallenge compacts with honduras and nicaragua that were signed in 2005 .

the largest portion,$919 million , is allocated to the andean countries of bolivia , colombia , peru , ecuador , andvenezuela , and represents 55% of regional assistance .

another $292 million , or 17% , is allocatedto mexico and central america , while the caribbean would receive $307 million , or 18% .

braziland the southern cone of south america would receive an estimated $36 million , or 2% .

theunited states also maintains aid programs of a regional nature , such as trade capacity building , andmigration and refugee assistance , that total an estimated $133 million , or 8% , in fy2006 .

figure 2 .

u.s. assistance to latin america by subregion,fy2006 for fy2007 , the president's budget request totals $1.63 billion for the region .

this includes$927 million for the andean region ; $278 million for mexico and central america ; $321 millionfor the caribbean ; $35 million for brazil and the southern cone ; and $95 million for regionalprograms .

according to the fy2007 budget request , the andes would receive 56% of the regionaltotal .

the largest decreases occur in development assistance and child survival and health forcentral america , but the isthmus would benefit from increased economic support funds , largelyfor trade support for cafta countries , and trade capacity building programs .

economic assistance is generally provided by the u.s. government directly to other foreigngovernments or to nongovernmental organizations working in those countries .

bilateral economicaid to latin america is primarily administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

usaid strives to use that assistance to alleviate poverty and to address criticaltransnational issues such as hiv / aids , the environment , and humanitarian relief .

bushadministration officials have maintained that u.s. policy towards latin america is based on threebroad objectives - - strengthening democracy , encouraging development , and enhancingsecurity .

 ( 7 ) whilehemispheric security is addressed by programs funded through counternarcotics and militaryaccounts , most transformational development programs aimed at fostering social , political , andeconomic progress are funded by the child survival and health ( csh ) , development assistance ( da ) , and economic support funds ( esf ) accounts .

child survival and health .

csh funds focus oncombating infectious disease and promoting child and maternal health , family planning , andreproductive health .

for fy2006 , the administration requested $125.3 million for latin americaout of a total of $1.25 billion in csh funds globally .

congress provided nearly $1.6 billion globallybut did not earmark by region .

the fy2006 request for latin america reflected a 12.7% decreasefrom the fy2005 estimated allocation of $143.5 million .

traditional csh programs are being cutin favor of new initiatives such as the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , astate department administrated program currently targeting two latin american countries , haiti,and guyana .

for fy2006 , the administration estimates spending $140.9 million in the westernhemisphere .

its fy2007 request is $128 million , a reduction of 9% from the previous year'sestimate .

csh funded hiv / aids programs focus on prevention , care , and treatment efforts,specifically targeting children affected by aids .

they will be integrated into the overall policyframework and strategic "prevention - to - care continuum" espoused by pepfar .

child survival andmaternal health programs strive to reduce the number of deaths in children under the age of five andsave the lives of women in childbirth .

interventions used to reduce preventable child deaths includeimmunizations , pneumonia and diarrhea prevention and treatment , oral rehydration , safe birthing andprenatal care , nutrition , and breast - feeding initiatives .

the final major component of csh fundssupport expanded access to information and services concerning family planning and reproductivehealth .

development assistance .

da funds aim toachieve measurable improvements in key areas to foster sustainable economic growth: trade andinvestment , agriculture , education , environment , health , and democracy .

the administrationrequested $223.8 million for latin america out of a total fy2006 request of $1.1 billion , an 8%decrease from the fy2005 estimated allocation of $255.5 million .

for fy2006 , congressappropriated $1.524 billion for worldwide programs , but did not earmark da funds by country orregion .

the administration estimates spending $254.4 million in fy2006 in the westernhemisphere .

congress did include report language that central american countries should receiveno less than they did in fy2005 in csh and da funds .

congress also allocated $20 million in dafunds for labor and environment capacity building programs for cafta - dr countries .

for fy2007,the administration requested $181.9 million for latin america , a 28% decrease from the previousyear .

some of this decrease is made up in the esf account for trade capacity building in centalamerica .

da supports the opportunity alliance for central america , which focuses on facilitatingregional integration and helping the region's economies recover from recent natural disasters,declining coffee prices and drought .

specific trade capacity - building initiatives were undertakenprior to the negotiation of the central american free trade agreement ( cafta ) .

agricultureprograms seek to promote non - traditional agricultural exports and find agricultural niche marketsfor local producers .

da funds basic education programs to strengthen preschool , primary , andsecondary education , as well as the centers of excellence in teacher training ( cett ) initiative inlatin america and the caribbean .

usaid manages five presidential initiatives addressing variousaspects of sustainable development .

these initiatives focus on encouraging natural resourcemanagement , developing alternative energy sources , expanding clean water access , preventingillegal - logging , and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions .

there are justice sector modernizationprograms underway in 12 countries in the region , as well as 15 anti - corruption programs throughoutlatin america .

da democracy programs also seek to strengthen latin american democracies bysupporting elections , strengthening civil society , and protecting human rights .

transition initiatives ( ti ) .

for fy2006 , theadministration requested funding for ti previously provided in the development assistanceaccount .

the request for fy2006 was $325 million , of which haiti was to receive $30 million .

the program would support stabilization , reform and post - conflict reconstruction programs in fragilestates .

in fy2005 , the state department estimated spending $25 million in haiti , and $8.9 millionin fy2004 .

congress did not fully fund the ti account , giving it $40 million , and leaving otherfunds in the da account .

for fy2007 , the administration has requested $50 million .

economic support funds .

through thesecurity - related esf program , the united states provides economic aid to countries of strategicinterest to u.s. foreign policy .

funding decisions are made by the state department ; programs aremanaged by usaid and the state department .

although israel and egypt receive the majority ofesf aid , 11 latin american countries have received some esf funding in recent years , with bolivia,cuba , ecuador , mexico , and peru among the largest recipients .

the administration estimatesspending $120.8 million in latin america in fy2006 .

the request for fy2007 is $152.1 million,with most increases for the dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , and guatemala for tradeassistance .

esf assistance in the andean region , mexico , and central america is used to pursue justicesector reform , facilitate implementation of free trade agreements , improve local governance , fightcorruption , and promote respect for human rights .

the $3 million requested for the third borderinitiative , which began in fy2002 , would enhance immigration , border security , rule of law , anddisaster preparedness in the caribbean .

a $9 million fy2007 request for cuba would continue theadministration's efforts to support a transition to democracy there through information disseminationand support for dissidents and human rights activists .

for fy2006 , congress appropriated $2.634 billion for esf programs globally and earmarked$116.4 million for latin america and the caribbean .

it also directed that haiti receive $50 million,guatemala $5.5 million , mexico $11.5 million , nicaragua $1.9 million , and another $20 million fortrade capacity building programs in the cafta - dr countries .

p.l .

480 title ii food aid .

thisaccount , funded through the annual agriculture appropriations bill , provides the funds for usaidto respond quickly to the food assistance needs of countries facing emergency situations .

food aidis targeted at vulnerable populations , especially those coping with , or recovering from , natural ormanmade disasters , including prolonged civil strife .

this assistance program is administered largelyby u.s. private voluntary organizations and through the united nation's world food program .

forfy2005 , the united states allocated an estimated $108 million for p.l .

480 in latin america , andthe administration estimates spending $100 million in fy2006 .

for fy2007 , the request is $118.5million .

the largest recipients of food aid in latin america include bolivia , guatemala , haiti,honduras , nicaragua , and peru .

migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) .

thisprogram supports refugee relief activities , and in some cases , helps resettle refugees .

fy2006funding for mra in latin america is an estimated $24.3 million .

the administration reduced itsmra request for fy2006 to $22 million .

most of the funding will be used to help the more than2 million internally displaced persons ( idps ) in colombia and thousands of refugees outside ofcolombia .

the state department partners with the international committee of the red cross andthe u.n. high commission on refugees to provide refugee assistance .

peace corps .

the peace corps sends u.s.volunteers to developing countries to provide technical aid and to promote mutual understanding ona people - to - people basis .

countries in latin america with peace corps programs include countriesin the eastern caribbean region and central america , the dominican republic , guyana , jamaica,suriname , mexico , belize , bolivia , ecuador , peru and paraguay .

funding in fy2006 totaled $44.5million ; the fy2007 request is $44.8 million .

inter - american foundation ( iaf ) .

the iaf isa small federal agency that provides grants to non - profit and community - based programs in latinamerica that promote entrepreneurship , self - reliance , and economic progress for the poor .

thefy2006 estimated allocation for the iaf is 19.3 million , and the fy2007 request maintains levelfunding at $19.3 million .

millennium challenge account ( mca ) .

themca is a presidential initiative announced in 2002 that is intended to increase foreign assistanceto countries below a certain income threshold that are pursuing policies intended to promotedemocracy , social development , and sustainable economic growth .

if fully funded , the mca wouldincrease foreign assistance beginning in fy2004 so that by fy2006 u.s. foreign aid would be $5billion higher than three years earlier .

the fy2005 allocation for the mca was $1.488 billion .

theadministration requested $3 billion in fy2006 , and congress approved $1.77 billion .

for fy2007,the request is $3 billion .

this assistance is administered by the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , in cooperation with usaid .

in 2005 , the mcc signed compacts with nicaragua for $175million over five years , and with honduras for $215 million over five years .

 ( for furtherinformation , see the discussion of the mca in the "additional issues for congress" section above. ) .

global hiv / aids initiative .

in 2003 , presidentbush announced the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , a new initiativepledging $15 billion over five years for the prevention and treatment of hiv / aids , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and malaria .

this includes $10 billion in new funding of which $1 billion would be forcontributions to the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria .

the other $5 billionwould come from existing programs managed by other agencies such as usaid and the departmentof health and human services ( hhs ) .

the global aids initiative , which constitutes the bulk ofpepfar funding , is a department of state program currently concentrated on 12 african countries,as well as haiti and guyana .

the 2005 funding level for haiti was estimated at $39.4 million , andfor guyana , at $13.2 million .

the fy2006 estimate provides $47.3 million for haiti , and $18million for guyana .

the fy2007 request includes $ $63 million for haiti and $25 million forguyana .

 ( for further information , see the discussion on hiv / aids in the "additional issues forcongress" section above. ) .

international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) .

inl funds bilateral , regional and global programs to assist foreigngovernments in strengthening their law enforcement capabilities , including the ability to destroy drugcrops , disrupt drug production , and interdict drug trafficking .

its largest single program is theandean counterdrug initiative .

its other programs focus on fighting money - laundering and terroristfinancing , enhancing security along the u.s. - mexican border , and fighting trafficking in persons,corruption , and cybercrimes .

it also includes programs to strengthen the rule of law and to promotedemand reduction .

it provides some funding to the united nations office on drugs and crime toprovide support for legal frameworks to prevent and combat organized crime , and the organizationof american states drug abuse control commission ( cicad ) to strengthen national drugcommissions and to support the multilateral evaluation mechanism ( mem ) .

mem is the peerreview system used to evaluate national anti - drug performance .

inl's current bilateral assistanceto latin america supports programs in the bahamas , guatemala , haiti , jamaica and mexico .

fy2006 funding is an estimated $61 million for latin america. , and $54.8 million isrequested for fy2007 .

mexico would receive the most funding in fy2006 ( $40 million ) , and haitiwould receive the second highest allocation ( $15 million ) .

congress included language expressingconcern about the rise in gang violence in central america and urged the secretary of state toincrease funds for gang - related programs .

interregional aviation support .

inl manages theinterregional aviation support program that operates a fleet of 189 fixed - and rotary - wing aircraftsupporting overflight drug crop imagery and aerial eradication programs in colombia , bolivia , andperu , as well as border security operations in pakistan .

fy2006 funding is estimated at nearly $62.9million , of which approximately half is allocated for programs in the andean region .

the requestfor fy2007 is for $65.5 million .

andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) .

the coreof u.s. counternarcotics programs in latin america is the aci .

the three primary global producersof cocaine are colombia , peru and bolivia .

the objectives are to eliminate the cultivation andproduction of cocaine and opium , build andean law enforcement infrastructure , arrest and prosecutetraffickers , and seize their assets .

the countries considered a part of the aci include bolivia , brazil,colombia , ecuador , panama , peru and venezuela , with the lion's share of funding allocated forprograms in colombia .

funds are divided between programs that support eradication andinterdiction efforts , as well as those focused on alternative crop development and democraticinstitution building .

on the interdiction side , this includes programs to train and support nationalpolice and military forces , to provide communications and intelligence systems , to support themaintenance and operations of host country aerial eradication aircraft , and to improve infrastructurerelated to counternarcotics activities .

on the alternative development side , funds support economicdevelopment programs in coca growing areas , including infrastructure development , and marketingand technical support for alternative crops .

it also includes assisting internally displaced persons,promoting the rule of law , and expanding judicial capabilities .

fy2006 funding for aci was estimated at $727.2 million , and $721.5 million is requestedfor fy2007 .

in the past , congress has approved the administration's requests , but often placesconditions on u.s. assistance .

for fy2006 , congress changed the allocations slightly amongcountries and programs .

 ( for further information , see the discussion of the aci in the "southamerica" section above. ) .

military assistance is provided by the state department through the foreign militaryfinancing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training program ( imet ) ,although both are managed by the defense department .

additional funding is provided from thedepartment of defense for both counternarcotics and military programs .

anti - terrorism assistanceis provided through the state department .

foreign military financing .

fmf provides grantsto foreign nations to purchase u.s. defense equipment , services , and training .

the program'sobjectives are to assist key allies to improve their defense capabilities , to strengthen militaryrelationships between the united states and fmf recipients , and to promote the professionalism ofmilitary forces in friendly countries .

in the western hemisphere , a large portion of fmf is allocatedfor colombia and the andean region with the objective of supporting the efforts of those nations toestablish and strengthen national authority in remote areas that have been controlled by leftistguerrilla organizations , rightist paramilitaries , and narcotics traffickers .

a portion of fmf fundingin fiscal years 2002 and 2003 went for infrastructure protection of oil pipelines in colombia .

theprogram also seeks to improve foreign military capabilities of countries that control land approachesto the united states and the caribbean , which is referred to as the "third border. .

fmf also providesequipment and training for countries in the region that participate in peacekeeping operations .

in fy2006 , fmf funding for programs in latin america amounted to $111.7 million .

therequested fy2007 amount is for $105.3 million .

for fy2006 , congress prohibited fmf toguatemala , and required notification to congress before any funds are allocated to haiti .

international military education and training .

the imet program provides training on a grant basis to students from allied and friendly nations .

its objectives are to improve defense capabilities , develop professional and personal relationshipsbetween u.s. and foreign militaries , and influence these forces in support of democratic governance .

training focuses on the manner in which military organizations function under civilian control,civil - military relations , military justice systems , military doctrine , strategic planning , and operationalprocedures .

the largest imet programs in latin america are for colombia , el salvador , andmexico .

the imet budget for latin america in fy2006 was $13.4 million ; the fy2007 requestis for $12.6 million .

anti - terrorism assistance ( ata ) .

ata isfunded through the state department's nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining , and relatedprograms ( nadr ) .

other programs funded by nadr include nonproliferation , and regionalstability and humanitarian assistance .

the objectives of ata are to build the political will andoperational capacity of partner countries in the fight against global terrorism .

the program providestraining , equipment , and advice to foreign law enforcement organizations .

in the westernhemisphere , colombia has received training and equipment for anti - kidnapping units .

funding hasalso been provided for an assessment of needs study for the tri - border region of brazil , paraguay , andargentina .

the state department proposed using additional funds for training and for theinvestigation of terrorist networks .

for fy2006 , the administration estimates spending $$17.9million in the region ; the fy2007 request is $15.3 million .

 ( for further information , see thediscussion of terrorism in the "additional issues for congress" section above. ) .

latin american countries benefit from a number of multilateral sources of assistance,including the world bank , the united nations and the international fund for agriculturaldevelopment ( ifad ) .

there are also regional organizations that provide various forms of assistance,which are discussed below .

inter - american development bank .

the unitedstates is a major donor to the inter - american development bank , the primary source of multilateralfinancing for economic , social , and institutional development projects in latin america and thecaribbean .

the idb makes near - market rate loans through its ordinary capital ( oc ) account andconcessional loans to poor countries through its fund for special operations ( fso ) .

anothersubsidiary of the idb , the inter - american investment corporation ( iic ) , makes loans and equityinvestments to promote the growth of private enterprises .

since 1993 , the enterprise for theamericas multilateral investment fund ( mif ) , which is administered by idb , has provided bothgrants and investments to businesses and nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) in latin americathat have demonstrated new ways to develop small enterprises , build worker skills , and strengthenenvironmental management .

the fy2006 estimated u.s. contribution was $1.7 million , while the fy2007 estimate is $25 million .

the fy2007 funding will be to replenish the enterprise for theamericas multilateral investment fund .

organization of american states ( oas ) .

theoas is a regional organization of 35 countries in latin america and the caribbean that have pledgedto promote democracy , advance human rights , preserve peace and security , pursue free trade , andtackle difficult problems caused by poverty , drugs , and corruption .

the united states contributesroughly 59% of the regular budget of the oas .

for fy2005 , the u.s. contribution to the oas was$55.7 million .

of the $55.7 million , $45.9 million was for the regular fund , and $9.8 million wasto pay tax reimbursements for u.s. employees of the oas .

the fy2006 request for the oas was$65.9 million .

the increase was to cover the cost of taxes owed for u.s. employees that are likelyto retire in the coming year .

the united states has also made substantial contributions to a few specific funds developedby the oas through foreign operations appropriations .

the oas fund for strengthening democracysupports oas efforts to promote democracy and the inter - american democratic charter throughoutthe region ; the fy2006 u.s. contribution , and the fy2007 request , is $2.5 million .

oasdevelopment assistance programs focus on summit of the americas mandates pertaining toeconomic prosperity , social well being , and environmental health ; ( 8 ) the fy2006 u.s. contributionwas $4.7 million , while the fy2007 request $5.2 million .

the oas de - mining program ( aicma ) works to ensure that the western hemisphere is cleared of all land mine devices ; the fy2006 u.s.contribution was $1.7 million , while the fy2006 request was for $1.8 million .

highly - indebted poor countries ( hipc ) initiative .

the hipc initiative was first launched in 1996 by the imf and the world bank to provide relief toextremely poor countries facing unsustainable amounts of foreign debt .

the hipc initiativeencompasses 41 countries , mostly in africa , but only those that have adopted sound fiscal policiesand a poverty reduction plan may qualify .

as of january 2004 , 27 countries had qualified for at leastpreliminary debt reduction , although only 10 have received full hipc relief .

latin americanbeneficiaries of the hipc initiative include bolivia , guyana , honduras , and nicaragua .

total costsof the hipc initiative are estimated at $51 billion ( nominal terms ) , roughly evenly divided betweenbilateral creditors like the united states and multilateral lenders such as the imf and world bank .

because only about 3% of the hipc debt was owed to the united states , the u.s. financialcommitment has been relatively small in relation to the cost to all creditors .

in fy2005 , funding fordebt restructuring amounts to $99.20 million .

the fy2006 request totaled $99.75 million , andcongress provided $65 million .

for fy2007 , the administration has requested $182.8 million , withmost of this funding going to cover the cost of completing bilateral debt reduction for the democraticrepublic of congo .

trade capacity building .

for fy2006 , congressprovided a total of $522 million from various accounts , including da and esf to assist countries'abilities to improve their trading capacities .

congress directed that $20 million in esf and $20million in da be used to assist the cafta - dr countries with labor and environmental issues .

forfy2007 , the administration included these funds in the esf request .

democracy fund .

for fy2006 , congress createda new account and appropriated $95 million for it .

the program is to increase the effectiveness andoversight of programs that promote democracy , governance , human rights , an independent media,and the rule of law .

the $95 million provided is in addition to other bilateral assistance thatpromotes democracy .

congress also directed that $3 million be provided for forensic assistance tocentral and south america , and $2 million be provided to the national endowment for democracyfor programs in venezuela .

