the collection of fees to support u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) pesticide program activities in the implementation of the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ; 7 u.s.c .

§136-136y ) and related requirements under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ; 21 u.s.c .

§346a ) has been a complex issue for more than 25 years .

authorities to collect fees in addition to appropriated funds have been provided over the years for the intended purposes of accelerating the agency's review efforts , and to fund its increasing statutory responsibilities ( see " a historical overview of pesticide fee authorities " later in this report ) .

current and successive past administrations' proposals to modify and significantly increase pesticide fees have been at odds with the views of a range of stakeholders and controversial in congress .

congress acted to address several issues of concern and to facilitate timely completion of epa's reviews through pesticide fee provisions included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 , enacted january 23 , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) , which came to be known as the pesticide registration improvement act , or pria 1 .

enacted october 9 , 2007 , p.l .

110-94 — the pesticide registration improvement renewal act ( referred to as pria 2 ) — revised and reauthorized the pesticide fee collection provisions effective retroactively to the beginning of fy2008 through fy2012 .

authority to collect specific fees under pria 2 was scheduled to expire at the end of fy2012 , with phase - out authority at reduced levels for certain fees through fy2014 .

the pesticide registration improvement extension act of 2012 ( pria 3 ; p.l .

112-177 ) , enacted september 28 , 2012 , revised and reauthorized through fy2017 pesticide fees established under pria 1 and revised by pria 2 .

additionally , certain fee collections and apportionment are authorized on a reduced basis through fy2019 .

in addition , pria 3 revised review activities subject to fees and the associated timelines for completion of epa review decisions .

pria 3 also amended fifra by eliminating other pre - pria one - time reregistration fee collection authorities established under the 1988 amendments to fifra ( p.l .

100-532 ) .

under pria 1 and pria 2 , collection of these 1988 fees was temporarily superseded , but these provisions were not removed from the law ( see discussion in " key provisions of the pesticide registration improvement extension act of 2012 ( pria 3 ) as enacted " ) .

prior to the passage of pria 3 , the 112 th congress had included provisions to temporarily extend prior pria authorization in introduced legislation ( h.r .

6083 ) to reauthorize the five - year farm bill , and in the continuing appropriations resolution ( cr ) for fy2013 ( p.l .

112-175 ) , enacted september 28 , 2012 , to provide appropriations for federal departments and agencies — including epa — funded under each of the regular appropriations bills through march 27 , 2013 .

pria 3 as enacted superseded the pria provisions included in the fy2013 cr .

general u.s. treasury revenues are used to cover much of the administrative costs of epa's pesticide program ( see table 2 later in this report ) , which implements requirements under fifra and ffdca , as amended .

however , fees also have been imposed on those who manufacture and distribute pesticides in u.s. commerce ( i.e. , "registrants" ) to supplement epa appropriations .

provisions in pria 1 modified existing pesticide fee authority to support specified activities and process improvements in an effort to achieve more timely completion of epa's statutory obligations under the authority of fifra and ffdca .

pria 2 ( p.l .

110-94 ) renewed this authority with some technical revisions , primarily modifications to the fee payment process and an expansion of the range of categories of pesticide registration ( licensing ) activities subject to fees .

pria 3 ( p.l .

112-177 ) , enacted september 28 , 2012 , modifies and expands on provisions included in pria 2 .

in march 2013 , epa released its most recent annual pria progress report , implementing the pesticide registration improvem ent act - fiscal year 201 2 ( or epa's fy2012 pria implementation report ) .

the annual report provides information about the registration process , including the status of its registration , reregistration , and registration review decisions and related activities , as well as epa's efforts to improve these processes during fy2012 .

epa reported the completion of 1,574 registration decisions subject to pria during fy2012 , compared with 1,544 decisions during fy2011 .

table 3 later in this report presents the number of completed pria registration decision / actions by pesticide type as reported by epa for each of the fiscal years fy2004 through fy2012 .

the following sections of this report provide a brief background of federal authority regarding pesticide fees , synopsis of the key elements and revisions reflected in pria 3 , historical overview of pesticide fee collection authorities ( table a - 1 in the appendix presents a historical chronology ) and associated issues , summary of the amount of fee revenues collected over time and recent fiscal years' appropriations , and epa's registration and reregistration review activities since enactment of pria 1 .

for a more complete overview of the federal pesticide laws , refer to crs report rl31921 , pesticide law: a summary of the statutes , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

fifra is a licensing statute that requires epa to register pesticide products before they can be sold , used , and distributed within the united states .

epa evaluates proposed pesticide registrations under a set of science - based safety standards .

before a registration can be granted for a "food use" pesticide , ffdca requires that a tolerance ( the maximum amount of pesticide residue permitted in or on food and feed ) or tolerance exemption be in place .

epa was also required to reevaluate older , registered pesticides ( i.e. , reregistration ) and to reassess existing tolerances ( i.e. , tolerance reassessment ) to ensure they meet current safety standards .

under the standards introduced by the 1996 amendments to fifra and ffdca ( the food quality protection act , or fqpa ; p.l .

104-170 ) , epa establishes tolerances through rulemaking based on risk assessments and human health criteria to ensure a "reasonable certainty of no harm. .

for pesticides that are not used on food , fifra requires epa to determine whether and under what conditions the proposed pesticide use would present an unreasonable risk to human health or the environment .

congress has amended ffdca and fifra over time to authorize the collection of fees to supplement appropriated funds for these and related pesticide review activities , in part , as a means of accelerating the pace of the agency's activities to meet statutory obligations .

these activities include review of the science when evaluating new pesticide registrations , and the establishment of the maximum residue allowance ( a "tolerance" ) as necessary .

also included is epa's reevaluation of older pesticide registrations and existing tolerances ( i.e. , "tolerance reassessment" ) to ensure they meet current standards for protecting human health and the environment ( see more detailed discussion in the following section of this report ) .

the 1954 amendments to ffdca authorized the collection of fees to provide adequate service for establishing maximum allowable residue levels ( tolerances ) for pesticides on food .

these amendments remain the basis for current "tolerance fee" authority .

in may 1988 , epa promulgated a rule for collecting registration fees under the authority of the independent offices appropriation act ( ioaa ) of 1952 ( 31 u.s.c .

§9701 ) .

shortly after its promulgation , the rule was challenged in court by the chemical specialties manufacturers association , which questioned the appropriateness of the statutory authority cited .

collection of these registration fees , as promulgated in may 1988 , was temporarily suspended through fy1997 by the 1988 amendments to fifra ( p.l .

100-532 section 4[i][6] ) .

the 1988 fifra amendments authorized the collection of a one - time "reregistration fee" for active ingredients and , through fy1997 , annual "maintenance fees" for pesticide registered products in an effort to accelerate reregistration ( review of pesticides registered before 1984 ) .

collecting registration fees as promulgated in may 1988 continued to be prohibited subsequently by the 1996 fifra / ffdca amendments ( fqpa ) and in provisions of annual appropriations bills , including the pria provisions in the fy2004 consolidated appropriations .

in the 1996 amendments to fifra and ffdca ( fqpa ; p.l .

104-170 ) , congress , concerned with the continued pace of reregistration , extended epa's authority to collect the annual maintenance fees through fy2001 .

in addition , in an attempt to provide resources to address increased responsibilities of implementing new safety standards introduced with the 1996 amendments , maintenance fee authority was expanded to allow a portion of the collected revenue to be used to support the reevaluation of "old" existing tolerances ( tolerance reassessment ) .

these pesticide maintenance fees , along with tolerance fees based solely on petitions for establishing new tolerances , were the only pesticide fees collected by epa during the eight years ( fy1996-fy2003 ) prior to the enactment of pria 1 .

 ( a more detailed overview of fee authorities and revenues collected is presented in " a historical overview of pesticide fee authorities ," later in this report. ) .

following the enactment of the 1996 amendments and prior to the enactment of pria 1 , epa proposed modifications to the pesticide fee structure in annual fiscal year budget requests to significantly increase revenues , primarily to obtain supplemental resources to support increased administrative costs associated with implementing the requirements of fqpa .

proposals generally focused on finalizing a 1999 epa proposed rule to substantially revise tolerance fees and on a recommendation that congress discontinue the legislative prohibition on pesticide registration fee authority promulgated in 1988 .

the proposed 1999 regulation to restructure the collection of tolerance fees was met with similar resistance as the may 1988 epa registration fee rule .

industry groups questioned the authority to expand fee collection under ffdca and the lack of a clearly defined schedule of specific agency activities to be supported by fee revenues .

these groups also generally opposed epa's justification for proposing a tenfold increase , requiring retroactive fee payments , and imposing fees for inert ingredients .

congress prohibited promulgation of a tolerance fee rule that was based on the 1999 proposal in epa's fy2000 appropriations ( p.l .

106-377 ) .

similar proposals to increase tolerance fees in epa's annual budget requests from fy2001 to fy2004 were prohibited through appropriations legislation .

pria 1 , enacted in january of 2004 , specifically prohibited collection of any tolerance fees , and temporarily replaced ( essentially prohibited ) "other fee" authority through fy2008 .

despite this prohibition , similar epa proposals to authorize collection of additional tolerance fees and other pesticide fee revenue increases were included in the fy2005 through fy2012 budget requests .

these proposals were not adopted by congress for those fiscal years , and at times , prohibited .

language contained in the fy2005 supplemental appropriations for military funding enacted may 11 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 §6033 ) , specifically banned epa from going forward with rulemaking for collecting pesticide tolerance fees .

pria 2 ( p.l .

110-94 ) , enacted october 9 , 2007 , continued the prohibition of other fee authority through fy2012 .

the president's fy2009 through fy2012 budget requests included similar proposals to allow for the collection of pesticide tolerance fees , as well as proposals for a new fee schedule for registration service fees to increase the overall amount of fee revenue collected , and proposals to raise the current limit for the amount of maintenance fees that can be collected annually .

the president's fy2013 budget request , submitted to congress february 13 , 2012 , did not include similar proposals for supplemental fees .

instead the fy2013 request acknowledged the need for reauthorization of the current fees at increased levels to cover a greater portion of relevant program operating costs .

as discussed in more detail below , pria 3 extends fee collection authority under pria 1 and pria 2 , with modifications , through fy2017 , with phase - out authority at reduced levels for certain fees through fy2019 , but also amends fifra by eliminating historical reregistration fee collection provisions established under the 1988 fifra amendments ( p.l .

100-532 ) .

the funding mechanism in pria — using fee revenue to support a particular program to ensure agency performance — has been used in other regulatory programs .

for example , the clean air act ( caa ) title v permitting program operates in part using fees collected from permit applicants and permittees , based on authority for epa and state agencies to collect "... all reasonable ( direct and indirect ) costs required to develop and administer the permit program" ( caa §502 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( b ) ( 1 ) ; see crs report rl33632 , clean air permitting: implementation and issues , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

as with pria , this provision was based in part on a desire to expedite agency actions ( i.e. , pesticide registration decisions and air permits ) .

a complete comparative examination of similar policy options is beyond the scope of this report .

the following section summarizes the key provisions of pria 3 as enacted .

enacted september 28 , 2012 , the pesticide registration improvement extension act of 2012 ( pria 3 ; p.l .

112-177 , s. 3552 ) — effective october 1 , 2012 — amended and reauthorized provisions of the pesticide registration improvement renewal act ( pria 2 ; p.l .

110-94 ) and the pesticide registration improvement act ( pria 1 ; p.l .

108-199 ) through fy2017 .

pria 1 had amended fifra and modified the framework for collecting fees to enhance and accelerate epa review of pesticide registration and reregistration applications , thereby temporarily superseding the epa may 1988 registration fee rule and suspending tolerance fee authority under ffdca through fy2008 .

as enacted in in january 2004 , pria 1 seemed to effectively address many of the issues associated with previously proposed modifications of pesticide fees , and received the support of a large cross section of stakeholders , including organizations representing manufacturers and formulators , agricultural producers , and environmental and public health advocacy groups .

these stakeholders jointly favored the acceleration of epa's decision process , the simplification of the fee authority , and the detailed schedule of activities determining the allocation of fees collected .

the changes reflected in pria 2 generally continued to receive similar support from various groups .

pria 2 amended certain pria 1 provisions under fifra , most notably the adding 40 new registration application categories and clarifying existing categories , and modifying small business fee waiver options .

pria 2 also extended the baseline appropriations protection for epa's office of pesticide programs ( opp ) ; if congressional appropriations fell below the amount allocated to opp for fy2002 by more than 3% , authority to assess fees would be suspended under pria 1 and pria 2 .

noting several key advancements attributed to pria 1 and pria 2 , in july 2012 an array of stakeholders urged reauthorization of pria with modifications to further enhance the pesticide registration processes .

pria 3 further revised the schedule of registration application categories ( including the addition of new categories and subcategories of existing categories ) , clarified existing categories , and revised associated fee amounts and review / process decision completion deadlines .

the schedule of fee categories and decision timelines was also codified in law .

previous fee schedules for pria 1 and pria 2 were as defined in the congressional record .

pria 3 also added authority for the epa administrator to provide a percentage reduction of maintenance fees for certain small business entities , and added new provisions for the enhancement of pesticide decision information tracking systems and for conducting preliminary screening of the content of a registration applications .

unlike pria 1 and pria 2 , which had temporarily suspended the one - time reregistration fee provisions established under the 1988 fifra amendments , pria 3 amended fifra by eliminating these provisions .

pria 3 also extended the baseline budget protection for the epa's opp ; however , the minimum baseline for annual congressional appropriations is set at the amount allocated to opp for fy2012 , compared to no less than 3% of the fy2002 level as had been previously defined in pria 1 and pria 2 .

in addition , pria 3 extended authority to collect "maintenance fees" through fy2017 ; renewed authority for epa to collect "registration service fees" through fy2017 , and on a phased out schedule at reduced levels in fy2018 and fy2019 .

 ( the phased out schedule applies only to registration fees not maintenance fees ) ; continued the authority for use of funds in the reregistration and expedited processing fund to include use for "registration review" as stipulated initially under pria 2 ; pesticide registrations are to be reviewed every 15 years , as established under pria 2 ; continued to require epa to identify reforms to the pesticide registration process to substantially reduce the decision review periods , and to provide annual reports summarizing activities and process improvements ; and added a new requirement for epa to provide a report analyzing the impact of maintenance fees on small businesses to the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee in agriculture , nutrition , and forestry by october 1 , 2016 .

the key pria 3 provisions and changes are summarized in more detail in the following sections .

various changes and proposed changes to pesticide fee authority led up to the 2004 enactment of pria 1 .

fees collected by epa over time to support the pesticide program have included tolerance fees , registration fees , reregistration fees , and maintenance fees .

between 1996 and 2004 , epa collected tolerance fees , primarily for the establishment of pesticide residue limits ( tolerances ) on food , and maintenance fees , primarily for reregistration reviews and reassessment of existing tolerances .

historical appropriated funding and fee revenues for the pesticide program activities provide context for the discussion of fees imposed on pesticide registrants to supplement epa - appropriated revenues .

the two sections that follow provide more detailed information regarding pesticide fee revenues over time and funds appropriated for epa pesticide program activities .

all registration service fees received by epa are deposited in the pesticide registration fund within the u.s. treasury as established under pria .

epa uses registration service fees to supplement appropriations to develop improved registration review processes , hire new staff , and cover costs associated with the review and decision making associated with registration applications for which fees have been paid , under the deadlines identified in pria .

portions of registration service fees are also used to enhance scientific and regulatory activities related to worker ( farm ) protection and the pesticide safety education program ( psep ) .

maintenance fees collected by the agency are placed in the reregistration and expedited processing fund .

the agency has used the maintenance fees to supplement appropriations primarily for reregistration ( i.e. , a reevaluation of pesticides registered prior to 1984 ) and tolerance review activities , and more recently for registration review .

portions of the revenue from this fund are used to carry out new inert ingredient reviews and to process fast track amendments and new products under fifra section 3 ( c ) ( 3 ) ( b ) .

pria 1 had modified fifra with regard to completion deadlines for reregistration decisions .

all reregistrations , other than those requiring tolerances for use on food , were to be completed no later than october 3 , 2008 .

reregistration of active ingredients that require tolerances or exemptions from tolerances were to be completed by august 3 , 2006 , as required by ffdca ( section 408[q][1][c] ) for tolerance reassessment .

epa completed reregistration decisions by september 2008 ; however , following the completion of a reregistration decision for a pesticide active ingredient , epa must reregister the individual end - use products that contain a pesticide ingredient that has been declared eligible for reregistration .

epa has initiated this process , and expects completion by 2014 .

in anticipation of completing the pesticide reregistration and tolerance reassessment programs , epa published a final rule for the "registration review" program in the federal register on august 9 , 2006 .

through this registration review program , epa plans to review pesticides registered as of october 2007 approximately every 15 years , consistent with fifra as amended .

the agency began implementing the registration review program at the start of fy2007 .

a key provision of pria 1 , pria 2 , and pria 3 in conjunction with the fee revenues is the requirement for epa to identify reforms to its pesticide registration and registration review processes with the intent of reducing the agency's decision review times .

epa has reported implementation of a number of process improvements to monitor workload and ensure that pria due dates are being met .

as required initially under pria 1 , epa released annual pria implementation reports describing these process improvements and other efforts and accomplishments .

epa released its inaugural report in march 2005 summarizing its first nine months of progress implementing the provisions of pria from january 23 , 2004 , through september 30 , 2004 , and subsequent reports have been annually released in 2006 through 2012 .

epa's timely completion of the statutory registration , reregistration , and tolerance assessment requirements for pesticides has been an ongoing concern for some members of congress , the agency itself , industry , and public interest groups .

attempts historically , prior to the enactment of pria 1 , to defray the increased costs of administering the pesticide program by modifying existing pesticide fee requirements through regulation and proposed legislation have been viewed by some as not being entirely successful .

the pesticide registration improvement extension act of 2012 ( pria 3 ; p.l .

112-177 ) , enacted september 28 , 2012 , reauthorized and revised fee provisions under the pesticide registration improvement renewal act ( pria 2 ; p.l .

110-94 ) , enacted october 9 , 2007 , and its predecessor , the pesticide registration improvement act ( pria 1 ; p.l .

108-199 ) , enacted january 23 , 2004 .

under pria 3 , authority to collect registration service fees and maintenance fees ends at the end of fy2017 , with phase - out authority at reduced levels for registration service fees through fy2019 ( reduced by 40% during fy2018 and 70% during fy2019 ) .

pria 3 and its predecessors , pria 1 and pria 2 , were enacted to help address several key issues and concerns regarding delays and complexities associated with epa's pesticide registration reviews .

most notably , epa has reported that the pria 1 and pria 2 provisions requiring specific decision process and schedule reforms , in conjunction with increased fee revenues , have led to more timely completion of certain registration applications and the completion of the reregistration reviews .

a coalition of industry stakeholder organizations and health and environmental advocacy groups confirm that advancements have been made and supported the enactment of pria 3 .

the prescriptive detailed schedules for the service fees included in pria 1 and pria 2 , and as modified in pria 3 , are widely deemed more commensurate with the specific epa actions required than previous legislative provisions related to registration and tolerance fees , which were more generic .

many have noted that the implementation of pria 1 and pria 2 resulted in improved efficiencies in the overall process , including the completion of reregistration decisions and the reevaluation of older tolerances of those pesticides registered prior to 1988 .

it is anticipated that pria 3's even more prescriptive fee schedule , including additional and consolidated fee categories and subcategories , will likely result in further efficiencies of the processing of registration applications .

epa , and some members of congress and stakeholders also expect that other refinements to certain pesticide fee provisions in pria 3 will potentially provide further stability for resource planning purposes that had been lacking historically prior to pria 1 .

epa has reported progress in developing process improvements and meeting shortened registration review deadlines during pria 1 ( pria 1 became effective march 23 , 2004 ) and that refinements and improvements continued under pria 2 .

sustained improvement in the efficiency of epa's decision - making process with the enactment of pria 3 is dependent on the agency's ability to continue to establish and effectively implement reforms while maintaining the protection of human health and the environment required by the statutes .

epa continuously develops and refines its scientific protocols and guidelines with input from stakeholders and the scientific community through various public forums .

however , as past experience has shown , this can be a complex and time - consuming undertaking , affected by uncertainties and advances in technology that could enhance or inhibit further acceleration of the pesticide review process .

 table a - 1 below provides a time line of key pesticide fee authorities and implementation regulations ; the following sections provide a brief description of these actions .

