since the beginning of the program , social security taxes have been levied on covered earnings up to a maximum level set each year , referred to as the taxable earnings base .

in 2018 , an estimated 175 million workers paid into social security via federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) taxes or self - employment contributions act ( seca ) taxes , or both , on their wages and net self - employment income .

both employers and employees contribute taxes at the fica rate , and seca taxes are paid by the self - employed .

both taxes have three components: old age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) , disability insurance ( di ) , and the hospital insurance ( hi ) part of medicare .

the oasdi ( combined oasi and di ) tax is levied on earnings up to $128,400 in 2018 .

the hi tax is levied on all earnings .

by law , the commissioner of social security is required to raise the base whenever an automatic benefit increase — a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) — is granted to social security recipients , assuming wages have risen ( eg , there was no increase in the base from 2015 to 2016 due to no cola increase for 2016 ) .

the taxable earnings base limits the amount of wages or self - employment income used to calculate contributions to social security .

unlike income taxes , workers who have earnings above the limit , whether they earn $200,000 or $2 million , pay the same dollar amount in social security payroll taxes .

under the 2018 limit of $128,400 , the maximum amount a wage and salary worker directly contributes to social security is $7,961 ( the worker's employer contributes an equal amount ) , whereas a self - employed individual contributes a maximum of $15,922 .

the taxable earnings base also limits the annual amount of earnings that are used in benefit calculations and thus sets a ceiling on the amount social security pays in benefits .

if a worker earned at or above the earnings base for his or her entire career and retired in 2018 at the full retirement age , his or her annual benefit would be $33,456 ( $2,788 per month ) .

however , very few americans receive the maximum benefit as it is rare to have had such consistently high earnings over a lifetime .

according to the social security administration's ( ssa's ) statistics , a small share of workers earn above the taxable earnings base each year .

in 2015 , 6.3% of workers ( 10.5 million individuals ) earned more than the taxable earnings base ( table 2 ) .

most of the individuals earning above the base were men ( 7.8 million individuals , or roughly 74% of the total ) .

approximately 9% of all male workers and 3% of all female workers had earnings above the maximum .

most individuals with earnings above the base were wage and salary workers ( roughly 94% of the total ) .

some 7.3% of individuals who earned above the base were self - employed .

a relatively small group of workers who earned above the base ( 156,000 individuals or 1.5% of the total ) have earnings in both wage and salary employment and self - employment .

in 1935 , the designers of social security , president franklin roosevelt's committee on economic security , did not recommend a maximum level of taxable earnings in their plan , and the draft bill that president roosevelt sent to congress did not include one .

the bill emphasized who was to be covered by the system , not how much wages should be taxed .

being in the midst of the depression , the administration's attention was on the large number of aged people living in poverty .

the committee's goal in proposing a social security program was to complement public assistance measures ( old - age assistance ) in its plan .

the plan offered immediate cash aid to the aged poor and created an earnings - replacement system intended to lessen the need for welfare benefits in the long run .

it was recognized that the new system would not be sufficient to provide full income in retirement , but would provide a "core" benefit as a floor of protection against poverty .

not concerned about high - income retirees , the administration's proposal exempted nonmanual workers earning $250 or more a month from coverage .

manual workers were to be covered regardless of their earnings , but few had earnings above this level .

it was the social security bill reported by the house ways and means committee that clearly established a maximum taxable amount , which the bill set at $3,000 per year , equivalent to 12 months of earnings at the $250 level .

in addition , the committee dropped the exemption for nonmanual workers with high earnings .

the committee's report and floor statements made at the time give no clear record as to the reasoning for the taxable limit , but the elimination of the high - earner exemption would include high - income individuals in the system ( increasing income to the system that could be redistributed to low - and middle - income workers ) and attain as much program coverage of the workforce as possible .

in addition , the administration's original exemption would be erratic for workers whose earnings fluctuated above and below the $250 monthly threshold .

although tax policy concerns were raised in later years , with a higher base preferred by those seeking a more proportional tax system , there was little , if any , serious attention given to eliminating the base entirely .

in the late 1940s and early 1950s , and to a lesser extent later on , the major arguments concerned the base's size and how it affected the development of social security .

a larger base meant that more earnings would be credited to a person's social security record and would lead to higher benefits ( because benefits are based on a worker's contribution into the system via taxes on earnings ) .

proponents argued that the base needed to be raised to reflect wage or price growth so that the benefits of recipients , in particular moderate and well - to - do recipients , would not erode over time , thereby preserving their support for the system .

critics argued that this would increase benefits for people who could save on their own while making saving by private means more difficult .

prior to 1974 , increases to the taxable earnings bases were specifically legislated on an ad hoc basis .

however , a period of large increases to the cost of living ( eg , 5.5% in 1970 ) led to concerns that such a rise in the cost of living would reduce the purchasing power of social security benefits , and that ad hoc increases might be insufficient .

president nixon had recommended automatic adjustments to benefits in 1969 , but efforts in 1970 and 1971 to incorporate automatic adjustments failed .

this changed in 1972 , when h.r .

1 ( which would eventually become the social security amendments of 1972 ; p.l .

92-603 ) gained traction .

the bill included a cola provision , but this provision , along with some others , split off from the main text , and was enacted under p.l .

92-336 instead .

p.l .

92-336 included procedures that increased the taxable earnings base automatically as a means of financing colas for social security recipients , though the adjustment to the taxable earnings base was tied to average wages .

the social security amendments of 1977 ( p.l .

95-216 ) gradually increased the base beyond what resulted from the automatic - adjustment procedures from 1978 to 1981 , such that in 1981 , the taxable earnings base was $7,500 higher than the "old - law" base .

this was done as a means of raising revenue to help shore up the program's ailing financial condition and was intended to achieve a base under which 90% of all covered payroll would be subject to tax ( to match the original 1935 act ) ; increases to the taxable earnings base after 1981 returned to automatic - adjustments procedures .

medicare was enacted in 1965 , under the social security amendments of 1965 ( p.l .

89-97 ) , with the hi portion of the program financed by payroll taxes .

the hi tax was first levied in 1966 at a rate of 0.35% ( on employee and employer , each ) and the maximum taxable amount was set at the same level as social security's .

the hi rate was subsequently raised periodically ( reaching its current level of 1.45% in 1986 ) to meet the financing needs of the program .

however , its base continued to be the same as social security's through 1990 .

then , to reduce federal budget deficits , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) raised the hi base to $125,000 .

the hi base then rose automatically to $135,000 over the next two years .

in 1993 , as part of his plan to reduce budget deficits , president clinton proposed that the hi base be eliminated entirely ; with the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) , the hi base was removed .

as there is no maximum taxable earnings amount in medicare , medicare financing will not be discussed further in this report .

the portion of social security covered earnings that is subject to the payroll tax has fluctuated over time ( figure 1 ) .

when the program began in 1937 , taxable earnings represented 92% of covered earnings ( table a - 1 ) .

by 1965 , this ratio had dropped to a low of 71% .

prior to 1972 , the taxable earnings base was updated periodically by congress , which contributed to its dramatic fluctuations in the 1950s and 1960s .

between 1972 and 1977 , and since 1982 , the base has been indexed to the increase in wages in the economy , which has reduced the volatility somewhat .

since the 1980s , the share of covered workers below the taxable earnings base has remained relatively stable at roughly 94% .

however , the share of covered earnings that is taxed has fallen from 90% of all earnings in 1982 to 83% in 2016 .

the large declines in the percentage of covered earnings since the 1980s were mainly due to salaries for top earners growing faster than the pay of workers below the cap , which means top earners had wage growth that was higher than average .

the cumulative growth in real wages from 1979 to 2017 was 34.3% for the 90 th percentile ( high - wage earners ) , 6.1% for the 50 th percentile ( middle - wage earners ) , and 1.2% for the 10 th percentile ( low - wage earners ) .

because increases in the taxable maximum are based on average wage growth , salaries for top earners increased faster than the taxable maximum .

this increasing gap between top earner salaries and the taxable maximum has led to more earnings that are not covered by payroll taxes ( because these earnings are above the taxable maximum ) , and thus a decline in the percentage of aggregate covered earnings that is below the taxable maximum .

the taxable earnings base is increased annually by the average growth in wages , so the share of the population below the cap is expected to remain relatively stable over time .

however , because of increasing earnings inequality , the share of payroll that is taxed is expected to decline even further ( see " the taxable earnings base over time " ) .

under the intermediate assumptions in the 2018 trustees report , the percentage of covered earnings that is taxable is assumed to decline to 82.5% for 2027 .

however , the trustees report assumes the levels will remain stable thereafter .

raising or removing the taxable earnings base could reduce the long - term social security deficit ( i.e. , improve the long - term solvency of the program ) .

the full impact of the policy change would depend on whether the wages above the maximum would also be counted toward benefits .

raising or eliminating the taxable earnings base while maintaining the current benefit structure , where benefits are calculated on the full contribution base , would lead to higher monthly social security checks for individuals who earned more than the current taxable earnings base during their careers .

these higher benefit payments would lead to greater program outlays , although these expenditures would be more than offset by greater tax revenues .

although the solvency impact would be improved to a greater degree if the cap on taxes were eliminated and the cap on benefits were retained , the traditional link between contributions and benefits would be broken .

rather than eliminate the taxable earnings base , policymakers could set it to cover a constant share of aggregate earnings .

as described previously , the portion of social security covered earnings subject to the payroll tax has fluctuated since its inception .

larger increases in the earnings of the highest - paid individuals relative to other workers have led to a decline in the share of social security covered earnings that is taxed .

the proportion of earnings that is taxed is projected to continue to fall .

maintaining a consistent tax base would increase revenue and help to improve the system's solvency .

some have proposed raising the taxable earnings base to consistently tax 90% of aggregate covered earnings , restoring it to roughly the level of coverage in 1982 when congress last undertook a major reform effort to address social security solvency .

ssa and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) have also used this benchmark to analyze the impact of raising the base on the social security trust funds and the budget .

the following sections examine the impact of raising or eliminating the taxable earnings base on individuals' taxes and benefits , on the social security trust funds , on federal revenue , and on workers' and employers' behavior .

some arguments for and against changing the social security taxable earnings base follow .

the major critique about the social security base is that it creates a regressive tax structure above maximum taxable earnings .

workers earning less than the base have a greater proportion of earnings taxed than workers whose earnings exceed it .

in 2018 , someone with annual earnings of $30,000 pays $1,860 in social security taxes , or 6.2% of his or her earnings ( ignoring the employer share of the tax ) .

however , because the tax is levied on only the first $128,400 in earnings , someone earning $200,000 a year pays $7,961 , or 3.98% of his or her earnings .

supporters of changing the wage base point out that only 6% of workers have earnings above the base in any given year .

however , because of rising earnings inequality , the proportion of their earnings that escapes taxation has risen from 12% to 17% since 1991 ( see table a - 1 ) .

they therefore contend that the current tax structure favors a small group of the higher - earning workers in society .

supporters argue that subjecting a larger percentage of earnings to the payroll tax would also adjust for the higher life expectancies of high earners .

on average , people with more education and higher earnings live longer than those with less education and lower earnings , and this difference has been growing over time .

the impact on the social security program is that higher - earning individuals receive benefits for more years over their lifetimes , making the system less progressive .

supporters claim that raising the taxable earnings base would make a reasonable adjustment for the faster - than - average life expectancy gains among high earners .

among supporters of changing the current base , there is disagreement regarding how high the base should be raised or if other changes should be made to tax income above the base .

several proposals would not eliminate the base entirely but raise it to cover 90% of taxable wages , restoring the level that was set in the 1977 amendments to the social security act .

other options would be to remove the taxable maximum , but lower the tax rate on those higher earnings or tax employers and employees at different rates above the current base ( see various proposals in table 3 ) .

others have called for broadening the sources of income that are taxed beyond earnings .

proponents of these ideas argue that they would close a significant portion of social security's long - range deficit without subjecting upper - middle - income individuals to sizeable increases in their marginal tax rates .

those who support keeping the base as it is point out that although the structure of the payroll tax may be regressive above the taxable maximum , it might be partially offset by the progressive calculation of benefits .

supporters further maintain that its critics fail to take into account the effect of other tax and transfer programs targeted to low earners .

they point out that mitigating the social security tax bite was part of the motivation for creating the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , which provides an income tax credit on earnings up to $54,884 in 2018 for married workers with three or more children ( up to $20,950 for married workers without children ) .

they also point out that low - income families receive a greater share of government transfer payments that are not subject to social security payroll taxes .

they argue that the combination of these factors mitigates the flat - rate nature of the tax at lower earnings levels , and that for most other workers the tax is proportional ( because it is flat rate ) .

it is only at the upper end of the income spectrum that it takes on a regressive appearance .

critics also argue that raising the cap will serve as a disincentive to work and could serve as a drain on the economy .

because additional work effort would cause lifetime payroll taxes to increase by more than lifetime social security benefits , opponents claim that workers faced with lower marginal rewards for work would either reduce their hours or avoid the tax by changing the form of their compensation .

there are additional arguments against eliminating the taxable earnings base .

for example , maintaining a base makes social security seem less like ordinary income taxation .

another argument is that high earners would pay more payroll taxes and receive more benefits after removing the base , but the larger benefits that high earners would receive would represent a poor return for the higher taxes they would pay .

some question the wisdom of paying large benefits to higher - income people , arguing that the purpose of the program is to provide a floor of protection for retirement , not large benefits for those who can save on their own .

these people contend that eliminating the base would raise public cynicism about a publicly financed system that pays enormous benefits to people who already are well off .

