on december 8 , 2004 , the president signed p.l .

108-447 , a consolidated appropriations actfor fy2005 .

the act includes a provision amending charter school - related language included in thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy2005 , p.l .

108-335 , which was signed by thepresident on october 18 , 2004 .

p.l .

108-335 includes $560 million in special federalpayments and approves the district's $6.3 billion operating budget for fy2005 .

on october 6 , 2004,by unanimous consent the senate approved the conference committee version of h.r .

4850 , the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2005 .

the house passed the act by a voteof 377 to 36 on the same day .

on september 22 , 2004 , the full senate passed by voice vote thesenate version of h.r .

4850 after substituting the language of s. 2826 .

onjuly 20 , 2004 , the house approved h.r .

4850 by a vote of 371-54 .

on september 7 , 2004,the president transmitted to congress the district of columbia budget request for fy2005 , whichwas approved on may 14 , 2004 , by the district of columbia city council following extensivenegotiations with the mayor over proposed budget cuts .

table 1 .

status of district of columbia appropriations , fy2005 , p.l .

108-33 .

whether to continue a needle exchange program funded with federal or districtfunds was one of several key policy issues that congress considered in reviewing thedistrict's appropriations for fy2005 .

the controversy surrounding funding a needleexchange program touches on issues of home rule , public health policy , andgovernment sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs .

proponents of aneedle exchange program contend that such programs reduce the spread of hivamong illegal drug users by reducing the incidence of shared needles .

opponents ofthese efforts contend that such programs amount to the government sanctioningillegal drugs by supplying drug - addicted persons with the tools to use them .

inaddition , they contend that public health concerns raised about the spread of aidsand hiv through shared contaminated needles should be addressed through drugtreatment and rehabilitation programs .

another view in the debate focuses on theissue of home rule and the city's ability to use local funds to institute such programsfree from congressional actions .

the prohibition on the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchangeprogram was first approved by congress as section 170 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 .

the 1999 act did allow privatefunding of needle exchange programs .

the district of columbia appropriations actfor fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , continued the prohibition on the use of federal anddistrict funds for a needle exchange program ; it also restricted the location ofprivately funded needle exchange activities .

section 150 of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2001 made it unlawful to distribute any needle or syringefor the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug in any area in the city that is within1,000 feet of a public elementary or secondary school , including any public charterschool .

the provision was deleted during congressional consideration and passageof the district of columbia appropriations act of fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 .

the act alsoincluded a provision that allows the use of private funds for a needle exchangeprogram , but it prohibits the use of both district and federal funds for such activities .

at present , one entity , prevention works , a private nonprofit aids awareness andeducation program , operates a privately funded needle exchange program .

thefy2002 district of columbia appropriations act requires such entities to track andaccount for the use of public and private funds .

during consideration of the fy2004 district of columbia appropriations act , district officials unsuccessfully sought to lift the prohibition on the use of districtfunds for needle exchange programs .

a senate provision , which was not adopted , proposed prohibiting only the use of federal funds for a needle exchange programand allowing the use of district funds .

the house and final conference versions ofthe fy2004 allowed the use of private funds for needle exchange programs andrequired private and public entities that receive federal or district funds in supportof other activities or programs to account for the needle exchange funds separately .

the president's budget proposal for fy2005 included a provision that wouldcontinue to prohibit the use of district and federal funds in support of a needleexchange program .

the house version of the district of columbia appropriationsact for fy2005 , h.r .

4850 , included a provision that would retain thecurrent law prohibiting the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchangeprogram .

the senate version of the bill would have allowed district , but not federal,funds to be used for such a program .

the conference version of the act prohibits theuse of district and federal funds for a needle exchange program .

the city's medical marijuana initiative is another issue that engenderscontroversy .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1999 , p.l.105-277 , included a provision that prohibited the city from counting ballots of avoter - approved initiative that would have allowed the medical use of marijuana toassist persons suffering debilitating health conditions and diseases , including cancerand hiv infection .

congress's power to prohibit the counting of a medical marijuana ballot initiativewas challenged in a suit filed by the d.c. chapter of the american civil libertiesunion ( aclu ) .

on september 17 , 1999 , district court judge richard roberts ruledthat congress , despite its legislative responsibility for the district under article i,section 8 , of the constitution , did not possess the power to stifle or prevent politicalspeech , which included the ballot initiative .

 ( 7 ) this rulingallowed the city to tally the votes on the november 1998 ballot initiative .

to preventthe implementation of the initiative , congress had 30 days to pass a resolution ofdisapproval from the date the medical marijuana ballot initiative ( initiative 59 ) wascertified by the board of elections and ethics .

language prohibiting theimplementation of the initiative was included in p.l .

106-113 , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy2000 .

opponents of the provision contend thatsuch congressional actions undercut the concept of home rule .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , includeda provision that continued to prohibit the district government from implementing theinitiative .

congress's power to block the implementation of the initiative was againchallenged in the courts .

on december 18 , 2001 , two groups , the marijuana policyproject and medical marijuana initiative committee , filed suit in u.s. district court,seeking injunctive relief in an effort to put another medical marijuana initiative onthe november 2002 ballot .

the district's board of elections and ethics ruled thata congressional rider that has been included in the general provisions of each districtappropriations act since 1998 prohibits it from using public funds to do preliminarywork that would put the initiative on the ballot .

on march 28 , 2002 , a u.s. district court judge ruled that the congressional banon the use of public funds to put such a ballot initiative before the voters wasunconstitutional .

 ( 8 ) the judge stated that the effect of the amendmentwas to restrict the plaintiff's first amendment rights to engage in political speech .

the decision was appealed by the justice department and on september 19 , 2002,the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit reversed the ruling ofthe lower court without comment .

the appeals court issued its ruling on september19 , 2002 , which was the deadline for printing ballots of the november 2002 generalelection .

the president's budget proposal for fy2005 would have continued to prohibitthe implementation of the medical marijuana ballot initiative , while the districtbudget for fy2005 does not include language related to the implementation of theinitiative .

the house , senate , and conference versions of the district of columbiaappropriations act for fy2005 , h.r .

4850 , included a provision thatcontinues to prohibit the implementation of the medical marijuana ballot initiativeand the decriminalization of marijuana possession for medical use .

the public funding of abortion services for district of columbia residents is aperennial issue debated by congress during its annual deliberations on district ofcolumbia appropriations .

district officials cite the prohibition on the use of districtfunds as another example of congressional intrusion into local matters .

the districtof columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 , included a provisionprohibiting the use of federal or district funds for abortion services , except in caseswhere the life of the mother is endangered , or the pregnancy is the result of rape orincest .

this prohibition has been in place since 1995 , when congress approved thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 .

since 1979 , with the passage of the district of columbia appropriations act of1980 , p.l .

96-93 , congress has placed some limitation or prohibition on the use ofpublic funds for abortion services for district residents .

from 1979 to 1988,congress restricted the use of federal funds for abortion services to cases where themother's life would be endangered , or the pregnancy resulted from rape and incest .

the district was free to use district funds for abortion services .

when congress passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1989 , p.l .

100-462 , it restricted the use of district and federal funds for abortion servicesto cases where the mother's life would be endangered if the pregnancy were taken toterm .

the inclusion of district funds , and the elimination of rape or incest asqualifying conditions for public funding of abortion services , was endorsed bypresident reagan , who threatened to veto the district's appropriations act if theabortion provision was not modified .

 ( 9 ) in 1989 , president bush twice vetoed the district'sfy1990 appropriations act over the abortion issue .

he signed p.l .

101-168 afterinsisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenues topay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life wasendangered .

 ( 10 ) the district successfully sought the removal of the provision limiting districtfunding of abortion services when congress considered and passed the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l .

103-127 .

the fy1994 act alsoreinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the public fundingof abortion services .

the district's success was short - lived , however , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest .

the final version of the fy2004appropriations for the district of columbia included a provision that continued to restrict the use of district and federal funds for abortion services except in cases ofrape or incest , or when the life of the mother is endangered .

the district's fy2005 appropriation bill , as approved by the house , the senate,and the conference committee , continues to prohibit the use of both district andfederal funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or whenpregnancy endangers the health of the mother .

p.l .

107-96 includes a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the useof district funds to implement its health care benefits expansion act .

 ( 11 ) theprovision permits unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples to register asdomestic partners .

under the health care benefits expansion act , which wasapproved by the city's elected leadership in 1992 , an unmarried person who registersas a domestic partner of a district employee hired after 1987 may be added to thedistrict employee's health care policy for an additional charge .

the act had not beenimplemented until 2002 because of a congressional prohibition first included in thegeneral provisions of district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 .

the city's health care benefits expansion act allows two cohabiting,unmarried , and unrelated individuals to register as domestic partners with the districtfor the purpose of securing certain health and family related benefits , includinghospital visiting rights .

under the law , district government employees enrolled inthe district of columbia employees health benefits program are allowed to purchasefamily health insurance coverage that would cover the employee's family members,including domestic partners .

in addition , a district employee registered as a domesticpartner may assume the additional cost of the family health insurance coverage forfamily members , which would include the employee's domestic partner .

opponents of the act maintain that it devalues the institution of marriage , andthat the act grants unmarried gay and heterosexual couples the same standing asmarried couples .

congressional proponents of lifting the ban on the use of districtfunds argue that the implementation of the act is a question of home rule and localautonomy .

supporters of health care benefits for domestic partners note that as of2003 , 10 states , 175 local governments , and more than 7,000 companies , colleges,and universities offered health insurance benefits to domestic partners .

 ( 12 ) the house , senate , and final conference versions of h.r .

4850 ,consistent with the provision first included in the district's fy2002 appropriationsact , include a general provision that allows the use of district funds to administer theprogram .

there has been some speculation in the press that the issue of gay marriagewould find its way into consideration of the city's fy2005 appropriations .

 ( 13 ) at leastone bill , h.r .

4773 , would define marriage in the district of columbiaas a union between a man and a woman .

during the 108th congress , legislation was introduced in the house ( h.r .

3193 ) and the senate ( s. 1414 ) that would haverepealed a number of long - standing gun control measures passed by the district ofcolumbia's city council .

the house and senate bills would have prohibited thedistrict government from passing any laws or regulations that exceed federal guncontrol measures or that would discourage , restrict , or prohibit private ownership anduse of firearms .

both bills would also have repealed district laws that: ban the sale and possession of handguns and semiautomaticweapons ; prohibit the sale or possession of firearms except for threespecific types of the firearms ( sawed - off shotguns , machine guns , and short - barreledrifles ) ; limit the possession of handgun ammunition ; and require all firearm registrants , except law enforcementpersonnel , to keep any firearm unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lockor similar device unless the firearm is kept at the registrant's place of business , or isbeing used for lawful recreational purposes within the district ofcolumbia .

in addition , the bills would have repealed provisions governing the registration offirearms in the district , including those requiring gun registration applicants to bephotographed and fingerprinted and to meet certain age thresholds .

the bills wouldhave also repealed district laws prohibiting the possession of a firearm by personswho have been judged to be mentally or physically unfit , persons who have beenconvicted or are under indictment for the commission of a violent crime , and personsconvicted of drug dealing .

the bills were referred to the house committee on government reform and thesenate government affairs committee .

neither the house nor the senatecommittees of jurisdiction held hearings or took any action on the respective bills .

according to press reports , it was anticipated that senator craig would include thelanguage of s. 1414 , which was introduced by senator hatch , in thedistrict's fy2005 appropriations measure .

 ( 14 ) senatorcraig noted that he would have offered his amendment only if he had sufficient votesin committee to secure its passage .

the bill , which was reported by the senateappropriations committee on september 21 , 2004 and approved by the senate onseptember 22 , 2004 , did not include any language repealing the city's gun controllaws .

representative souder's bill ( h.r .

3193 ) , with 228 cosponsors,was brought to the house floor for a vote on september 29 , 2004 .

the bill passedthe house by a vote of 250 to 171 .

 ( 15 ) the bill was forwarded to the senate forconsideration , but no action was taken .

the district's mayor and its congressional delegate have voiced opposition to therepeal of the city's gun control measures , characterizing the bills as an "assault onhome rule" and warning that repealing the city's gun control measures wouldjeopardize public safety by increasing the availability of weapons .

supporters of therepeal of the city's gun control measures counter that the bill is intended not as anintrusion on home rule , but rather as an effort to restore to district residents theconstitutionally guaranteed right to keep and bear arms .

in addition , supporters ofthe bills note that the district's gun control measures have been ineffective instemming the city's crime rate .

