kyrgyzstan is a small and poor country that gained independence in 1991 with the breakupof the soviet union .

 ( 1 ) itwas long led by askar akayev , who initially was widely regarded as a reformer but in recent yearsappeared increasingly autocratic .

despite this , the country was still considered "the most open,progressive and cooperative in central asia," according to the u.s. agency for internationaldevelopment .

 ( 2 ) theunited states has been interested in helping kyrgyzstan to enhance its sovereignty and territorialintegrity , increase democratic participation and civil society , bolster economic reform anddevelopment , strengthen human rights , prevent weapons proliferation , and more effectively combattransnational terrorism and trafficking in persons and narcotics .

the united states has pursued theseinterests throughout central asia , with special strategic attention to oil - rich kazakhstan andregional - power uzbekistan , and somewhat less to kyrgyzstan .

the significance of kyrgyzstan tothe united states increased after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states .

theu.s .

military repaired and upgraded the air field at the manas international airport for trans - shippingpersonnel , equipment , and supplies to support coalition operations in afghanistan and the region .

in early 2005 , the base hosted about 800 u.s. and 100 spanish troops .

 ( 3 ) .

many people both inside and outside kyrgyzstan were hopeful that the national legislativeelection on february 27 , 2005 would strengthen political pluralism , easing the way for a peacefulhandover of executive power in late 2005 when president akayev was expected to step down .

nearly 400 prominent politicians and businessmen and 40 parties ( many united in blocs ) ran for 75seats in the highly contentious race .

many in kyrgyzstan thought it unseemly that the president'sand prime minister's children were running for seats , along with many other family members andfriends of high officials .

balloting resulted in the filling of less than half the seats , with run - offs heldon march 13 in districts where no one candidate received over 50% of the votes cast .

on march 22,the central electoral commission ( cec ) announced that results for 71 districts were valid .

lessthan 10% of seats were won by opposition candidates , although there reportedly were many closeraces where they "lost" only by a few votes .

these results incensed many in the opposition camp,who alleged massive vote fraud .

an initial report by election observers from the organization forsecurity and cooperation in europe ( osce ) and the european parliament fueled this discontent bystating that serious irregularities had taken place , including the questionable exclusion of severalopposition candidates from running , biased state - controlled media and other heavy government useof administrative resources , and problematic voter lists .

 ( 4 ) after opposition candidates won only two seats in the first round , opposition party - leddemonstrators called for a new election and for akayev to resign .

in southern kyrgyzstan , protestorsstormed and occupied government facilities , including in the regional centers of osh and jalalabad .

many of these southerners ( including a majority ethnic uzbek community ) viewed themselves asdiscriminated against both economically and politically by a central government dominated bynortherners .

 ( 5 ) somecounter - demonstrations in support of the government also were reported .

protests widenedthroughout both the north and south in the wake of the march 13 run - off .

akayev hastily convenedthe new legislature immediately after the cec announced voting results on march 22 , and urged thepublic to focus on the upcoming planting season rather than a past election .

he blamed foreignngos and religious extremists for the protests , and his spokesman warned that the unrest markedefforts by drug lords and terrorists to take power .

observers remain divided on prospects for kyrgyzstan , with some suggesting that it willcontinue to democratize because it has a relatively vibrant civil society , compared to the rest ofcentral asia .

others are less optimistic , pointing to the economic development challenges facingkyrgyzstan and the high level of disaffection among its population .

they also point to the socialfragility of a country where the north and south have differing interests and where even groundtransport back and forth is difficult during the winter because of mountainous terrain .

the main division among the groups vying for power and influence during the late marchevents appeared to be between pro - akayev regional , clan , and family groups - - which togetherconstituted the political and economic elite - - and other regional , clan , and family groups that feltdeprived of their share of political and economic power .

ethnic issues appeared at least initially lesssignificant , since many ethnic uzbeks in southern kyrgyzstan joined other southerners in topplingthe regime .

however , ethnic tensions remain of concern .

beyond their anti - akayev stance anddemands for redistributing political and economic power , the opposition parties mostly lackwell - developed policies and strategic plans for the future of kyrgyzstan .

some observers have raisedconcerns that interim government leaders are engaging in nepotism and other corrupt practicesrather than combating them .

several commentators view the coup as involving two anti - regime groups , the dispossessedand the political opposition .

to some degree , the former are younger and the latter are older .

theformer were the active agents in taking over government offices , and reportedly were motivatedmore by poverty and unemployment than by opposition politics .

otunbayeva stressed that "mainlypoor people" rather than party stalwarts stormed the government complex on march 24 .

thesecommentators warn that if a new government fails to remedy economic distress , more violence couldoccur .

 ( 7 ) other analystshave placed less credence on the "poor people" theory , suggesting that at least some of the politicalopposition may have planned to forcibly oust akayev on march 24 .

 ( 8 ) no one opposition leader appears to enjoy overwhelming public and elite support , althoughbakiyev's influence appears to have grown in recent months .

 ( 9 ) as was the case in georgia,some of the most influential opposition leaders appear at least initially to be cooperating in runningthe government .

however , the planned july presidential election appears to be accentuating tensionswithin the opposition camp , in particular between bakiyev and kulov .

 ( 10 ) bakiyev , representingsouthern interests , seeks to enlarge his power base by wooing northern politicians ( such asotunbayeva and many of those elected to the new legislature ) .

such actions could reduce kulov'sstrong appeal in the north .

on the other hand , many of the oppositionists remain outside the bakiyevgovernment , and at least some may unify to support kulov in a prospective presidential race .

kulovalso is trying to woo former akayev supporters by endorsing akayev's immunity from prosecution .

however , some pro - akayev and northern interests have created the akyykat ( justice ) politicalmovement to challenge opposition candidates in the election .

some observers raise the specter of a highly contentious and problematic presidential electionthat may deepen civil disorder .

another source of likely disorder may then come to the fore later inthe year if the 15-20 or more disputed legislative seats are re - contested , or if a new election of thewhole legislature is carried out .

unless these elections take place , however , the legislature willremain illegitimate in the eyes of many kyrgyzstanis .

calls by some in kyrgyzstan for rewriting theconstitution to remove what are viewed as illegitimate changes made during akayev - orchestratedreferenda create still more uncertainties about kyrgyzstan's stability during the next few months .

some optimistic observers suggest that the relatively bloodless march coup ( 3 deaths were reported ) and reduced public passions after akayev's ouster may bode well for the avoidance of violence orpolitical instability in the near term .

 ( 11 ) other observers who caution that political disorder may deepen suggest that islamicextremists could bid to take power .

they maintain that hizb ut - tahrir and other islamic extremistgroups have gained members in kyrgyzstan in recent years , and warn that such groups areanti - american and anti - russian .

 ( 12 ) before the coup , there appeared to be some cooperation among ethnic kyrgyz and uzbeksin protests in kyrgyzstan's south , in contrast to inter - communal violence there in the early 1990s .

many ethnic uzbeks and kyrgyz joined in supporting ethnic uzbek opposition leader anvar artykovin osh .

the emergence of such cooperation appeared buttressed by region - wide parades and othercelebrations to mark akayev's overthrow .

however , while some ethnic uzbeks have supportedbakiyev , others have criticized him for appointing people to leading government posts whom theyregard as kyrgyz nationalists and for not appointing enough ethnic uzbeks .

 ( 13 ) .

kurmanbek bakiyev , prime minister 2000-2002 .

then - president askar akayev blamed him for agovernment crackdown on a protest in the south that led to several deaths , and he was forced toresign .

he became head of the opposition people's movement of kyrgyzstan ( pmk ) bloc in late2004 .

he lost his bid for a legislative seat in the march 2005 run - off .

azimbek beknazarov , head of the nationalist asaba party .

in 2001 he harshly criticized presidentakayev for agreeing to border adjustments deemed favorable to china and kazakhstan , allegedlycontributing to his arrest in 2002 .

in late 2004 , he became deputy head of pmk .

he won alegislative seat in the march 2005 run - off .

murtabek imanaliyev , foreign minister 1997-2002 .

he heads the jany bagyt ( new direction ) socialand political movement .

feliks kulov , head of the ar - namys ( dignity ) party .

he was imprisoned in 2001 on corruptioncharges that some observers viewed as politically motivated .

his party is prominent in the north buthas members all over the country .

he was released from prison during the demonstrations on march24 , 2005 , and the supreme court threw out all charges against him on april 11 .

adakhan madumarov , co - head of the ata jurt party bloc and for fair elections movement .

hecontested his "loss" in the march 2005 run - off and was declared the winner by the cec .

roza otunbayeva , former deputy prime minister , foreign minister , ambassador to the unitedkingdom and the united states , and u.n. emissary .

in late 2004 , she became co - chair of theata - jurt party bloc .

the cec refused to register her as a candidate in the recent legislative election .

omurbek tekebayev , heads the ata meken party .

he won a legislative seat in the march 2005run - off .

figure 1 .

map of kyrgyzsta .

