more than 53,000 commercial vessels — tankers , bulk carriers , container ships , barges , and passenger ships — travel the oceans and other waters of the world , carrying cargo and passengers for commerce , transport , and recreation .

their activities are regulated and scrutinized in a number of respects by international protocols and u.s. domestic laws , including those designed to protect against discharges of pollutants that could harm marine resources , other parts of the ambient environment , and human health .

however , there are overlaps of some requirements , gaps in other areas , geographic differences in jurisdiction based on differing definitions , and questions about the adequacy of enforcement .

public attention to the environmental impacts of the maritime industry has been especially focused on the cruise industry , in part because its ships are highly visible and in part because of the industry's desire to promote a positive image .

it represents a relatively small fraction of the entire shipping industry worldwide .

as of october 2010 , passenger ships ( which include cruise ships and ferries ) composed about 13% of the world shipping fleet .

the cruise industry is a significant and growing contributor to the u.s. economy , providing $40 billion in total benefits in 2009 and generating more than 357,000 u.s. jobs , but also making the environmental impacts of its activities an issue to many .

since 1990 , the average annual growth rate in the number of cruise passengers worldwide has been 7.4% , and in 2010 , cruises hosted an estimated 14.3 million passengers .

the worldwide cruise ship fleet consists of more than 230 ships , and the majority are foreign - flagged , with liberia and panama being the most popular flag countries .

foreign - flag cruise vessels owned by six companies account for nearly 95% of passenger ships operating in u.s. waters .

each year , the industry adds new ships to the total fleet , vessels that are bigger , more elaborate and luxurious , and that carry larger numbers of passengers and crew .

over the past two decades , the average ship size has been increasing at the rate of roughly 90 feet every five years .

the average ship entering the market from 2008 to 2011 will be more than 1,050 feet long and will weigh more than 130,000 tons .

to the cruise ship industry , a key issue is demonstrating to the public that cruising is safe and healthy for passengers and the tourist communities that are visited by their ships .

cruise ships carrying several thousand passengers and crew have been compared to "floating cities," in part because the volume of wastes produced and requiring disposal is greater than that of many small cities on land .

during a typical one - week voyage , a large cruise ship ( with 3,000 passengers and crew ) is estimated to generate 210,000 gallons of sewage ; 1 million gallons of graywater ( wastewater from sinks , showers , and laundries ) ; more than 130 gallons of hazardous wastes ; 8 tons of solid waste ; and 25,000 gallons of oily bilge water .

those wastes , if not properly treated and disposed of , can pose risks to human health , welfare , and the environment .

environmental advocates have raised concerns about the adequacy of existing laws for managing these wastes , and suggest that enforcement of existing laws is weak .

a 2000 general accounting office ( gao ) report focused attention on problems of cruise vessel compliance with environmental requirements .

gao found that between 1993 and 1998 , foreign - flag cruise ships were involved in 87 confirmed illegal discharge cases in u.s. waters .

a few of the cases included multiple illegal discharge incidents occurring over the six - year period .

gao reviewed three major waste streams ( solids , hazardous chemicals , and oily bilge water ) and concluded that 83% of the cases involved discharges of oil or oil - based products , the volumes of which ranged from a few drops to hundreds of gallons .

the balance of the cases involved discharges of plastic or garbage .

gao judged that 72% of the illegal discharges were accidental , 15% were intentional , and 13% could not be determined .

the 87 cruise ship cases represented 4% of the 2,400 illegal discharge cases by foreign - flag ships ( including tankers , cargo ships and other commercial vessels , as well as cruise ships ) confirmed during the six years studied by gao .

although cruise ships operating in u.s. waters have been involved in a relatively small number of pollution cases , gao said , several have been widely publicized and have led to criminal prosecutions and multimillion - dollar fines .

in 2000 , a coalition of 53 environmental advocacy groups petitioned the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to take regulatory action to address pollution by cruise ships .

the petition called for an investigation of wastewater , oil , and solid waste discharges from cruise ships .

in response , epa agreed to study cruise ship discharges and waste management approaches .

as part of that effort , in 2000 epa issued a background document with preliminary information and recommendations for further assessment through data collection and public information hearings .

subsequently , in december 2008 , the agency released a cruise ship discharge assessment report as part of its response to the petition .

this report summarized information on cruise ship waste streams and findings of recent data collection activities ( especially from cruise ships operating in alaskan waters ) .

it also identified options to address ship discharges .

this report presents information on issues related to cruise ship pollution .

it begins by describing the several types of waste streams and contaminants that cruise ships may generate and release .

it identifies the complex body of international and domestic laws that address pollution from cruise ships , as there is no single law in this area .

some wastes are covered by international standards , some are subject to u.s. law , and for some there are gaps in law , regulation , or possibly both .

the report then describes federal and state legislative activity concerning cruise ships in alaskan waters and activities in a few other states .

cruise ship companies have taken a number of steps to prevent illegal waste discharges and have adopted waste management plans and practices to improve their environmental operations .

environmental critics acknowledge these initiatives , even as they have petitioned the federal government to strengthen existing regulation of cruise ship wastes .

environmental groups endorsed legislation in the 109 th and 110 th congresses ( the clean cruise ship act ) that would require stricter standards to control wastewater and other discharges from cruise ships .

similar legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress ( the clean cruise ship act , h.r .

3888 and s. 1820 ) , but no legislative action occurred .

cruise ships generate a number of waste streams that can result in discharges to the marine environment , including sewage , graywater , hazardous wastes , oily bilge water , ballast water , and solid waste .

they also emit air pollutants to the air and water .

these wastes , if not properly treated and disposed of , can be a significant source of pathogens , nutrients , and toxic substances with the potential to threaten human health and damage aquatic life .

it is important , however , to keep these discharges in some perspective , because cruise ships represent a small — although highly visible — portion of the entire international shipping industry , and the waste streams described here are not unique to cruise ships .

however , particular types of wastes , such as sewage , graywater , and solid waste , may be of greater concern for cruise ships relative to other seagoing vessels , because of the large numbers of passengers and crew that cruise ships carry and the large volumes of wastes that they produce .

further , because cruise ships tend to concentrate their activities in specific coastal areas and visit the same ports repeatedly ( especially florida , california , new york , galveston , seattle , and the waters of alaska ) , their cumulative impact on a local scale could be significant , as can impacts of individual large - volume releases ( either accidental or intentional ) .

blackwater is sewage , wastewater from toilets and medical facilities , which can contain harmful bacteria , pathogens , diseases , viruses , intestinal parasites , and harmful nutrients .

discharges of untreated or inadequately treated sewage can cause bacterial and viral contamination of fisheries and shellfish beds , producing risks to public health .

nutrients in sewage , such as nitrogen and phosphorous , promote excessive algal growth , which consumes oxygen in the water and can lead to fish kills and destruction of other aquatic life .

cruise ships generate , on average , 8.4 gallons / day / person of sewage , and a large cruise ship ( 3,000 passengers and crew ) can generate an estimated 15,000 to 30,000 gallons per day of sewage .

graywater is wastewater from the sinks , showers , galleys , laundry , and cleaning activities aboard a ship .

it can contain a variety of pollutant substances , including fecal coliform bacteria , detergents , oil and grease , metals , organics , petroleum hydrocarbons , nutrients , food waste , and medical and dental waste .

sampling done by epa and the state of alaska found that untreated graywater from cruise ships can contain pollutants at variable strengths , and that it can contain levels of fecal coliform bacteria one to three times greater than is typically found in untreated domestic wastewater .

cruise ships generate , on average , 67 gallons / day / person of graywater ( or , approximately 200,000 gallons per day for a 3,000-person cruise ship ) ; by comparison , residential graywater generation is estimated to be 51 gallons / person / day .

graywater has potential to cause adverse environmental effects because of concentrations of nutrients and other oxygen - demanding materials , in particular .

graywater is typically the largest source of liquid waste generated by cruise ships ( 90% - 95% of the total ) .

solid waste generated on a ship includes glass , paper , cardboard , aluminum and steel cans , and plastics .

it can be either non - hazardous or hazardous in nature .

solid waste that enters the ocean may become marine debris , and it can then pose a threat to marine organisms , humans , coastal communities , and industries that utilize marine waters .

cruise ships typically manage solid waste by a combination of source reduction , waste minimization , and recycling .

however , as much as 75% of solid waste is incinerated on board , and the ash typically is discharged at sea , although some is landed ashore for disposal or recycling .

marine mammals , fish , sea turtles , and birds can be injured or killed from entanglement with plastics and other solid waste that may be released or disposed off of cruise ships .

on average , each cruise ship passenger generates at least two pounds of non - hazardous solid waste per day and disposes of two bottles and two cans .

with large cruise ships carrying several thousand passengers , the amount of waste generated in a day can be massive .

for a large cruise ship , about 8 tons of solid waste are generated during a one - week cruise .

it has been estimated that 24% of the solid waste generated by vessels worldwide ( by weight ) comes from cruise ships .

most cruise ship garbage is treated on board ( incinerated , pulped , or ground up ) for discharge overboard .

when garbage must be off - loaded ( for example , because glass and aluminum cannot be incinerated ) , cruise ships can put a strain on port reception facilities , which are rarely adequate to the task of serving a large passenger vessel ( especially at non - north american ports ) .

cruise ships produce hazardous wastes from a number of on - board activities and processes , including photo processing , dry - cleaning , and equipment cleaning .

types of waste include discarded and expired chemicals , medical waste , batteries , fluorescent lights , and spent paints and thinners , among others .

these materials contain a wide range of substances such as hydrocarbons , chlorinated hydrocarbons , heavy metals , paint waste , solvents , fluorescent and mercury vapor light bulbs , various types of batteries , and unused or outdated pharmaceuticals .

although the quantities of hazardous waste generated on cruise ships are relatively small , their toxicity to sensitive marine organisms can be significant .

without careful management , these wastes can find their way into graywater , bilge water , or the solid waste stream .

on a ship , oil often leaks from engine and machinery spaces or from engine maintenance activities and mixes with water in the bilge , the lowest part of the hull of the ship .

oil , gasoline , and byproducts from the biological breakdown of petroleum products can harm fish and wildlife and pose threats to human health if ingested .

oil in even minute concentrations can kill fish or have various sub - lethal chronic effects .

bilge water also may contain solid wastes and pollutants containing high amounts of oxygen - demanding material , oil , and other chemicals , as well as soaps , detergents , and degreasers used to clean the engine room .

these chemicals can be highly toxic , causing mortality to marine organisms if the chemicals are discharged .

amounts vary , depending on the size of the ship , but large vessels often have additional waste streams that contain sludge or waste oil and oily water mixtures that can inadvertently get into the bilge .

a typical large cruise ship will generate an average of eight metric tons of oily bilge water for each 24 hours of operation .

to maintain ship stability and eliminate potentially hazardous conditions from oil vapors in these areas , the bilge spaces need to be flushed and periodically pumped dry .

however , before a bilge can be cleared out and the water discharged , the oil that has been accumulated needs to be extracted from the bilge water , after which the extracted oil can be reused , incinerated , and / or off - loaded in port .

if a separator , which is normally used to extract the oil , is faulty or is deliberately bypassed , untreated oily bilge water could be discharged directly into the ocean , where it can damage marine life .

according to epa , bilge water is the most common source of oil pollution from cruise ships .

a number of cruise lines have been charged with environmental violations related to this issue in recent years .

cruise ships , large tankers , and bulk cargo carriers use a tremendous amount of ballast water to stabilize the vessel during transport .

ballast water is often taken on in the coastal waters in one region after ships discharge wastewater or unload cargo , and discharged at the next port of call , wherever more cargo is loaded , which reduces the need for compensating ballast .

thus , it is essential to the proper functioning of ships ( especially cargo ships ) , because the water that is taken in compensates for changes in the ship's weight as cargo is loaded or unloaded , and as fuel and supplies are consumed .

however , ballast water discharge typically contains a variety of biological materials , including plants , animals , viruses , and bacteria .

these materials often include non - native , nuisance , exotic species that can cause extensive ecological and economic damage to aquatic ecosystems .

ballast water discharges are believed to be the leading source of invasive species in u.s. marine waters , thus posing public health and environmental risks , as well as significant economic cost to industries such as water and power utilities , commercial and recreational fisheries , agriculture , and tourism .

studies suggest that the economic cost just from introduction of pest mollusks ( zebra mussels , the asian clam , and shipworms ) to u.s. aquatic ecosystems is about $2.2 billion per year .

these problems are not limited to cruise ships , and there is little cruise - industry specific data on the issue .

further study is needed to determine the role of cruise ships in the overall problem of introduction of non - native species by vessels .

air pollution from cruise ships is generated by diesel engines that burn high sulfur content fuel , producing sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxide , and particulate matter , in addition to carbon monoxide , carbon dioxide , and hydrocarbons .

diesel exhaust has been classified by epa as a likely human carcinogen .

epa recognizes that emissions from marine diesel engines contribute to unhealthy air and failure to meet air quality standards , as well as visibility degradation , haze , acid deposition , and eutrophication and nitrification of water .

epa estimates that ocean - going vessels account for about 10% of mobile source nitrogen oxide emissions , 24% of mobile source particulate emissions , and 80% of mobile source sulfur dioxide emissions in the united states in 2009 .

these percentages are expected to increase as other sources of these pollutants are controlled .

emissions from marine diesel engines can be higher on a port - specific basis .

ships are also an important source of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) pollutants .

the international maritime organization estimates that international shipping contributed 2.7% of global carbon dioxide emissions in 2007 .

vessels also emit significant amounts of black carbon and nitrogen oxides , which contribute to climate change .

one source of environmental pressures on maritime vessels recently has come from states and localities , as they assess the contribution of commercial marine vessels to regional air quality problems when ships are docked in port .

a significant portion of vessel emissions occur at sea , but they can impact areas far inland and regions without large commercial ports , according to epa .

again , there is little cruise - industry specific data on this issue .

they comprise only a small fraction of the world shipping fleet , but cruise ship emissions may exert significant impacts on a local scale in specific coastal areas that are visited repeatedly .

shipboard incinerators also burn large volumes of garbage , plastics , and other waste , producing ash that must be disposed of .

incinerators may release toxic emissions as well .

the several waste streams generated by cruise ships are governed by a number of international protocols and u.s. domestic laws , regulations and standards , which are described in this section , but there is no single law or regulation .

moreover , there are overlaps in some areas of coverage , gaps in other areas , and differences in geographic jurisdiction , based on applicable terms and definitions .

concerns about cruise ship pollution raise issues for congress in three broad areas: adequacy of laws and regulations , research needs , and oversight and enforcement of existing programs and requirements .

attention to these issues is relatively recent , and more assessment is needed of existing conditions and whether current steps ( public and private ) are adequate .

bringing the issues to national priority sufficient to obtain resources that will address the problems is a challenge .

a key issue is whether the several existing u.s. laws , international protocols and standards , state activities , and industry initiatives described in this report adequately address management of cruise ship pollution , or whether legislative changes are needed to fill in gaps , remedy exclusions , or strengthen current requirements .

as epa noted in its 2000 white paper , certain cruise ship waste streams such as oil and solid waste are regulated under a comprehensive set of laws and regulations , but others , such as graywater , are excluded or treated in ways that appear to leave gaps in coverage .

graywater is one particular area of interest , since investigations , such as sampling by state of alaska officials , have found substantial contamination of cruise ship graywater from fecal coliform , bacteria , heavy metals , and dissolved plastics .

state officials were surprised that graywater from ships' galley and sink waste streams tested higher for fecal coliform than did the ships' sewage lines .

one view advocating strengthened requirements came from the u.s. commission on ocean policy .

in its 2004 final report , the commission advocated clear , uniform requirements for controlling the discharge of wastewater from large passenger vessels , as well as consistent interpretation and enforcement of those requirements .

it recommended that congress establish a new statutory regime that should include uniform discharge standards and waste management procedures ; thorough recordkeeping requirements to track the waste management process ; required sampling , testing , and monitoring by vessel operators using uniform protocols ; and flexibility and incentives to encourage industry investment in innovative treatment technologies .

a proposal reflecting some of these concepts , the clean cruise ship act , was introduced in the 111 th congress as s. 1820 ( durbin ) and h.r .

3888 ( farr ) .

no legislative action occurred on either bill .

the legislation would amend the clean water act to prohibit cruise vessels entering a u.s. port from discharging sewage , graywater , or bilge water into waters of the united states , including the great lakes , except in compliance with prescribed effluent limits and management standards .

it further would direct epa and the coast guard to promulgate effluent limits for sewage , graywater , and bilge water discharges from cruise vessels that are no less stringent than the more restrictive standards under the existing federal alaska cruise ship law described above .

it would require cruise ships to treat wastewater wherever they operate and would authorize broadened federal enforcement authority , including inspection , sampling , and testing .

the legislation also would impose passenger fees for use by epa and the coast guard to implement the legislation .

environmental advocates supported similar versions of this legislation in previous congresses .

industry groups have argued that it would target an industry that represents only a small percentage of the world's ships and that environmental standards of the industry , including voluntary practices , already meet or exceed current international and u.s. regulations .

as noted above , a few states have passed legislation to regulate cruise ship discharges .

if this state - level activity were to increase , congress could see a need to develop federal legislation that would harmonize differences in the states' approaches .

another issue for congress is the status of epa's efforts to manage or regulate cruise ship wastes .

as discussed previously , in 2000 congress authorized epa to issue standards for sewage and graywater discharges from large cruise ships operating in alaska .

in response , the agency has been collecting information and assessing the need for additional standards , beyond those provided in p.l .

106-554 , but has not yet proposed any rules .

in december 2008 , epa released a cruise ship discharge assessment report that builds on a 2007 draft assessment report and the 2000 white paper .

the final report examines five cruise ship waste streams ( sewage , graywater , oily bilge water , solid waste , and hazardous waste ) and discusses how the waste streams are managed and current actions by the federal government to address the waste streams .

for each waste stream , the report identifies possible options and alternatives to address cruise ship discharges , but it also states that epa has not determined that any of the options are necessary , feasible , or warranted , or that epa or any other entity has the legal authority to implement the options .

other related issues of interest could include harmonizing the differences presented in u.s. laws for key jurisdictional terms as they apply to cruise ships and other types of vessels ; providing a single definition of "cruise ship," which is defined variously in federal and state laws and rules , with respect to gross tonnage of ships , number of passengers carried , presence of overnight passenger accommodations , or primary purpose of the vessel ; or requiring updating of existing regulations to reflect improved technology ( such as the msd rules that were issued in 1976 ) .

several areas of research might help improve understanding of the quantities of waste generated by cruise ships , impacts of discharges and emissions , and the potential for new control technologies .

the u.s. commission on ocean policy noted in its 2004 final report that research can help identify the degree of harm represented by vessel pollution and can assist in prioritizing limited resources to address the most significant threats .

the commission identified several directions for research by the coast guard , epa , noaa , and other appropriate entities on the fates and impacts of vessel pollution: processes that govern the transport of pollutants in the marine environment .

small passenger vessel practices , including the impacts of stationary discharges .

disposal options for concentrated sludge resulting from advanced sewage treatment on large passenger vessels .

cumulative impacts of commercial and recreational vessel pollution on particularly sensitive ecosystems , such as coastal areas with low tidal exchange and coral reef systems .

impacts of vessel air emissions , particularly in ports and inland waterways where the surrounding area is already having difficulty meeting air quality standards .

in the 2008 cruise ship assessment report , epa identified several possible research options , including establishing a detailed nationwide sampling , testing , and monitoring program to gather data ; increasing studies on human health an environmental effects of cruise ship discharges ; directing research to geographic areas that may be impacted by cruise ship discharges ; or directing future assessments to potential cumulative impacts from multiple cruise ships , from stationary cruise ships , and in semi - enclosed environments such as bays and harbors .

the 2000 gao report documented — and epa's 2000 cruise ship white paper acknowledged — that existing laws and regulations may not be adequately enforced or implemented .

gao said there is need for monitoring of the discharges from cruise ships in order to evaluate the effectiveness of current standards and management .

gao also said that increased federal oversight of cruise ships by the coast guard and other agencies is needed concerning maintenance and operation of pollution prevention equipment , falsifying of oil record books ( which are required for compliance with marpol ) , and analysis of records to verify proper off - loading of garbage and oily sludge to onshore disposal facilities .

the coast guard has primary enforcement responsibility for many of the federal programs concerning cruise ship pollution .

a key oversight and enforcement issue is the adequacy of the coast guard's resources to support its multiple homeland and non - homeland security missions .

the resource question as it relates to vessel inspections was raised even before the september 11 terrorist attacks , in the gao's 2000 report .

the same question has been raised since then , in light of the coast guard's expanded responsibilities for homeland security and resulting shift in operations , again by the gao and others .

epa has identified several possible options for enforcement and compliance , including improving monitoring and inspections ; rewarding passengers who aid in detecting illegal activities ; allowing state personnel ( as well as the coast guard ) to inspect cruise ship pollution control equipment ; or charging a passenger fee to put a marine engineer onboard cruise ships to observe ship waste treatment practices .

in its 2000 report , gao also found that the process for referring cruise ship violations to other countries does not appear to be working , either within the coast guard or internationally , and gao recommended that the coast guard work with the imo to encourage member countries to respond when pollution cases are referred to them and that the coast guard make greater efforts to periodically follow up on alleged pollution cases occurring outside u.s. jurisdiction .

