on december 30 , 2005 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced thatthe united states will implement the dominican republic - central american free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) "on a rolling basis as countries make sufficient progress" in completing theircommitments under the agreement .

steps include each country's adoption of relevant new laws andregulations necessary to put dr - cafta into effect , and the completion of a final review ofimplementation details with the united states .

to date , ustr has confirmed the completion ofthese steps for four countries .

accordingly , president bush issued proclamations to implement u.s.commitments under dr - cafta with respect to el salvador , effective march 1 , 2006 ; hondurasand nicaragua , effective april 1 , 2006 ; and guatemala , effective july 1 , 2006 .

observers expect thedominican republic to be added to this list later this year , and costa rica likely early in 2007 if itslegislature approves the agreement .

on july 10 , 2006 , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) issued a report examining theeconomic feasibility of converting sugarcane , sugar beets , raw cane sugar and refined sugar intoethanol .

the study concluded that while such conversion would be profitable with current highdemand for ethanol and record ethanol prices , it would be unprofitable when compared to ethanolprices projected for mid - 2007 .

this report reflects a usda commitment made during last summer'sdr - cafta debate to study alternatives for sugar imported under this and other free tradeagreements that could add to u.s. sugar supplies and depress domestic sugar prices .

exports .

u.s. agricultural exports in 2004 to thesix countries covered by the dr - cafta ( costa rica , the dominican republic , el salvador,guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua ) totaled $1.7 billion , and represented almost 3% of u.s.worldwide sales ( see table 1 ) .

these countries combined represented the seventh - largest exportmarket for u.s. agricultural products after canada , japan , mexico , china , south korea , and taiwan .

leading exports were corn , wheat , rice , soybean meal , and tobacco .

the dominican republic wasthe largest market - - with $462 million in sales that accounted for 27% of all agricultural exports tothe region , followed by guatemala ( $383 million with a 23% share ) .

u.s. farm exports accountedfor 11% of total u.s. merchandise exports to the six countries , and have increased 56% in valueterms since 1995 .

imports .

agricultural imports from these sixcountries equaled almost $2.5 billion , or nearly 5% of all u.s. farm and food imports ( see table 1 ) .

these countries combined ranked as the fourth - largest source of u.s. agricultural imports in 2004 .

u.s. purchases of bananas , raw coffee , other fresh fruit , raw cane sugar , and fresh and frozenvegetables led the list .

costa rica was the largest supplier of food products - - shipping $899 million,or 37% of all agricultural imports from the region , followed by guatemala ( $784 million , or 32% ) .

u.s. farm imports accounted for 14% of total u.s. merchandise imports from the six countries , andhave grown by 23% in dollar terms over the last decade .

table 1 .

u.s .

agricultural trade with countries covered by thedr - cafta , 2004 source: u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , foreign agricultural service .

notes: exports refer to domestic exports .

imports refer to imports for u.s. consumption only .

a .

of u.s. agricultural exports of almost $61.4 billion to the world .

b .

of u.s. agricultural imports of $54.0 billion from the world .

trade balance .

the united states in 2004recorded an agricultural trade deficit of $761 million with the six countries covered by thedr - cafta .

however , if shipments of bananas and coffee - - two tropical products produced in verysmall amounts domestically - - are excluded from u.s. imports from this region , bilateral trade withthese countries would have resulted in an agricultural trade surplus of $394 million in 2004 .

entries under two unilateral u.s. trade preference programs ( the caribbean basin initiativeand the generalized system of preferences ) accounted for almost 47% of u.s. agricultural importsfrom the six countries in 2004 - - meaning they entered duty free .

practically all other agriculturalimports ( primarily tropical products such as bananas and raw coffee ) entered at mfn zero dutyrates .

 ( 1 ) though importsof certain commodities ( sugar , beef , dairy products , peanuts , tobacco , among others ) that the unitedstates protects using tariff - rate quotas ( trqs ) generally entered duty - free , amounts allowed to enterwere limited by quotas .

 ( 2 ) .

the united states and the six countries primarily use tariffs and trqs to protect theiragricultural sectors .

the five central american countries and the dominican republic committedunder the multilateral uruguay round agreement on agriculture ( uraa ) to bind their averagetariffs on agricultural imports at relatively high levels ( ranging from honduras's 35% to nicaragua's73% ) , compared to the u.s. commitment to bind its average rate at 12% .

 ( 3 ) however , in practice , the sixcountries generally have imposed much lower average tariffs on agricultural imports ( with appliedtariffs ranging from 6.7% in nicaragua to 23.3% in the dominican republic ) , and at times haveallowed larger amounts of commodities than spelled out in their trq minimum commitments toenter duty free or at a lower duty .

 ( 4 ) the average u.s. applied tariff on imports from these six countriesis very low ( 0.2% ) when u.s. trade preference benefits are taken into account ( see table 2 ) .

theseapplied tariff averages , though , understate the higher level of border protection the united states andthe six countries provide their most sensitive agricultural products through the use of quotas andother restrictive measures .

table 2 .

average tariffs and tariff - rate quotas on agriculturalimports: united states and the dr - cafta countries source: u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) forbound and applied rates ; world trade organization ( wto ) for commodities subject to trqs .

note: reflects level of protection before dr - cafta was negotiated .

a .

2001 for united states , 2000 for the central american countries and the dominican republic .

b .

the u.s. applied tariff on agricultural imports from the five central american countries and thedominican republic is much lower - - 0.02% , reflecting duty - free treatment of imports thatentered under two trade preference programs and the commodity / product composition ofimports .

once dr - cafta takes effect , almost all tariffs and quotas on agricultural products importedby the six countries from the united states , and by the united states from these countries , will bephased out completely ( see below for details ) .

each country's agricultural imports from the rest ofthe world , though , will continue to be subject to the tariff levels and quotas negotiated under theuraa or under separate bilateral ftas each has entered into with other trading partners .

u.s. objectives in negotiating dr - cafta's agricultural provisions were to ( 1 ) eliminatecentral american and dominican republic tariffs , quotas , and non - tariff barriers to trade , ( 2 ) provide adequate transition periods and relief mechanisms for the u.s. agricultural sector to adjustto increased imports of sensitive products from the region , ( 3 ) eliminate any unjustified sanitary andphytosanitary ( sps ) restrictions imposed by the six countries and seek their affirmation of theirworld trade organization ( wto ) commitments on sps measures , and ( 4 ) develop a mechanismwith its fta partners to support the u.s. objective to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies inthe wto and free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) negotiations .

 ( 5 ) the u.s. position called forno product or sectoral exclusions from the final agreement .

u.s. officials also repeatedly made clearthat the issue of u.s. farm support or subsidies , which the central american countries sought toplace on the negotiating table , should only be addressed in wto multilateral negotiations .

almost all of the agricultural exports to the united states from the fta partner countriesalready enter duty free under trade preference programs or at mfn zero rates .

consequently , the sixcountries were most interested in securing unrestricted market access for those commodities nowsubject to u.s. trqs: sugar and certain sugar - containing products , beef , dairy products , peanuts,tobacco , and cotton .

however , central american and dominican republic negotiators expressedfears that opening up their markets to u.s. corn and rice would undermine the region's smallsubsistence farmers unable to compete against subsidies that u.s. producers receive under currentfarm programs .

though these countries had pressed to include the subsidy issue on the negotiatingagenda , they eventually did accept the u.s. position that this issue should be addressed multilaterallyin the wto context .

in the agreement , the united states and the six countries agreed to completely phase outtariffs and quotas - - the primary means of border protection - - on all but four agriculturalcommodities and food products in seven stages either immediately or over 5 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 18 , or 20years .

the four most sensitive commodities - - fresh potatoes and fresh onions imported by costarica , white corn imported by the other four central american countries , and sugar entering the u.s.market - - will be treated uniquely .

after a specified period , the size of the quotas established forthese four commodities will increase about 2% each year in perpetuity .

in other words , a caplimiting imports will always be in place .

the tariff on entries above the quota level ( frequentlyreferred to as the over - quota tariff ) will not decline at all , but stay at current high levels to keep outabove - quota imports , in order to protect producers of the four commodities .

for all other sensitive products that fall into any of the over - 10-year transition periods,negotiators on all sides agreed to provide some measure of protection .

while details vary bycommodity and food product , these will take the form of tariff - rate quotas effective only during thetransition to free trade , long tariff and quota phase - out periods , nonlinear tariff reductions , and theuse of an import safeguard mechanism .

nonlinear refers to a practice known as "backloading,"where most of the decline in a tariff occurs in the last few years of the transition period .

safeguardswill serve to protect agricultural producers from sudden surges in imports , triggered when quantitiesincrease above specified levels .

when triggered , an additional duty - - temporary in duration - - isapplied to provide protection , according to detailed terms found in annexed schedules .

each countrynegotiated its own list of agricultural products eligible for safeguard protection .

a country's rightto use safeguards will expire at the end of the transition period .

all countries commit under dr - cafta not to introduce or maintain agricultural exportsubsidies to sell commodities or food products to each other .

such subsidies , though , are allowedto counter the trade - distorting effects of exports subsidized by third countries if an exporting countryand an importing country fail to agree on counter measures .

rules of origin specify what is required for a product to be considered to have been producedor processed in a country that is a party to a trade agreement .

they are used to determine whethera product benefits from an fta's preferential terms ( eg , duty - free and / or additional quota access ) .

the agreement commits all countries to apply the science - based disciplines of the wtoagreement on sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures to facilitate trade .

 ( 6 ) should disagreements arise,a working group will serve as a forum for consultations and resolving technical issues .

the textprecludes the use of dr - cafta's dispute settlement provisions to resolve differences when spsproblems cannot be resolved .

the dr - cafta will grant immediate duty - free status to more than half of the u.s. farmproducts now exported to the six countries , according to the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) .

 ( 7 ) such treatmentwill apply to high - quality beef cuts , cotton , wheat , soybeans , certain fruits and vegetables , processedfood products , and wine destined for the five central american countries .

u.s. exports of corn,cotton , soybeans , and wheat to the dominican republic will benefit also from immediate duty - freetreatment .

central american tariffs and quotas on most other agricultural products ( pork , beef,poultry , rice , other fruits and vegetables , yellow corn , and other processed products ) will be phasedout over a 15-year period .

longer transition periods will apply to imports from the united states ofrough / milled rice and chicken leg quarters ( 18 years ) and dairy products ( 20 years ) .

dominicanrepublic tariffs and quotas on most other u.s. agricultural products ( beef , pork , and selected dairyand poultry products ) will be eliminated over 15 years .

however , 20-year transitions will cushionthe impact of the entry of u.s. chicken leg quarters , rice , and certain dairy products ( cheese and milkproducts ) .

 ( 8 ) an overviewof these countries' dr - cafta commitments with respect to imports from the united states ofselected commodities appears in the section "u.s. agriculture and food sectors' views ondr - cafta's agricultural provisions," below .

with el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua designating white corn as their mostsensitive agricultural commodity ( produced by subsistence farmers and used as a staple to maketortillas ) , negotiators agreed to establish a quota ( i.e. , equal to the current import level ) that increasesabout 2% annually in perpetuity .

compared to all other commodities imported from the unitedstates , there will be no reduction in the over - quota tariff for white corn .

u.s. exports of freshpotatoes and onions to costa rica would be subject similarly to quotas that increase slowly inperpetuity but face permanent high over - quota tariffs .

ustr further states that u.s. agricultural products will have "generally better" access to thecentral american countries than is given to similar imports from canada , europe , and southamerica .

the six fta partners also agreed to "move toward recognizing export eligibility for allu.s .

plants inspected under the u.s. food safety and inspection system. .

almost all agricultural imports ( in value terms ) from the six countries already enter the u.s.market duty free .

dr - cafta , according to ustr , "will consolidate those benefits [immediately]and make them permanent. .

for the u.s. sensitive agricultural products ( sugar , sugar - containingproducts , beef , peanuts , dairy products , tobacco , and cotton ) , u.s. negotiators granted duty - freeaccess in the form of country - specific preferential quotas .

these quotas would be in addition to ( i.e.,not carved out of ) the existing agricultural trqs established by the united states under its existingwto commitments , which the six countries have taken advantage of historically to export to theu.s .

market .

because of its sensitivity , the united states will similarly treat sugar imports as the fourcentral american countries protect white corn imports .

the new sugar quotas would expandgradually each year , but the high and prohibitive over - quota tariff will remain unchanged , inperpetuity .

details on the u.s. provisions for sugar and other selected commodities are provided inthe section "u.s. agriculture and food sectors' views on dr - cafta's agricultural provisions,"below .

in an economy - wide , quantitative analysis of the dr - cafta , the u.s. international tradecommission ( itc ) projects that 12% of the agreement's overall export gains would flow to u.s.agriculture .

two - thirds of the export gains would be realized by the u.s. manufacturing ( 36% ) andtextile ( 30% ) sectors ( see table 3 ) .

 ( 9 ) textile imports from the six countries would account for almost all of the growth in totalu.s .

imports under full implementation of the agreement , according to the itc .

additional u.s.agricultural imports would represent almost 2% of the import change under dr - cafta .

the itcanalysis shows small negative changes in imports of manufactured products , energy and other rawmaterials , and services ( see table 3 ) .

increases in u.s. sugar , meat , and dairy imports ( due to the expansion and / or elimination ofu.s .

agricultural trqs under dr - cafta ) would be offset to some degree by a drop in imports ofvegetables , fruits , nuts , processed food and tobacco products , and other crops imported from the sixcountries .

according to the itc , these small declines would largely reflect the movement of laborand resources in the dr and central american countries away from producing the latter products ( which already benefit from preferential duty - free access to the u.s. market ) to the more profitabletextile , apparel , leather products , and sugar sectors , which expand output to take advantage of theagreement's openings in the u.s. market .

under dr - cafta , u.s. agricultural imports from the sixcountries would increase 1.3% ( table 4 ) .

this $52 million in net imports would equal one - tenthof 1% of total u.s. agricultural imports ( $73 billion , according to the itc ) .

itc's qualitative analysis examined how two agricultural commodity sectors would beaffected over time - - grains and sugar .

u.s. corn and rice exports to the region would see littlechange in the short term , but would rise as the six countries' quotas expand .

once quotas are fullyphased out , u.s. grain exports are expected to increase substantially .

the itc estimates that by theend of the 15-20 year transition period , annual u.s. grain exports to the region likely would increaseby at least 20% ( $120 million ) , based on 2003 prices - - broken out among corn ( $75 million ) , roughrice ( $35 million ) , and milled rice ( $10 million ) .

though the impact of these additional sales in thelong run is small ( equal to 1.2% of 2003 u.s. grain exports worldwide ) , the itc views the potentialincrease as offering significant market opportunities for u.s. corn and rice producers .

the itcfurther found that the u.s. grains sector would , of all economic sectors , experience the mostnoticeable positive changes , though very small .

grain output , revenues , and employment would risebetween one - quarter to one - third of 1% .

 ( 10 ) the itc expects that the dr - cafta's sugar provisions likely would result in a "smallincrease" in u.s. sugar and sugar - containing product ( scp ) imports from the region equal to thequantities spelled out in the new preferential quotas .

prices ( calculated to drop by about 1% ) dueto increased imports "likely would have an adverse impact on production and employment for u.s.sugar producers. .

at the same time , lower prices "likely would benefit production and employmentfor u.s. producers of certain scps," particularly of those containing high sugar content .

the itc'sanalysis further shows that the u.s. sugar manufacturing and sugar crops sectors would bothexperience the largest percentage decrease of all sectors in domestic output and employment - - morethan 2% .

 ( 11 ) table 3 .

impact of dr - cafta on u.s. trade , by economic sector source: adapted by crs from table 4.4 in itc's u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement: potential economywide andselected sectoral effects , p. 75 .

note: "total" may not add due to rounding .

table 4 .

impact of dr - cafta on u.s .

agricultural trade source: adapted by crs from table 4.4 in itc's u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement: potential economywide andselected sectoral effects , p. 75 .

na - not applicabl .

most u.s. commodity organizations , agribusiness and food firms , and theamerican farm bureau federation ( a general farm organization ) supported this tradeagreement , expecting their producer - members and exporters to benefit from theincreased access guaranteed to the central american and dominican republicmarkets .

supporters in the spring of 2005 formed the agricultural coalition for dr - cafta to present and argue their position to members of congress .

the u.s.cotton sector initially opposed the agreement , primarily reflecting the concerns oftextile firms , but in early may 2005 came out in favor following the decision by amajor textile trade association to support it .

other commodity groups concerned about the competitive pressures theyexpect to face under dr - cafta opposed the agreement .

these include the sugarindustry , and one livestock / beef trade association .

the u.s. sugar industry stronglyopposed the additional access given to sugar , fearing its economic impact ondomestic producers and processors .

sugar producers' and processors' greatestconcern was that dr - cafta sets a precedent for including sugar in the other ftasthat the bush administration is negotiating , a position that the industry stronglyopposes .

one trade organization representing cattlemen with concerns about freetrade agreements in general opposed dr - cafta's beef provisions .

the nationalfarmers union ( a general farm organization ) opposed the agreement .

because full implementation of the dr - cafta will result in a reciprocaltrading relationship , a large portion of the u.s. agricultural and food sectors willbenefit slightly from expanding exports over time as the six countries eliminate theirtariffs and quotas on practically all u.s. commodities and food products .

theprojected increase would represent a very small share ( one - half of 1% , according tothe itc ) of total u.s. agricultural exports to the world .

this outcome largely reflectsthe small population of the six countries ( a combined 44 million in 2003 ) and low percapita incomes when contrasted to the much larger markets in asia where averageincomes are higher and agricultural import demand is growing rapidly .

at the sametime , the market openings granted these countries could place additional pressure onthe u.s. sugar and cotton / textile sectors .

fearing what increased competition fromadditional imports might mean for their business outlook , sugar and cotton / textileinterests lobbied congress to defeat or to modify this agreement .

of more interest to the u.s. agribusiness sector likely will be the agreement'sinvestment provisions - - structured to give u.s. investors in the region a predictablelegal framework and equal treatment with local investors , protections for all types ofinvestment , and transparent procedures for handling disputes .

accordingly , someu.s .

food manufacturers may take advantage of lower input and labor costs toestablish food processing plants to supply the regional market as well as to export ( eg , hispanic food products ) to the u.s. market .

the six countries' agricultural sectors would , in the aggregate , gain little fromthis agreement , according to the itc's analysis , since almost all exports to the u.s.market would continue to benefit from duty - free access that they already receiveunder u.s. trade preference programs .

what would change is that the agreementmakes this duty - free access permanent and sets into motion a process that in 15-20years gives these countries unrestricted access to the u.s. market for all sensitivecommodities ( except sugar ) now subject to u.s. agricultural tariff - rate quotas .

theexpanding u.s. quotas reserved for these countries would benefit sugar processorsin the region , and , to a lesser extent , exporters of beef and dairy products , that seekto sell to the u.s. market .

the congressional debate created divisions within the u.s. agricultural sectorbetween commodity groups that expect to gain from dr - cafta and those whichforesee losses .

whether this tension is short - lived or continues beyond the debate onthis trade agreement will depend on whether and to what extent the bushadministration includes comparable openings affecting these same sensitiveagricultural products in other ftas recently negotiated ( eg , colombia and peru ) oryet to be concluded ( eg , panama and thailand ) .

recognizing this , u.s. tradenegotiators are likely to craft these other bilateral free trade agreementsacknowledging the political realities involved in securing congressional approval .

this means translating potential agricultural export gains in a trade agreement intoa bloc of supportive congressional votes .

it also suggests that ustr's negotiatingstrategy must incorporate limiting u.s. trade concessions on u.s. sensitiveagricultural commodities in order to minimize the number of congressional "no"votes on a concluded free trade agreement .

following senate approval of dr - cafta , most observers acknowledgedthat securing a majority in the house for dr - cafta would be problematic , in largepart due to opposition by the sugar sector and some segments of the textile sector .

consequently , administration officials faced a dilemma .

should they press ahead,and work to cut deals to line up the necessary votes to make a majority ? .

or , shouldthey consider making further changes to the sugar and textile provisions or relateddeals sufficient to yield enough "yes" votes to win approval ? .

as precedent for thelatter course of action , the clinton administration negotiated last - minute changes innovember 1993 to nafta's sugar and orange juice provisions in order to secureenough votes for house passage .

u.s. trade officials signaled their reluctance toconsider this option , for fear of unraveling the overall dr - cafta package andfacing opposition from central american negotiators to such a scenario .

though theadministration made commitments to some members to address certain textileissues , the president decided to forward the final implementing bill to congresswithout seeking any changes in the agreement itself .

the dr - cafta implementingbill ( h.r .

3045 ) did not contain any provisions , for example , detailingthe sugar compensation provision or the textile commitments , though these issuesremained under discussion between the administration and some house membersuntil the very close house vote occurred .

a similar debate also occurred in each of the legislative chambers of fivecountries , as their commodity and related groups sought to influence whetherdr - cafta should be approved or not .

to date , the legislatures of the dominicanrepublic , el salvador , guatemala , honduras and nicaragua have approved the tradeagreement .

the debate in guatemala was marked by street clashes , before and afterthe vote , in which small farmers with others joined in calls for a public referendumon the agreement .

because of the upcoming presidential election , the costa ricanlegislature may not complete debating dr - cafta until early 2007 .

commercial farmers that produce - - and agribusiness firms that process - - sugar , beef , dairy products and non - traditional products with export potential ( eg,fruits and vegetables ) generally supported dr - cafta .

subsistence farmers ofstaple crops and citizen groups concerned with the trade agreement's impact on rural,primarily agricultural , areas , though , feared that the gradual removal of quotas ( evenwith the safeguard provisions available during the long transition to free trade ) willnot sufficiently protect their livelihood and encourage families to move to urbanareas in search of employment .

representatives reflecting the views of theseconstituents in their national legislatures worked unsuccessfully to defeat thedr - cafta when it was submitted for consideration .

 ( 36 ) somecentral american leaders , though , viewed the textile provisions of dr - cafta asnecessary to keep their textile and apparel sectors viable against chinese competitionin the u.s. retail market and to absorb the movement of labor out of the agriculturalsector .

 ( 37 ) also not yet clear is the extent to which the governments of the six countrieshave , or might be willing to dedicate , financial and technical resources to assistsubsistence and small farmers , and rural areas dependent on agriculture , adjust topossible adverse consequences of increased imports of staple commodities from theunited states .

the bush administration , though , has signaled that it will direct someresources from the u.s. foreign aid program in the region to help producers adverselyaffected by the agreement's agricultural provisions to adjust .

in an effort to securevotes in the senate finance committee for s. 1307 ( the administration'sbill submitted to implement the agreement ) , the administration committed in a letterto senator bingaman to support additional spending of up to $150 million over fiveyears for transitional rural assistance to assist farmers in guatemala , el salvador , andthe dominican republic , beginning in fy2007 .

this commitment would besuperseded by u.s. resources for rural development made available under amillennium challenge corporation compact , if signed earlier by any of thesecountries with the united states .

 ( 38 ) another approach would be to expand upongovernment efforts ( with support from the world bank and the inter - americandevelopment bank ) to assist interested producers and entrepreneurs exploreopportunities to increase food exports to neighboring country and u.s. markets .

