many retirees depend on their former employer for retirement health insurance , either as their sole source of coverage for those under age 65 or as a supplement to their medicare coverage once they reach 65 .

however , given that employers are not required to offer employer - sponsored health insurance , as well as limited federal protections available for persons losing coverage , the future of these benefits is uncertain .

with the retirement of the baby boom generation looming ahead , employers offering coverage to their retired workers will face a huge future financial commitment .

some employers have already reduced or eliminated their commitment to insure their retirees .

recent trends indicate that retiree health benefits are increasingly subject to higher beneficiary cost - sharing .

further , among employers who provide health insurance for current retirees , their current workers are less likely to be guaranteed these benefits upon retirement .

retiree health insurance became prevalent after the passage of medicare in 1965 , as a result of the relatively low cost .

because medicare is the primary payer for qualified retired beneficiaries aged 65 and older , it was fairly inexpensive for employers to provide retiree health benefits that supplemented the medicare benefit .

in the late 1980s , retiree health benefits became more expensive for employers due to both the rising costs of benefits not covered by medicare and the changing demographics of the retiree population .

for example , employer - sponsored plans often include coverage for prescription drugs , and depending on the cost - sharing arrangements and level of coverage , the cost of including prescription drug coverage can be very expensive .

with the implementation of medicare prescription drug coverage in january 2006 , retiree coverage may see further changes as employers gain experience with the interaction between medicare's and their plan's prescription drug coverage .

however , medicare coverage affects only those retirees who are over 65 , disabled , have end stage renal disease ( esrd ) and also qualify for medicare .

many individuals retire before reaching 65 , and their retiree health insurance would most likely be their sole source of health insurance coverage , including prescription drug coverage .

employer - sponsored retiree health insurance benefits are eroding as employers attempt to control their costs by tightening eligibility requirements and shifting costs to retirees through increased premium contributions , deductibles , and co - payment amounts .

in some cases when employers attempt to scale back or eliminate coverage , employees have turned to the courts to try to retain their coverage .

the courts have sided with retirees in only limited instances because minimal federal protections exist for retirees when employers change their health insurance coverage .

understanding the demographics of the retiree population helps to explain their high health insurance costs .

this issue is of growing concern to employers offering retiree health insurance , especially as they face the retirement of their current "baby boom generation" workers .

as this group begins to consider retirement , a combination of factors — the size of the group , their increasing life expectancies and their increasing health costs as they age — will make it financially difficult for employers to offer them retiree health insurance .

furthermore , absent retiree health insurance from a former employer , this group can also generally expect to pay higher amounts for the same or less coverage in the individual market .

in 1965 when medicare was created , costs were relatively low for employer - based retiree health benefits and there were few retirees compared to the number of active workers .

the 18.5 million persons over age 65 comprised only 9.5% of the total population .

most workers waited to retire until the age of 65 when they were eligible for retirement benefits under social security and health insurance coverage under medicare .

at retirement , they had an average life expectancy of 14 more years , living to age 79 .

since that time , americans are living longer .

according to the u.s. national center for health statistics , 2002 data indicates that persons reaching age 65 had an average life expectancy of an additional 18.2 years , living beyond age 83 .

according to the u.s. census , the total number of persons over age 65 has almost doubled since 1965 , reaching 35.6 million , or 12.3% of the total population by 2002 .

this trend is projected to continue and , according to u.s. census bureau estimates for 2030 , when the baby boomers are all over age 65 , the total number of persons 65 and older will have more than doubled again , growing from 35.6 million to 71.5 million , comprising 20% of the u.s. population .

as individuals reach their late 50s and 60s , they become increasingly likely to have acute and chronic health conditions such as heart disease , arthritis , and diabetes .

according to the national center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion , approximately 80% of all persons over age 65 have at least one chronic condition and 50% have at least two .

furthermore , after adjusting for socioeconomic factors , a lack of health insurance has been linked to an increased risk of a decline in overall health among adults in late middle age .

americans approaching or at retirement age can expect to consume more medical services than younger persons .

according to the administration on aging , in 2003 , the elderly averaged $3,741 in out - of - pocket health care expenditures , compared to the average out - of - pocket costs of only $2,416 for the total population .

employment - based insurance spreads these costs over all its enrollees in the same plan , but private non - group insurance premiums generally reflect the higher risk attributable to the policyholder's age and health status .

retirees who have a greater prevalence of health problems are less able than workers to obtain affordable health insurance should they lose their employer - sponsored insurance before they are eligible for medicare .

a 2001 commonwealth fund study found that adults aged 50 to 64 who buy individual coverage are likely to pay much more out - of - pocket for a limited package of benefits than their counterparts who are covered by their employers .

an analysis of premium costs for individual coverage in 15 cities showed a median cost of nearly $6,000 for individual coverage for a 60-year - old .

group rates would have been less than half this amount , with a median annual premium cost of employer insurance of $2,520 for a preferred provider organization ( ppo ) plan , and workers would have been required to pay only 14% of this amount for single coverage .

today's workers face many choices regarding retirement age .

some workers retire as early as age 55 , the minimum retirement age allowed by most defined benefit pension plans .

because availability of health insurance benefits is an important consideration for older workers , still others wait until the medicare eligibility age of 65 to retire .

according to mercer , in its 2004 survey on employer - sponsored health insurance , the median retirement age was 60 in organizations offering retiree health insurance , compared to 64 in those that do not .

while the discussion of the significance of this age difference only focuses on whether or not firms offer retiree health insurance , there may be other factors , such as overall benefit package and salary levels that contribute to an individual's decision of when to retiree .

the erosion of health insurance coverage for the retiree population is based on several factors .

as previously discussed , the demographics of this group foreshadow that employers may be facing coverage for a larger number of individuals who are expected to live longer and therefore use a lot more health care services than originally anticipated when these companies first began to offer retiree health coverage .

in addition , several other factors , described below , contribute to the erosion of retiree health insurance , including increasing costs ( especially for prescription drugs ) , the economy , and changes in accounting practices .

there are a wide variety of policy options that endeavor to make retiree coverage more available or affordable , or even to require that employers maintain coverage .

however , when considering any option , it is also essential to consider the relationship between retirees' health insurance and insurance for current workers .

special treatment for retirees , compared to current workers could lead to inequitable outcomes .

for example , one policy option often discussed to protect retiree health insurance is to require employers to continue to provide previously promised health insurance coverage to their retiree population .

without a parallel requirement for current workers , employers could find themselves in an awkward situation in which they were financially unable to cover workers , but required to cover retirees .

thus any statutory requirement to provide retiree health insurance coverage should be examined in the broader context of all employer - sponsored coverage .

the 110 th congress has not yet introduced bills relating to retire health insurance .

however , given the continued reduction in employer - sponsored retiree health insurance , it is likely that this issue will be as active in the 110 th congress as it was in the 109 th congress .

therefore , listed below is a summary of some of the bills introduced in the 109 th congress , to provide a sense of the types of legislative solutions that were proposed to address retirees' health insurance coverage .

the 109 th bills cover a wide variety of options for making retiree coverage more available and affordable such as , options for expanding medicare or fehbp coverage to certain retirees , prohibiting group plans from reducing benefits for retirees , or providing tax relief .

several bills address the needs of specific groups of retirees .

other legislation provides for comprehensive health insurance for all americans , not just retirees .

this list does not include bills that would amend medicare prescription drug coverage or associated employer subsidies .

the list will be updated in response to congressional activity in the 110 th congress , as information becomes available .

expand medicare or fehbp coverage h.r .

55 would make fehbp available to individuals age 55 to 65 who would not otherwise have health insurance .

h.r .

2072 would provide access to medicare benefits for individuals ages 55 to 65 and would amend the internal revenue code to allow a refundable and advanceable credit against income tax for payment of such premiums .

protect retirees who lose their health coverage s. 329 would increase the amount of unsecured claims for salaries and wages given priority in bankruptcy to provide for cash payment to retirees to compensate for lost health insurance benefits resulting from bankruptcy of their former employer .

h.r .

1322 would prohibit profitable employers from making any changes to retiree health benefits once an employee retired .

the bill would require plan sponsors to restore benefits for retirees whose health coverage was reduced before enactment of the bill , and create a loan guarantee program to help firms restore benefits .

it would not restrict employers from changing retiree health benefits for current employees .

provide tax relief h.r .

218 would allow a deduction for amounts paid for health insurance and prescription drug costs of individuals .

h.r .

2176 would provide a 100% deduction for the health insurance costs of individuals .

h.r .

2089 , h.r .

765 , s. 4 and s. 160 would allow individuals a refundable credit against income tax for the purchase of private health insurance , subject to income and other limitations .

s. 1573 would amend the internal revenue code to encourage funding of collectively bargained retiree health care benefits .

h.r .

1872 and s. 978 would provide tax incentives for the purchase of qualified health insurance .

protect specifically defined groups of retirees through a variety of methods h.r .

299 and s. 162 would clarify that certain coal industry health benefits may not be modified or terminated .

h.r .

602 and s. 407 would restore health care coverage to certain retired members of the uniformed services .

h.r .

322 would allow a refundable credit to military retirees for premiums paid for coverage under medicare part b. h.r .

994 and s. 484 would allow federal civilian and military retirees to pay health insurance premiums on a pretax basis and allowed a deduction for tricare supplemental premiums .

provide comprehensive employer or national health insurance h.r .

15 , h.r .

676 , h.r .

1200 , and h.r .

2133 would establish national health insurance programs .

h.r .

1955 , s. 637 , and s. 874 would establish a national health program administered by the office of personnel management to offer health benefits plans to individuals who are not federal employees .

