the trump administration's nuclear posture review , released on february 2 , 2018 , includes plans for the united states to deploy two new types of nuclear weapons "to enhance the flexibility and responsiveness of u.s. nuclear forces. .

the report highlights that these weapons represent a response to russia's deployment of a much larger stockpile of lower - yield nonstrategic nuclear weapons and to russia's apparent belief "that limited nuclear first use , potentially including low yield weapons" can provide "a coercive advantage in crises and at lower levels of conflict. .

the two capabilities identified in the npr are a new low - yield nuclear warhead to be deployed on u.s. long - range submarine - launched ballistic missiles and a new sea - launched cruise missile that could be deployed on navy ships or attack submarines .

the report states that the united states does not need to deploy "non - strategic nuclear capabilities that quantitatively match or mimic russia's more expansive arsenal. .

but it indicates that "expanding flexible u.s. nuclear options now , to include low yield options , is important for the preservation of credible deterrence against regional aggression. .

the npr's recommended deployment of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons follows growing concerns , both in congress and among analysts outside of government , about new nuclear challenges facing the united states .

for example , in late january 2015 , representatives mike rogers and mike turner , both members of the house armed services committee , sent a letter to then - secretary of state john kerry and then - secretary of defense chuck hagel , seeking information about the agreements that would be needed and costs that might be incurred if the united states sought to deploy dual - capable aircraft and nuclear bombs at bases on the territories of nato members in eastern europe .

neither nato , as an organization , nor any of the nations who are members of nato had called on the united states to pursue such deployments .

however , representatives rogers and turner noted that russian actions in 2014 — including aggression against ukraine , noncompliance with the 1987 inf treaty , and threats to deploy nuclear weapons in crimea — threatened european security and warranted a more potent u.s. response .

some analysts outside government have also called for the deployment of greater numbers and / or types of nuclear weapons in europe in response to russia's continuing aggression in ukraine and its apparent increased reliance on nuclear weapons .

others , however , have argued that more nuclear weapons would do little to enhance nato's security and that nato would be better served by enhancing its conventional capabilities .

this interest in possible new deployments of u.s. nonstrategic , or shorter - range , nuclear weapons differs sharply from previous years , when members of congress , while concerned about russia's larger stockpile of such weapons , seemed more interested in limiting these weapons through arms control than expanding u.s. deployments .

during the senate debate on the 2010 u.s. - russian strategic arms reduction treaty ( new start ) , many members noted that this treaty did not impose any limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons and that russia possessed a far greater number of these systems than did the united states .

some expressed particular concerns about the threat that russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons might pose to u.s. allies in europe ; others argued that these weapons might be vulnerable to theft or sale to nations or groups seeking their own nuclear weapons .

in response to these concerns , the senate , in its resolution of ratification on new start , stated that the united states should seek to initiate within one year , "negotiations with the russian federation on an agreement to address the disparity between the non - strategic ( tactical ) nuclear weapons stockpiles of the russian federation and of the united states and to secure and reduce tactical nuclear weapons in a verifiable manner. .

in addition , in the fy2013 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4310 , §1037 ) , congress again indicated that "the united states should pursue negotiations with the russian federation aimed at the reduction of russian deployed and nondeployed nonstrategic nuclear forces. .

although the united states did raise the issue of negotiations on nonstrategic nuclear weapons with russia within the year after new start entered into force , the two nations have not moved forward with efforts to negotiate limits on these weapons .

russia has expressed little interest in such a negotiation , and has stated that it will not even begin the process until the united states removes its nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases in europe .

according to u.s. officials , the united states and nato have been trying to identify and evaluate possible transparency measures and limits that might apply to these weapons .

this report provides basic information about u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

it begins with a brief discussion of how these weapons have appeared in public debates in the past few decades , then summarizes the differences between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

it then provides some historical background , describing the numbers and types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed by both nations during the cold war and in the past decade ; the policies that guided the deployment and prospective use of these weapons ; measures that the two sides have taken to reduce and contain their forces , and the 2018 npr's recommendation for the deployment of new u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

the report reviews the issues that have been raised with regard to u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons , and summarizes a number of policy options that might be explored by congress , the united states , russia , and other nations to address these issues .

during the cold war , nuclear weapons were central to the u.s. strategy of deterring soviet aggression against the united states and u.s. allies .

toward this end , the united states deployed a wide variety of systems that could carry nuclear warheads .

these included nuclear mines ; artillery ; short - , medium - , and long - range ballistic missiles ; cruise missiles ; and gravity bombs .

the united states deployed these weapons with its troops in the field , aboard aircraft , on surface ships , on submarines , and in fixed , land - based launchers .

the united states articulated a complex strategy , and developed detailed operational plans , that would guide the use of these weapons in the event of a conflict with the soviet union and its allies .

during the cold war , most public discussions about u.s. and soviet nuclear weapons — including discussions about perceived imbalances between the two nations' forces and discussions about the possible use of arms control measures to reduce the risk of nuclear war and limit or reduce the numbers of nuclear weapons — focused on long - range , or strategic , nuclear weapons .

these include long - range land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) , submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , and heavy bombers that carry cruise missiles or gravity bombs .

these were the weapons that the united states and soviet union deployed so that they could threaten destruction of central military , industrial , and leadership facilities in the other country — the weapons of global nuclear war .

but both nations also deployed thousands of nuclear weapons outside their own territories with their troops in the field .

these weapons usually had less explosive power and were deployed with launchers that would deliver them across shorter ranges than strategic nuclear weapons .

they were intended for use by troops on the battlefield or within the theater of battle to achieve more limited , or tactical , objectives .

these "nonstrategic" nuclear weapons did not completely escape public discussion or arms control debates .

their profile rose in the early 1980s when u.s. plans to deploy new cruise missiles and intermediate - range ballistic missiles in europe , as a part of nato's nuclear strategy , ignited large public protests in many nato nations .

their high profile returned later in the decade when the united states and soviet union signed the 1987 intermediate range nuclear forces ( inf ) treaty and eliminated medium - and intermediate - range ballistic and cruise missiles .

then , in 1991 , president george bush and soviet president mikhail gorbachev each announced that they would withdraw from deployment most of their nonstrategic nuclear weapons and eliminate many of them .

these 1991 announcements , coming after the abortive coup in moscow in august 1991 , but months before the december 1991 collapse of the soviet union , responded to growing concerns about the safety and security of soviet nuclear weapons at a time of growing political and economic upheaval in that nation .

they also allowed the united states to alter its forces in response to easing tensions and the changing international security environment .

consequently , for many in the general public , these initiatives appeared to resolve the problems associated with nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

as a result , although the united states and russia included these weapons in some of their arms control discussions , most of their arms control efforts during the rest of that decade focused on strategic weapons , with efforts made to implement the 1991 strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) and negotiate deeper reductions in strategic nuclear weapons .

the lack of public attention did not , however , reflect a total absence of questions or concerns about nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

in 1997 , president clinton and russia's president boris yeltsin signed a framework agreement that stated they would address measures related to nonstrategic nuclear weapons in a potential start iii treaty .

further , during the 1990s , outside analysts , officials in the u.s. government , and many members of congress raised continuing questions about the safety and security of russia's remaining nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

congress sought a more detailed accounting of russia's weapons in legislation passed in the late 1990s .

analysts also questioned the role that these weapons might play in russia's evolving national security strategy , the rationale for their continued deployment in the u.s. nuclear arsenal , and their relationship to u.s. nuclear nonproliferation policy .

the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , also reminded people of the catastrophic consequences that might ensue if terrorists were to acquire and use nuclear weapons , with continuing attention focused on the potentially insecure stock of russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

the george w. bush administration did not adopt an explicit policy of reducing or eliminating nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

when it announced the results of its nuclear posture review ( npr ) in early 2002 , it did not outline any changes to the u.s. deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in europe ; it stated that nato would address the future of those weapons .

although there was little public discussion of this issue during the bush administration , reports indicate that the united states did redeploy and withdraw some of its nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases in europe .

it made these changes quietly and unilaterally , in response to u.s. and nato security requirements , without requesting or requiring reciprocity from russia .

the bush administration also did not discuss these weapons with russia during arms control negotiations in 2002 .

instead , the strategic offensive reductions treaty ( moscow treaty ) , signed in june 2002 , limited only the number of operationally deployed warheads on strategic nuclear weapons .

when asked about the absence of these weapons in the moscow treaty , then - secretary of state colin powell noted that the treaty was not intended to address these weapons , although the parties could address questions about the safety and security of these weapons during less formal discussions .

these discussions , however , never occurred .

nevertheless , congress remained concerned about the potential risks associated with russia's continuing deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

the fy2006 defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-163 ) contained two provisions that called for further study on these weapons .

section 1212 mandated that the secretary of defense submit a report that would determine whether increased transparency and further reductions in u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons were in the u.s. national security interest ; section 3115 called on the secretary of energy to submit a report on what steps the united states might take to bring about progress in improving the accounting for and security of russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5017 , a bill to ensure implementation of the 9 / 11 commission report recommendations , included a provision ( §334 ) that called on the secretary of defense to submit a report that detailed u.s. efforts to encourage russia to provide a detailed accounting of its force of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

it also would have authorized $5 million for the united states to assist russia in completing an inventory of these weapons .

the 109 th congress did not address this bill or its components in any detail .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

1 sought to ensure the implementation of the 9 / 11 commission report recommendations .

however , in its final form ( p.l .

110-53 ) , it did not include any references to russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

several events in the past decade have served to elevate the profile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in debates about the future of u.s. nuclear weapons and arms control policy .

for example , in january 2007 , four senior statesmen published an article in the wall street journal that highlighted the continuing threat posed by the existence , and proliferation , of nuclear weapons .

they called on leaders in nations with nuclear weapons to adopt the goal of seeking a world free of nuclear weapons .

after acknowledging that that this was a long - term enterprise , they identified a number of urgent , near - term steps that these nations might take .

they included among these steps a call for nations to eliminate "short - range nuclear weapons designed to be forward - deployed. .

in a subsequent article published in january 2008 , they elaborated on this step , calling for "a dialogue , including within nato and with russia , on consolidating the nuclear weapons designed for forward deployment to enhance their security , as a first step toward careful accounting for them and their eventual elimination. .

they noted , specifically , that "these smaller and more portable nuclear weapons are , given their characteristics , inviting acquisition targets for terrorist groups. .

in addition , as a part of its renewed interest in the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy , congress established , in the fy2008 defense authorization bill ( p.l .

110-181 §1062 ) , a congressional commission on the strategic posture of the united states .

the congressional commission , which issued its report in april 2009 , briefly addressed the role of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy and noted that these weapons can help the united states assure its allies of the u.s. commitment to their security .

it also noted concerns about the imbalance in the numbers of u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and mentioned that russia had increased its reliance on these weapons to compensate for weaknesses in its conventional forces .

the 110 th congress also mandated ( p.l .

110-181 , §1070 ) that the next administration conduct a new nuclear posture review ( npr ) .

the obama administration completed this npr in early april 2010 .

this study identified a number of steps the united states would take to reduce the roles and numbers of nuclear weapons in the u.s. arsenal .

a few of these steps , including the planned retirement of nuclear - armed , sea - launched cruise missiles , affected u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

at the same time , though , the npr recognized the role that u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons play in assuring u.s. allies of the u.s. commitment to their security .

it indicated that the united states would "retain the capability to forward - deploy u.s. nuclear weapons on tactical fighter - bombers" and that the united states would seek to "expand consultations with allies and partners to address how to ensure the credibility and effectiveness of the u.s. extended deterrent .

no changes in u.s. extended deterrence capabilities will be made without close consultations with our allies and partners. .

discussions about the presence of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in europe and their role in nato's strategy also increased in 2009 and 2010 during the drafting of nato's most recent strategic concept .

officials in some nato nations called for the removal of u.s. nonstrategic weapons from bases on the continent , noting that they had no military significance for nato's security .

others called for the retention of these weapons , arguing that they played a political role in nato , with shared rights and responsibilities , and that they helped balance russia's deployment of greater numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

when it was published , the strategic concept did not call for the removal of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

it stated that "deterrence , based on an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional capabilities , remains a core element of our overall strategy. .

it also indicated that "the circumstances in which any use of nuclear weapons might have to be contemplated are extremely remote," but indicated that "as long as nuclear weapons exist , nato will remain a nuclear alliance. .

it then concluded that nato would "maintain an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces. .

nato nations continue to share responsibility for basing and delivery of the weapons and would weigh in on decisions about their possible use .

at the same time , nato recognized that the new strategic concept would not be the last word on the role or presence of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in nato .

in the declaration released at the conclusion of the november 2010 lisbon summit , the allies agreed that they would continue to review nato's overall posture in deterring and defending against the full range of threats to the alliance .

they commissioned a comprehensive deterrence and defense posture review ( ddpr ) that would examine the range of capabilities required for defense and deterrence , including nuclear weapons , missile defense , and other means of strategic deterrence and defense .

the ddpr was presented at the may 2012 nato summit in chicago .

it did not , however , recommend any changes in nato's nuclear posture .

instead , it noted that "nuclear weapons are a core component of nato's overall capabilities for deterrence and defence," and that "the alliance's nuclear force posture currently meets the criteria for an effective deterrence and defence posture. .

nato reaffirmed this conclusion after its summit in wales in september 2014 , noting that "deterrence , based on an appropriate mix of nuclear , conventional , and missile defence capabilities , remains a core element of our overall strategy. .

nato addressed this issue again during its summit in warsaw in july 2016 , and did not alter this conclusion about the value of nuclear weapons to the alliance .

moreover , although the alliance did not call for the deployment of additional nuclear weapons in europe , the communique released at the end of the summit highlighted the continuing importance of u.s. nuclear weapons deployed in europe and the nuclear sharing arrangements among the allies .

specifically , the allies reiterated that "as long as nuclear weapons exist , nato will remain a nuclear alliance" and that "the strategic forces of the alliance , particularly those of the united states , are the supreme guarantee of the security of the allies. .

at the same time , they noted that "nato's nuclear deterrence posture also relies , in part , on united states' nuclear weapons forward - deployed in europe and on capabilities and infrastructure provided by allies concerned. .

at the same time , nato has begun to implement numerous initiatives in response to russia's aggression in ukraine and aggressive posture toward europe .

while some of these initiatives may strengthen nato's planning and exercise capabilities , they are unlikely to result in changes in the numbers of deployed nuclear weapons .

the 2018 nuclear posture review picks up on many of the same themes highlighted in documents published in the past decade .

like the strategic posture commission report published in 2009 , the npr highlights the imbalance in the numbers of u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and states that russia has increased its reliance on these weapons in its national security strategy .

it argues that russia believes it could use these weapons to coerce the united states and its nato allies to back down during a conventional conflict in europe .

the 2018 npr also echoes the obama administration's npr , indicating that the united states will maintain "the capability to forward deploy nuclear bombers and dca around the world. .

it also states that the united states will continue obama - era programs to communicate with and consult allies "on policy , strategy and capabilities. .

the 2018 npr also supports of the recent changes in nato's approach to nuclear modernization and planning , indicating that the united states is "committed to upgrading dca [dual capable aircraft] with the nuclear - capable f - 35 aircraft" and that the united states will "work with nato to best ensure — and improve where needed — the readiness , survivability , and operational effectiveness of dca based in europe. .

however , while the 2010 npr called for the retirement of u.s. tomahawk nuclear - armed sea - launched cruise missiles ( tlamn ) , the 2018 npr calls for the development of a new sea - launched cruise missile ( slcm ) .

the 2010 npr argued that "this system serves a redundant purpose in the u.s. nuclear stockpile" and , although the united states "remains committed to providing a credible extended deterrence posture and capabilities," the "deterrence and assurance roles of tlamn can be adequately substituted by these other means. .

the 2018 npr disputes this conclusion .

it states that "the rapid development of a modern slcm" will address "the increasing need for flexible and low - yield options to strengthen deterrence and assurance" and "will strengthen the effectiveness of the sea - based nuclear deterrence force. .

the distinction between strategic and nonstrategic ( also known as tactical ) nuclear weapons reflects the military definitions of , on the one hand , a strategic mission and , on the other hand , the tactical use of nuclear weapons .

according to the department of defense dictionary of military terms , a strategic mission is directed against one or more of a selected series of enemy targets with the purpose of progressive destruction and disintegration of the enemy's warmaking capacity and will to make war .

targets include key manufacturing systems , sources of raw material , critical material , stockpiles , power systems , transportation systems , communication facilities , and other such target systems .

as opposed to tactical operations , strategic operations are designed to have a long - range rather than immediate effect on the enemy and its military forces .

in contrast , the tactical use of nuclear weapons is defined as "the use of nuclear weapons by land , sea , or air forces against opposing forces , supporting installations or facilities , in support of operations that contribute to the accomplishment of a military mission of limited scope , or in support of the military commander's scheme of maneuver , usually limited to the area of military operations. .

during the 2010 debate on the new start treaty , many senators expressed concerns about russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

they noted that these weapons were not covered by the new treaty , that russia possessed a far greater number of these weapons than did the united states , and that russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons might be vulnerable to theft or sale to other nations seeking nuclear weapons .

more recently , some members have raised concerns about the possibility that russia might deploy these weapons in crimea , which russia annexed in march 2014 , bringing them closer to the borders of some nato allies .

russia's foreign minister sergei lavrov ignited these concerns in december 2014 , when he noted that russia had a right to put nuclear weapons in crimea because crimea was now a part of russia .

although he did not offer details of plans for such deployments , other reports have indicated that russia might move missiles and bombers that could deliver either nuclear or conventional weapons into crimea in the next few years .

the 2018 nuclear posture review continues to highlight concerns about russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons and links proposed changes in u.s. nuclear forces — including the development of a new low - yield warhead for submarine launched ballistic missiles and new sea - launched cruise missile — to russia's apparent nuclear doctrine and the modernization of its nonstrategic nuclear forces .

during the 2010 debates prior to the completion of nato's new strategic concept , analysts and government officials also raised many issues about u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

these debates focused on questions about whether nato should continue to rely on nuclear weapons to ensure its security and whether the united states should continue to deploy nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in europe .

many of the discussions that focused on russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and many of those that focused on u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons reached a similar conclusion — there was widespread agreement about the need for further cooperation between the united states and russia in containing , controlling , and possibly reducing nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

the 112 th congress reiterated its support for this agenda , when in the fy2013 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4310 , §1037 ) it indicated that "the united states should pursue negotiations with the russian federation aimed at the reduction of russian deployed and nondeployed nonstrategic nuclear forces. .

but the tone of the discussion has changed in recent years , following russia's annexation of crimea , its support for separatists in ukraine , and its military maneuvers near nato nations .

there is little discussion of possible reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons in europe and declining interest in pursuing transparency and confidence - building measures with russia .

instead , while the prospects for cooperation with russia seem limited , particularly in light of its reported violation of the inf treaty , nato has taken steps to bolster its nuclear capabilities and the united states is considering the deployment of new nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

one potential risk from russia's continued deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons stems from concerns about their safety and security in storage areas and a possible lack of central control over their use when deployed in the field .

these weapons were deployed , and many remain in storage , at remote bases close to potential battlefields and far from the central command authority in moscow .

the economic chaos in russia during the 1990s raised questions about the stability and reliability of the troops charged with monitoring and securing these weapons .

at the time , some raised concerns about the possibility that the weapons might be lost , stolen , or sold to other nations or groups seeking nuclear weapons .

even though economic conditions in russia have improved significantly , some analysts still view russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons as a possible source of instability .

specifically , some have noted that "the continuing existence of … tactical nuclear weapons … creates a risk of accidental , unauthorized or mistaken use .

in addition , the risk of terrorist groups acquiring these weapons is high .

therefore , security vigilance is essential. .

russian officials deny that they might lose control over their nonstrategic nuclear weapons and they contend that the problems of the 1990s were resolved as the weapons were withdrawn to central storage areas .

moreover , there is no public evidence from western sources about any episodes of lost , sold , or stolen russian nuclear weapons .

nevertheless , concerns remain that these weapons might find their way to officials in rogue nations or nonstate actors .

for example , during comments made after a speech in october 2008 , secretary of defense robert gates stated that he was worried that the russians did not know the numbers or locations of "old land mines , nuclear artillery shells , and so on" that might be of interest to rogue states or terrorists .

russian officials noted , in response to this comment , that its stocks of nuclear weapons were secure and well - guarded and that gates's concerns were not valid .

as was noted above , many analysts argue that russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons pose a risk to the united states , its allies , and others because russia has altered its national security concept and military strategies , increasing its reliance on nuclear weapons .

some fear that russia might resort to the early use of nuclear weapons in a conflict along its periphery , which could lead to a wider conflict and the possible involvement of troops from nato or other neighboring countries , possibly drawing in new nato members .

some also believe that russia could threaten nato with its nonstrategic nuclear weapons because russia sees nato as a threat to its security .

russian analysts and officials have argued that nato enlargement — with the possible deployment of nuclear weapons and missile defense capabilities on the territories of new nato members close to russia's borders — demonstrates how much nato could threaten russia .

the congressionally mandated strategic posture commission expressed a measure of concern about the military implications of russia's nonstrategic nuclear forces .

it noted that russia "stores thousands of these weapons in apparent support of possible military operations west of the urals. .

it further noted that the current imbalance between u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear warheads is "worrisome to some u.s. allies in central europe. .

it argued that this imbalance , and the allies' worries , could become more pronounced in the future if the united states and russia continue to reduce their numbers of deployed strategic nuclear weapons .

others have argued , however , that regardless of russia's rhetoric , "russia's theater nuclear weapons are not .. .

destabilizing. .

even if modernized , these weapons will not "give moscow the capability to alter the strategic landscape. .

further , russian weapons , even with its new military strategy , may not pose a threat to nato or u.s. allies .

russia's doctrine indicates that it would use these weapons in response to a weak performance by its conventional forces in an ongoing conflict .

since it would be unlikely for nato to be involved in a conventional conflict with russia , it would also be unlikely for russian weapons to find targets in nato nations .

this does not , however , preclude their use in other conflicts along russia's periphery .

as russian documents indicate , russia could use these weapons if its national survival were at stake .

this view , however , has been tempered , in recent years , by both russia's aggression in ukraine and its frequent "nuclear saber - rattling. .

not only have russian officials reminded others of the existence and relevance of russian nuclear weapons , russian military exercises , bomber flights , and cruise missile launches have seemed designed to demonstrate russia's capabilities and , possibly , its willingness to challenge nato's eastern members .

these actions have raised concerns about the possibility that russia might threaten to use nuclear weapons during a crisis with nato , in line with its apparent "escalate to de - escalate" strategy , to force a withdrawal by nato forces defending an exposed ally or to terminate a conflict on terms favorable to russia .

while some analysts dispute this interpretation of russia's doctrine , most agree that nonstrategic nuclear weapons appear to play a significant role in russia's doctrine and war plans .

the bush administration argued , after the 2001 nuclear posture review , that the united states had reduced its reliance on nuclear weapons by increasing the role of missile defenses and precision conventional weapons in the u.s. deterrent posture .

at the same time , though , the administration indicated that the united states would acquire and maintain those capabilities that it needed to deter and defeat any nation with the potential to threaten the united states , particularly if the potential adversary possessed weapons of mass destruction .

it noted that these new , threatening capabilities could include hardened and deeply buried targets and , possibly , bunkers holding chemical or biological weapons .

it indicated that the united states would seek to develop the capabilities to destroy these types of facilities .

using a similar construct , the obama administration , in the 2010 nuclear posture review , also indicated that the united states would reduce the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. regional deterrence strategies by increasing its reliance on missile defenses and precision conventional weapons .

unlike the bush administration , however , the obama administration did not seek to acquire new nuclear weapons capabilities or to extend u.s. nuclear deterrence to threats from nations armed with chemical or biological weapons .

it stated that it would not consider the use of nuclear weapons in response to conventional , chemical , or biological attack if the attacking nation were in compliance with its nuclear nonproliferation obligations .

instead , in such circumstances , the united states would deter and respond to attacks with missile defenses and advanced conventional weapons .

in addition , the administration announced that it planned to retire the navy's nuclear - armed , sea - launched cruise missiles , which had been part of the u.s. extended deterrent to allies in asia .

nevertheless , the administration pledged to retain and modernize the b - 61 warheads , carried by u.s. tactical fighters and bombers ; these are also a part of the u.s. extended deterrent .

some questioned the wisdom of this change in policy .

they recognized that the united states would only threaten the use of nuclear weapons in the most extreme circumstances , but they argued that , by taking these weapons "off the table" in some contingencies , the united states might allow some adversaries to conclude that they could threaten the united states without fear of an overwhelming response .

the obama administration argued , however , that although it was taking the nuclear option off the table in some cases , this change would not undermine the u.s. ability to deter attacks from non - nuclear nations because the united states maintained the capability to respond to attacks from these nations with overwhelming conventional force .

according to under secretary of state ellen tauscher , "we retain the prospect of using devastating conventional force to deter and respond to any aggression , especially if they were to use chemical or biological weapons .

no one should doubt our resolve to hold accountable those responsible for such aggression , whether those giving the orders or carrying them out .

deterrence depends on the credibility of response .

a massive and potential conventional response to non - nuclear aggression is highly credible. .

questions about the role of u.s. nuclear weapons in regional contingencies have resurfaced in recent years , as analysts have sought to understand how these weapons might affect a conflict with a regional ally armed with nuclear weapons .

some analysts doubt that u.s. nuclear weapons would play any role in such a contingency , unless used in retaliation after an adversary used a nuclear weapon against the united states or an ally , because u.s. conventional forces should be sufficient to achieve most conceivable military objectives .

others , however , argue that the united states might need to threaten the use of nuclear weapons , and possibly even employ those weapons , when facing an adversary seeking to use its own nuclear capabilities to intimidate the united states or coerce it to withdraw support for a regional ally .

some have suggested , specifically , that forward - deployed nuclear weapons with lower yields — in other words , nonstrategic nuclear weapons — might serve as a more credible deterrent threat in these circumstances .

the 2018 nuclear posture review adopts this perspective , and seems to discount the approach , taken in both the bush and obama nprs , of reducing the role of nuclear weapons by expanding the role and options available with advanced conventional weapons .

it does not completely dismiss the value of u.s. conventional capabilities , but asserts that "conventional forces alone are inadequate to assure many allies who rightly place enormous value on u.s. extended nuclear deterrence for their security. .

these concerns are central to the npr's recommendation that the united states develop two new types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

where the two previous nprs sought to fill "gaps" in deterrence with ballistic missile defenses and advanced conventional weapons , the 2018 npr asserts that new nuclear weapons are needed for this purpose .

for years after the collapse of the warsaw pact and demise of the soviet union , analysts questioned whether the united states needed to continue to deploy nuclear weapons in europe .

during the cold war , these weapons were a part of nato's effort to offset the conventional superiority of the soviet union and its warsaw pact allies .

some argued that this role was no longer relevant following the collapse of the soviet - era military and alliance structure .

in addition , analysts argued that nato conventional forces were far superior to those of russia , and sufficient for nato's defense .

however , nato policy still views nonstrategic nuclear weapons as a deterrent to any potential adversary , and they also serve as a link among the nato nations , with bases in several nations and shared responsibility for nuclear policy planning and decisionmaking .

they also still serve as a visible reminder of the u.s. extended deterrent and assurance of its commitment to the defense of its allies .

the united states , its allies , and analysts outside government engaged in a heated debate over the role of and need for u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed in europe in the months leading up to the completion of nato's strategic concept in november 2010 .

in early 2010 , political leaders from several nato nations — including belgium , germany , luxembourg , the netherlands , and norway — called for the united states to remove these weapons from europe .

they argued that these weapons served no military purpose in europe , and that their removal would demonstrate nato's commitment to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons , a vision supported by president obama in a speech he delivered in april 2009 .

those who sought the weapons' removal also argued that nato could meet the political goals of shared nuclear responsibility in other ways , and that the united states could extend deterrence and ensure the security of its allies in europe with conventional weapons , missile defenses , and longer - range strategic nuclear weapons .

moreover , some argue , because these weapons play no military or political role in europe , they no longer serve as a symbol of alliance solidarity and cooperation .

others , however , including some officials in newer nato nations , argued that u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons in europe not only remained relevant militarily , in some circumstances , but that they were an essential indicator of the u.s. commitment to nato security and solidarity .

this argument has gained credence as some of the newer nato allies , such as poland and the baltic states , feel threatened by russia and its arsenal of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

they would view the withdrawal of u.s. nuclear weapons as a change in the u.s. and nato commitment to their security .

nato foreign ministers addressed the issue of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons during their meeting in tallinn , estonia , in april 2010 .

at this meeting , the allies sought to balance the views of those nations who sought nato agreement on the removal of the weapons and those who argued that these weapons were still relevant to their security and to nato's solidarity .

at the conclusion of the meeting , secretary of state hillary clinton said that the united states was not opposed to reductions in the number of u.s. nuclear weapons in europe , but that the removal of these weapons should be linked to a reduction in the number of russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

moreover , according to a nato spokesman , the foreign ministers had agreed that no nuclear weapons would be removed from europe unless all 28 member states of nato agreed .

some also question whether the united states and nato might benefit from the removal of these weapons from bases in europe for safety and security reasons .

an air force review of nuclear surety and security practices , released in early 2008 , identified potential security concerns for u.s. weapons stored at some bases in europe .

the problems were evident at some of the national bases , where the united states stores nuclear weapons for use by the host nation's own aircraft , but not at u.s. air bases in europe .

the review noted that "host nation security at nuclear - capable units varies from country to country" and that most bases do not meet dod's security requirements .

as was noted earlier , some in congress thought the united states should consider expanding its deployment of dual - capable aircraft and nuclear bombs into eastern nato nations , in response to russia's aggression in ukraine .

they argued that such moves would demonstrate that "russian actions will come at a price. .

some have also suggested that the united states consider deploying new nuclear - armed missiles in europe , in response to russia's violation of the 1987 inf treaty .

there is little evidence that nato has requested , or would welcome , such deployments , even though the united states has announced that it plans to withdraw from the inf treaty .

some have argued that such steps could ignite a new arms race that could further undermine security in europe .

others have noted that these weapons might be destabilizing if they were vulnerable to preemptive strikes .

moreover , nato has adjusted its conventional force posture and operations in response to russia's actions in ukraine .

according to nato documents , these changes , when backed by the strategic nuclear forces of the united states and united kingdom , should help assure the eastern allies of nato's ability to defend them .

the george w. bush administration stated that the u.s. nuclear posture adopted after the 2002 npr , along with the research into the development of new types of nuclear warheads , would contribute to u.s. efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons .

it argued that , by creating a more credible threat against the capabilities of nations that seek these weapons , the u.s. policy would deter their acquisition or deployment .

it also reinforced the value of the u.s. extended deterrent to allies in europe and japan , thus discouraging them from acquiring their own nuclear weapons .

critics of the bush administration's policy questioned whether the united states needed new nuclear weapons to deter the acquisition or use of wmd by other nations ; as noted above , they claim that u.s. conventional weapons can achieve this objective .

further , many analysts claimed that the u.s. policy would actually spur proliferation , encouraging other countries to acquire their own wmd .

specifically , they noted that u.s. plans and programs could reinforce the view that nuclear weapons have military utility .

if the world's only conventional superpower needs more nuclear weapons to maintain its security , then it would be difficult for the united states to argue that other nations could not also benefit from these weapons .

such nations could also argue that nuclear weapons would serve their security interests .

consequently , according to the bush administration's critics , the united states might ignite a new arms race if it pursued new types of nuclear weapons to achieve newly defined battlefield objectives .

the bush administration countered this argument by noting that few nations acquire nuclear weapons in response to u.s. nuclear programs .

they do so either to address their own regional security challenges , or to counter u.s. conventional superiority .

the obama administration , in the 2010 nuclear posture review , set out a different relationship between u.s. nuclear weapons policy and nonproliferation policy .

the bush administration had indicated that a policy where the united states argued that it might use nuclear weapons against non - nuclear nations would discourage these nations from acquiring or using weapons of mass destruction .

in other words , they could be attacked with nuclear weapons whether or not they had nuclear weapons of their own .

the obama administration , however , argued that its adjustment to the u.s. declaratory policy — where it indicated that it would not use u.s. nuclear weapons to threaten or attack nations who did not have nuclear weapons and were in compliance with their nonproliferation obligations — would discourage their acquisition of nuclear weapons .

nations that did not yet have nuclear weapons would know that they could be added to the u.s. nuclear target list if they acquired them .

and others , like iran and north korea , who were already pursuing nuclear weapons , would know that , if they disbanded their programs , they could be removed from the u.s. nuclear target list .

the 2018 nuclear posture review , for example , explicitly states that "credible u.s. extended nuclear deterrence will continue to be a cornerstone of u.s. non - proliferation efforts. .

many analysts have argued that , if allies were not confident in the reliability and credibility of the u.s. nuclear arsenal , they may feel compelled to acquire their own nuclear weapons .

such calculations might be evident in japan and south korea , as they face threats or intimidation from nuclear - armed neighbors like china and north korea .

in recent years , some politicians in south korea have called for the return of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons to the peninsula , or even south korea's development of its own nuclear capability , as a response to north korea's development and testing of nuclear weapons .

this view has not received the support of the current government in south korea , but it does demonstrate that some may see u.s. security guarantees as fragile .

many analysts note , however , that extended deterrence rests on more than just u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

for example , in recent years the united states and south korea have participated in the u.s. - rok ( republic of korea ) extended deterrence policy committee and the united states and japan have pursued the u.s. - japan extended deterrence dialogue to discuss issues related to regional security and to bolster the allies' confidence in the u.s. commitment to their security .

moreover , the united states occasionally flies b - 2 and b - 52 bombers in joint exercises with south korea to demonstrate its ability to project power , if needed , into a conflict in the area .

concerns about the disparity between the numbers of u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons have dominated discussions about possible arms control measures addressing nonstrategic nuclear weapons in recent years .

the united states and russia have never employed their nonstrategic nuclear weapons to counter , or balance , the nonstrategic nuclear weapons of the other side .

for nato during the cold war and for russia in more recent years , these weapons have served to counter perceived weaknesses and an imbalance in conventional forces .

as a result , there has been little interest , until recently , in calculating or creating a balance in the numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

some who have expressed a concern about the numerical imbalance in nonstrategic nuclear weapons argue that this imbalance could become more important as the united states and russia reduce their numbers of strategic nuclear weapons .

they fear that nato nations located near russia's borders may feel threatened or intimidated by russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

they assert that russia's advantage in the numbers of these weapons , when combined with a reduction in u.s. strategic forces , could convince these nations that russia was the rising power in the region , and that they should , therefore , accede to russia's political or economic pressure .

others , however , have questioned this logic .

they agree that russia's ability to intimidate , and possibly attack , nato nations on its periphery may be related to the capabilities of russia's conventional forces and the existence of russia's nuclear forces .

but this ability would exist whether russia had dozens or hundreds of nuclear weapons in the region .

and nato's ability to resist russian pressure and support vulnerable allies would be related more to its political cohesion and overall military capabilities than to the precise number of nuclear weapons that were deployed on european territory .

moreover , some note that , in spite of russia's advantage in the aggregate number on nonstrategic nuclear weapons , many of russia's weapons may be deployed at bases closer to its border with china than its borders with nato nations , so many of these weapons should not count in the balance at all .

many analysts have argued that the united states and russia should , at a minimum , provide each other with information about their numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons and the status ( i.e. , deployed , stored , or awaiting dismantlement ) of those weapons .

according to one such article , "a crucial first step ... would be to ... agree on total transparency , verification , and the right to monitor changes and movement of the arsenal. .

such information might help each side to monitor the other's progress in complying with the pnis ; it could also help resolve questions and concerns that might come up about the status of these weapons or their vulnerability to theft or misuse .

the united states and russia have discussed transparency measures for nuclear weapons in the past , in a separate forum in the early 1990s , and as a part of their discussions of the framework for a start iii treaty in the late 1990s .

they failed to reach agreement on either occasion .

russia , in particular , has seemed unwilling to provide even basic information about its stockpile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

some in the united states resisted as well , arguing that public discussions about the numbers and locations of u.s. nuclear weapons in europe could increase pressure on the united states to withdraw these weapons .

after nato completed its new strategic concept in 2010 and deterrence and defense posture review in 2012 , many experts recognized that nato was unlikely to approve reductions in u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons in europe unless russia agreed to similar reductions .

as a result , in recent years , some again argued that nato and russia should focus on transparency and confidence - building measures as a way to ease concerns and build cooperation , before they seek to negotiate actual limits or reductions in nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

they could begin , for example , with discussions about which types of weapons to include in the negotiation and what type of data to exchange on these weapons .

some have suggested , in addition , that the two nations could exchange information on the locations of storage facilities that no longer house these weapons , as a way to begin the process of building confidence and understanding .

those who support this approach argue that it would serve well as a first step , and could eventually lead to limits or reductions .

others , however , believe these talks might serve as a distraction , and , if the united states and russia get bogged down in these details , they may never negotiate limits or reductions .

moreover , russian officials seem equally as uninterested in transparency negotiations as they are in reductions at this time .

over the years , some analysts have suggested that the united states and russia negotiate a formal treaty to put limits and restrictions on each nation's nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

this was a central theme in the debate over the new start treaty in late 2010 .

not only did members of the senate call on the obama administration to pursue such negotiations , administration officials noted often that the new start treaty was just a first step and that the united states and russia would pursue limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons in talks on a subsequent agreement .

in april 2009 , when presidents obama and medvedev outlined their approach to nuclear arms control , they indicated that arms control would be a step - by - step process , with a replacement for the 1991 start treaty coming first , but a more comprehensive treaty that might include deeper cuts in all types of warheads , including nonstrategic nuclear weapons , following in the future .

negotiations on a treaty to limit nonstrategic nuclear weapons could be complex , difficult , and very time - consuming .

given the large disparity in the numbers of u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons , and given the different roles these weapons play in u.s. and russian security strategy , it may be difficult to craft an agreement that not only reduces the numbers of weapons in an equitable way but also addresses the security concerns addressed by the retention of these weapons .

a treaty that imposed an equal ceiling on each sides' numbers of deployed nonstrategic weapons might appear equitable , but it would require sharp reductions in russia's forces with little impact on u.s. forces .

a treaty that required each side to reduce its forces by an equal percentage would have a similar result , requiring far deeper reductions on russia's part .

even if the united states and russia could agree on the depth of reductions to impose on these weapons , they may not be able to agree on which weapons would fall under the limit .

for the united states , it may be relatively straightforward to identify the affected weapons — the limit could apply to the gravity bombs deployed in europe and any spare weapons that may be stored in the united states .

russia , however , has many different types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons , including some that could be deployed on naval vessels , some that would be delivered by naval aircraft , and some that would be deployed with ground forces .

moreover , while many of these weapons might be deployed with units in western russia , near europe , others are located to the east , and would deploy with troops in a possible conflict with china .

to address these problems , some analysts have suggested that the limits in the next arms control treaty cover all types of nuclear warheads — warheads deployed on strategic - range delivery vehicles , warheads deployed with tactical - range delivery vehicles , and nondeployed warheads held in storage .

the obama administration reportedly considered this approach , and studied the contours of a treaty that would limit strategic , nonstrategic , and nondeployed nuclear warheads .

this type of agreement would allow each side to determine , for itself , the size and mix of its forces , within the limits on total warheads .

while this type of comprehensive agreement may seem to provide a solution to the imbalance between u.s. and russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons , it is not clear that , once the parties move beyond limits on just their deployed strategic weapons , they will be able to limit the scope of the treaty in this way .

each side has its own list of weapons that it finds threatening ; each may seek to include these in a more comprehensive agreement .

for example , russian officials , including the foreign minister , sergei lavrov , have stated that a future arms control agreement should also include limits on missile defenses , strategic - range weapons that carry conventional warheads , and possibly weapons in space .

minister lavrov stated , specifically , that it is impossible to discuss only one aspect of the problem at strategic parity and stability negotiations held in the modern world .

it is impossible to ignore such aspects as non - nuclear strategic armaments , on which the united states is actively working , plans to deploy armaments in space , which we oppose actively , the wish to build global missile defense systems , and the imbalance of conventional armaments .

it is possible to hold further negotiations only with due account of all these factors…. .

the united states has no interest in including these types of limits in the next agreement .

hence , it is not clear that the two sides would be able to agree on which issues and what weapons systems to include in a next round of arms control negotiations .

moreover , although president medvedev agreed , in april 2009 , that the united states and russia should pursue more arms control reductions after completing new start , russia may have little interest in limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

russian officials have denied that their weapons pose a safety and security problem , and they still consider these weapons essential to russian military strategy and national security .

most analysts agree that the united states and russia are unlikely to make any progress on either limits or transparency measures related to nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the current environment .

russia's annexation of crimea , aggression against ukraine , and violation of the inf treaty have altered the security atmosphere in europe and quieted calls among officials in nato nations for reductions in these weapons .

according to obama administration officials , the u.s. offer for further negotiations remained on the table through the end of the administration , but "progress requires a willing partner and a conducive strategic environment. .

the trump administration reiterated this point in the 2018 nuclear posture review , noting that "progress in arms control is not an end in and of itself , and depends on the security environment and the participation of willing partners. .

it emphasized , further , that neither of these conditions exist today , in light of russia's violation of numerous arms control agreements and its efforts to "change borders and overturn existing norms" in crimea and eastern ukraine .

nevertheless , the 2018 npr suggests the contours of a possible future arms control agreement between the united states and russia .

when discussing the need for a new sea - launched cruise missile , the npr notes that this missile would not only provide a "non - strategic regional presence" and "an assured response capability" to bolster the u.s. commitment to its allies' defense , but would also provide "an inf - treaty compliant response to russia's continuing treaty violation. .

moreover , it seems to view the slcm as a bargaining chip for a future negotiation: if russia returns to compliance with its arms control obligations , reduces its non - strategic nuclear arsenal , and corrects its other destabilizing behaviors , the united states may reconsider the pursuit of a slcm .

indeed , u.s. pursuit of a slcm may provide the necessary incentive for russia to negotiate seriously a reduction of its non - strategic nuclear weapons , just as the prior western deployment of intermediate - range nuclear forces in europe led to the 1987 inf treaty .

as then secretary of state george p. shultz stated , "if the west did not deploy pershing ii and cruise missiles , there would be no incentive for the soviets to negotiate seriously for nuclear weapons reductions .

this last sentence is a reference to nato's 1979 dual track decision , which paved the way for the negotiation of the inf treaty .

in the late 1970s , the soviet union began to deploy a new intermediate - range ballistic missile — known as the ss - 20 — that threatened to upset stability in europe and raised questions about the cohesion of nato .

as a result , in december 1979 , nato adopted a "dual - track" decision that sought to link the modernization of u.s. nuclear weapons in europe with an effort to spur the soviets to negotiate reductions in inf systems .

in the first track , the united states and its nato partners agreed to replace aging medium - range pershing i ballistic missiles with a more accurate and longer - range pershing ii ( p - ii ) while adding new ground - launched cruise missiles .

in the second track , nato agreed that the united states should attempt to negotiate limits with the soviet union on intermediate - range nuclear systems .

the allies recognized that the soviet union was unlikely to negotiate limits on its missiles unless it faced a similar threat from intermediate - range systems based in western europe .

initially , the united states sought an agreement that would impose equal limits on both sides' intermediate - range missiles , but after several years of negotiations and significant changes in the global security environment , both nations agreed to a global ban on all land - based intermediate - range ballistic and cruise missiles .

this agreement serves as an imperfect model for the offer contained in the 2018 npr .

the "dual - track" decision envisioned limits on similar systems — u.s .

and soviet intermediate - range missiles .

the npr offers to forgo the new u.s. slcm in exchange for a longer list of russian weapons and behaviors — it indicates that the united states may reconsider the slcm program if russia "returns to compliance with its arms control obligations , reduces its non - strategic nuclear arsenal , and corrects its other destabilizing behaviors. .

in addition , the 1979 dual track decision sought to deploy new u.s. missiles in europe , to balance an emerging soviet threat to europe .

a u.s. offer to forgo the slcm in negotiations with russia could be inconsistent with the npr's insistence that this missile is critical to extended deterrence in asia .

even if the united states sought to limit the agreement to missiles deployed in europe , russia might object by noting that the united states could easily move sea - launched cruise missiles deployed in asia to locations closer to russia ( the inf treaty addressed the problem of mobility by adopting a global ban on these missiles ) .

finally , as the united states and soviet union discovered when they negotiated the inf treaty , the complexity of distinguishing between nuclear and conventional cruise missiles could necessitate a ban on all cruise missiles of a designated range .

this would likely be inconsistent with the u.s. reliance on conventional slcms in conflicts around the world .

consequently , even with the potential opening for arms control in the 2018 npr , it seems unlikely that the united states and russia will pursue or conclude an agreement limiting nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the near future .

