the senate is governed by the constitution , the standing rules of the senate , permanentstanding orders of the senate ( adopted in prior congresses ) , temporary standing orders of thesenate ( adopted at the beginning of each congress ) , and statutes .

it is also governed by precedents,which are decisions made by the presiding officer of the senate , or the body itself , concerning howits rules operate in practice .

the precedents tend to elaborate the senate's understanding of its ownrules .

the standing rules , for example , can be printed in 78 pages , while the most recent collectionof senate precedents is 1,564 pages long .

precedents have tremendous weight in decidingparliamentary questions in the senate , and the presiding officer , whether the vice president or amajority party senator , is expected to be guided by these precedents when ruling on a pendingquestion .

the standing rules of the senate would seem to be the obvious place to start if a senatordesired to change that chamber's procedures .

if there is no substantial opposition , the standing rulesof the senate can be changed by a simple majority vote ; there is no supermajority requirement forchanging the rules .

if , however , there is opposition to the proposed rules change and if opponentsseek to prevent a final vote on the proposal by extended debate and amendment , known as afilibuster , a supermajority requirement does exist for invoking cloture , or ending debate , on a ruleschange .

senate rule xxii , which sets out the process for invoking cloture , requires that two - thirdsof those present and voting ( 67 if all senators participate ) vote to invoke cloture on a rules change .

this is a difficult threshold to meet ; invoking cloture on all other measures or mattersrequires a three - fifths vote of all senators chosen and sworn ( 60 votes , if no vacancies exist ) .

cloture on a proposal to change an existing standing order , or to establish a new standing order,also requires this lower threshold .

it should be noted that the senate uses standing orders to modifyor set aside its standing rules without doing so directly .

s.res .

445 , in the 108thcongress , for example , inherently superceded portions of senate rule xxv and senate rule xxvi,to establish a committee on homeland security and governmental affairs without directly amendingthe rules .

a similar approach might be used to alter rule xxii without directly amending it .

the potential difficulty the elevated requirement for invoking cloture poses for changing thestanding rules , has led some to look at making changes in senate practice through proceedings thatalter existing precedents or establish new ones .

proceedings of this kind , it is argued , would bothbreak old precedent and establish new senate precedents , and could have the effect of changingsenate practice .

eventually such a plan might even result in changes in senate rules , whilecircumventing the procedures prescribed by senate rules for changing the rules .

some have recently referred to such actions as the "nuclear option" for bringing about changein senate rules or practice , referring to the possible problems that could result in the senate from theuse of such tactics .

no set definition exists for the term "nuclear option" ; indeed , this term has beenused to refer to many kinds of possible proceedings .

one set of possibilities , however , involvesappealing to constitutional requirements as an authority superior to that of the senate's own rules,and supporters of such an approach have accordingly preferred to describe such an approach as a"constitutional option. .

 ( 1 ) .

exactly because the point of a "nuclear" or "constitutional" option is to achieve changes insenate procedure by using means that lie outside the senate's normal rules of procedure , it wouldbe impossible to list all the different permutations such maneuvers could encompass .

the following,nevertheless , represent several different approaches or scenarios that have been discussed as possiblemethods to achieve this goal .

these are just a sampling of the options available to senators ; they arenot an exhaustive list .

any version of the "nuclear" option would carry with it risks and rewards .

the most obviousdirect benefit would be for those judges who could be confirmed by majority vote if debate couldbe stopped by a simple majority as well .

it would also strengthen the executive branch's hand in theselection of federal judges , if the administration could be assured of confirmation with the votes of51 senators .

it also might make the administration less likely to use its recess appointment powerto install judges on the federal bench , an issue that raised serious concerns in the senate in2004 .

 ( 20 ) .

opponents of using any of these parliamentary maneuvers argue that the ability to confirmnominations , even those with significant opposition , by a simple majority could make anadministration less willing to negotiate with the senate and weaken the role of the senate in thenomination and confirmation of presidential nominees .

furthermore , they note that the senateconfirmed 207 of president bush's judicial nominations and failed to confirm 10 .

in the 108thcongress , roughly 3% of federal judgeships were vacant at any time , not creating a significantimpediment to the operations of the federal courts , they say .

 ( 21 ) supporters of using a "nuclear" or "constitutional" option to change the cloture process arguethat it could protect a senate majority's ability to act , particularly when it came to an issue of suchvital interest as ensuring a sufficient number of federal judges to operate the courts , the third branchof the federal government .

there is a serious concern among some that a constitutionalresponsibility of the senate , to advise and consent to presidential nominations , is being weakenedwith the repeated , successful filibusters of certain federal judicial nominations .

 ( 22 ) because the senate has not utilized the "nuclear" or "constitutional" option before , theconsequences of doing so are unclear .

the potential exists for significant repercussions .

indescribing the senate , most modern congressional scholars now refer to it as a "unanimous consentbody. .

by far the greatest share of the chamber's business is conducted , one way or another , byagreement among all senators .

in part , the reason is that senators have learned to agree on how toproceed , knowing that such procedural agreement does not necessarily predetermine the outcomeof policy decisions .

the use of a plan which would intentionally use a procedural tool to force afinal decision on a policy option could make it dramatically more difficult to obtain unanimousconsent for anything else that followed .

both sides of the debate seem to be concerned about the possible results .

in the opinion ofone democratic senator , the use of the "nuclear" option "… would be a dagger at the heart of whatthe senate is all about , and democrats would take very strong action. .

 ( 23 ) a republican senator told the hill that damage from the use of the "nuclear" or "constitutional" option could level the senate,making it very difficult for work to get done .

"the nuclear option on judges , it rather clears thelandscape," the senator said .

 ( 24 ) the procedural maneuver also could change the nature of the senate , in which it is difficultto override the rights of the minority .

it would raise fundamental and significant questions abouthow the institution would function , the answers to which would become clear only as time passed .

if the power of the filibuster were broken , for example , would the senate become more like thehouse of representatives , in which debate and deliberation can be terminated at the option of themajority ? .

or would it become a chaotic environment in which a temporary majority could changeprecedents any time it wanted to ? .

another concern would be consequences for other rules of the senate .

because it is sodifficult to change the senate's rules , they have remained fairly stable , and therefore the basicstructure of senate procedure has remained fairly constant .

if , however , a change to the rules wereaccomplished by a majority vote , nothing would prevent other changes to the rules from beingproposed , which could then conceivably be accomplished with a majority vote to end debate on themas well .

in addition , even if a "constitutional" or "nuclear" option were used , opponents still mightbe able to delay a final vote on whatever measure or matter was pending .

existing senate precedentswould seem to allow an endless series of amendments to a proposed rules change , even if no debatewere allowed .

the senate routinely does this each year when it considers the annual budgetresolution .

therefore , it is unclear that the "constitutional" or "nuclear" option by itself could bringabout a vote on a rule change .

further , even if the use of this option resulted in a lower cloture votethreshold , other portions of the rule would presumably remain untouched , in which case thepost - cloture process still would provide delaying possibilities for opponents .

additional questions arise if the senate used an opening day gambit .

would successfulaction in this form change the understanding of the senate as a continuing body ? .

would this changemean that the senate would have to elect its officers and adopt its rules at the start of each congress ? .

one potential alternative would be to modify other senate practices ( instead of changing thecloture rule ) or to enforce existing senate rules more stringently .

a number of possible approachescould be used to bring debate to a close absent any formal change to rule xxii .

for example , the two - speech rule does not apply to executive business in the same way itdoes to legislative business .

limiting senators to two speeches during the consideration of anynomination , regardless of how many session days the nomination was pending , would bring abouta vote on a nomination without the need to invoke cloture , or to consider amendments to the cloturerule .

another alternative might be to require senators who wish to filibuster a measure or matter ( such as a nomination ) to hold the floor and talk to maintain their filibuster .

in the modern senate,such displays are rare .

instead , the senate routinely permits senators to "suggest the absence of aquorum" as a means to delay action without the need to debate .

the senate , by precedent , has ruledsuch quorum calls dilatory , after cloture .

by precedent , the senate could make such quorum callsdilatory at any time , if no substantive business had intervened since a quorum had been previouslyestablished .

the two - track system allows other business to come before the senate even as the pendingbusiness remains unresolved .

as a result , time on the senate floor is more often used to conductbusiness on which there has already been agreement , rather than to debate or amend measures , orfilibuster them .

removing a contentious measure from active consideration allows the threat of afilibuster to halt a measure , instead of requiring opposition senators to openly debate the measureand explain their concerns publicly .

the senate no longer relies on extended continuous session to put pressure on oppositionsenators .

such late - night or multiple day sessions were common until a generation ago .

the disuseof a traditionally effective strategy to end debate or to encourage policy compromise has led , in theopinion of some , to the consideration of ill - advised rule changes when less drastic changes to senatetradition could achieve the desired result .

 ( 25 ) .

