congress has broad plenary authority to determine classes of aliens who may be admitted into the united states and the grounds for which they may be removed .

pursuant to the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended , certain conduct may either disqualify an alien from entering the united states or provide grounds for his or her removal .

prominently included among this conduct is criminal activity .

in general , aliens may legally enter the united states under one of three categories: ( 1 ) legal permanent residents ( lprs ) , who are also commonly referred to as immigrants ; ( 2 ) nonimmigrants , who are aliens permitted to enter the united states temporarily for a specific purpose , such as for tourism , academic study , or temporary work ; and ( 3 ) refugees , who are aliens facing persecution abroad and are of special humanitarian concern to the united states .

there are two aspects for legal admission under each of these categories .

first , an alien must fulfill the substantive requirements for admission under a specified category .

for example , in order to enter the united states as a nonimmigrant student , an alien must demonstrate that he is a bona fide student at an approved school .

second , aliens who fulfill substantive requirements for admission may nevertheless be denied admission if they fall within a class of inadmissable aliens listed under ina § 212 .

once admitted , aliens remain subject to removal if they fall within a class of deportable aliens listed under ina § 237 .

the ina contains bars for admission and grounds for deportation based on criminal conduct .

this report discusses the potential immigration consequences of criminal activity .

"criminal activity" generally refers to conduct for which an alien has been found or plead guilty before a court of law , though in limited circumstances consequences may attach to the commission of a crime or admission of acts constituting the essential elements of a crime .

consequences may flow from violations of either federal , state or , in many circumstances , foreign criminal law .

some federal crimes are set out in the ina itself — alien smuggling , for example .

however , not all violations of immigration law are crimes .

notably , being in the united states without legal permission — i.e. , being an "illegal alien" — is not a crime in and of itself .

thus , for example , an alien who overstays a student visa may be an "illegal alien," in that the alien may be subject to removal from the united states , but such an alien is not a "criminal alien. .

the ina lists a number of criminal grounds for designating an alien as inadmissible or deportable .

most crimes included under these grounds are not specifically mentioned , but instead fall under a broad category of crimes , such as crimes involving moral turpitude or aggravated felonies .

in addition , certain criminal conduct precludes a finding of good moral character under the ina , thereby preventing an alien from becoming either a naturalized u.s. citizen or a candidate for certain types of relief .

the class of crimes involving moral turpitude , the class of aggravated felonies , and the class of crimes that preclude a finding of good moral character are overlapping , but no two classes are coextensive .

the types of crimes constituting crimes of moral turpitude are determined by case law .

crimes that are aggravated felonies are listed in statute , with case law illuminating the bounds of certain listed crimes .

crimes precluding a finding of good moral character are determined by a combination of case law and statutory law .

these criminal classes are further modified for the purposes of specific ina provisions .

the following sections will describe these criminal categories in more detail .

certain criminal conduct may have a substantial impact upon an alien's ability to enter or remain in the united states , and it may also affect the availability of discretionary forms of immigration relief and the ability of an alien to become a u.s. citizen .

the following sections describe the major immigration consequences for aliens who engage in certain criminal conduct .

in recent years , numerous proposals have been introduced to modify the immigration consequences of criminal activity .

the 110 th congress enacted several such measures , including p.l .

110 - 257 , providing certain relief from inadmissibility to members of the african national congress ; p.l .

110 - 340 , making persons who have engaged in the recruitment of child soldiers in violation of federal law inadmissible , deportable and ineligible for asylum or withholding of removal ; and p.l .

110 - 457 , modifying the grounds for inadmissibility and removal related to human trafficking .

it is possible that proposals will be introduced in the 111 th congress to further modify the immigration consequences of criminal activity .

proposals made in recent years that have received legislative action or significant congressional interest include measures that would: add further document - fraud offenses to the list of criminal activities making aliens inadmissible and / or deportable ; make gang - related activity a ground for inadmissibility , deportation , and ineligibility from certain forms of relief from removal ; make dui offenses a ground for inadmissibility or deportation ; and specify that an aggravated felony conviction is a ground for inadmissibility .

