public safety agencies include the nation's first responders ( such as firefighters , police officers , and ambulance services ) , 911 call center staff , and a number of local , state , federal — and sometimes regional — authorities .

communications , often wireless radios , are vital to these agencies' effectiveness and to the safety of their members and the public .

wireless technology requires radio frequency capacity in order to function , and existing wireless technology is designed to work within specified frequency ranges .

different operations , different applications , different rules and standards , and different radio frequencies are among the problems first responders face in trying to communicate with each other .

interoperability , also referred to as compatibility or connectivity , refers to the capability for different systems to readily connect to each other .

facilitating interoperability has been a policy concern of public safety officials for a number of years .

however , public safety agencies — especially at the local level — tend to rely on vendors for technical expertise .

interoperable solutions , therefore , are often based on proprietary systems , limiting the scope of connectivity .

one way to bypass the vendor - driven planning that characterizes , and limits , public safety communications could be to implement a national plan that encouraged resource - sharing and standardized interfaces , while promoting the transition to open source architecture .

at the level of national policy for emergency planning and response , for example , goals for interoperability could include interchangeability , assuring that equipment from any agency , state , or community could be used to replace or supplement equipment in any area of the country , as needed .

since september 11 , 2001 — when communications failures added to the horror of the day — achieving interoperability for public safety communications has become an important policy concern for congress .

the damage to communications infrastructure caused by hurricane katrina and subsequent flooding has revealed the extent to which the concerns of congress , as expressed in legislation , have yet to be acted upon .

although many replacements for lost communications equipment were rushed to critical sites in the gulf coast states , they were usually different systems using different radio frequencies , with little or no capability for cross - communication .

although interoperability in communications is correctly perceived as a subset of the larger problem of providing comprehensive communications support , it is a pivotal solution .

interoperability provides redundancy and back - up capacity , key elements for a robust network .

some have suggested that the current definition widely used in discussing interoperability may be too general , and that a fuller articulation of planning goals should be developed to guide policy .

many experts agree that — at this point in what can only be described as an ongoing crisis in communications capacity — a critical missing element is planning at the national level .

in this view , national planning — whether undertaken at the federal level , through a consortium of states , or other means — is needed to transcend proprietary solutions and bring about consensus on common interfaces with uniform standards that permit full interoperability and interchangeability for newer , digital equipment .

federal policy also could guide public safety communications purchases toward a transition to open source platforms .

standardized interfaces can link existing , non - standard ( e.g .

proprietary ) systems and networks ; for planning purposes this could require , for example , a federal mandate for interoperable standards for "cross talk" systems provide by companies such as m / a com , motorola and raytheon .

open architecture standards would ensure that systems were fully interoperable , with equipment that was fully interchangeable ; an example of planning would be a program to encourage the development and use of open source architectures .

federalization of emergency response for disasters or catastrophic events could become inevitable unless states and communities have adequate resources to act in a timely manner .

current disaster response plans of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) are built on the assumption that local resources will be adequate after a disaster strikes until additional resources arrive .

the destructive chaos that followed in the wake of hurricanes katrina and rita revealed many weakness in current assumptions and plans , such as those in the national response plan and the national incident management system .

two critical pieces of infrastructure failed early on: electrical power and communications .

a well - planned and robust emergency communications system should be sustainable at reasonable levels of operation even after electrical power is lost .

resources to sustain operations include back - up generators and fuel , redundant systems , self - healing networks , access to multiple communications channels , common radio frequencies for wireless communications , sufficient spectrum bandwidth to support communications needs , and the proper equipment and infrastructure to make it all work .

as testimony before congress has regularly substantiated , industry plans for disasters , prepares to the best of its capacity , and carries out the plans as needed ; similar levels of planning and capacity to respond need to be achieved for emergency communications ( and other public safety services ) in communities .

since september 11 , 2001 , congress has passed important legislation to respond to problems revealed after the attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , including problems of communications at the disaster sites .

provisions of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) instruct the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to address some of the issues concerning public safety communications in emergency preparedness and response and in providing critical infrastructure .

telecommunications for first responders is mentioned in several sections , with specific emphasis on technology for interoperability .

acting on recommendations made by the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) , congress included several sections regarding improvements in communications capacity — including clarifications to the homeland security act — in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) .

by requirements it included in the intelligence reform and terrorism act — for studies on interoperability strategies , use of technology , spectrum use , and more — congress has assigned itself a number of specific tasks of oversight regarding emergency communications .

congress also has recognized the many dilemmas faced by its constituents in supporting communications interoperability .

it has in many ways taken on the role of champion in support of programs for interoperability that benefit local communities , states and tribes .

some steps have been taken , particularly within dhs , and congress has demanded further advances .

despite indications of progress , much remains to be done .

issues that could be addressed — collectively or singly — by congress , the administration , the private sector , or others include the development of a long term strategy that coordinates both public safety spectrum needs and interoperable communications needs , and the coordination of the various studies requested by congress and by the administration .

the findings and recommendations from these studies could be valuable in the advancement of policy for public safety .

the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) analysis of communications difficulties on september 11 , 2001 was summarized in the following recommendation .

congress should support pending legislation which provides for the expedited and increased assignment of radio spectrum for public safety purposes .

furthermore , high - risk urban areas such as new york city and washington , d.c. , should establish signal corps units to ensure communications connectivity between and among civilian authorities , local first responders , and the national guard .

federal funding of such units should be given high priority by congress .

the commission , in this paragraph , recognized the important link between access to spectrum and the effectiveness of communications technology .

briefly , the recommendation says: free up and assign more spectrum for public safety use ; establish communications support ( the role of a signal corps typically is to provide information systems and networks for real - time command and control ) ; with interoperable communications ( connectivity ) ; and prioritize funding these communications operations for high - risk urban areas .

although , cumulatively , radio frequencies designated for non - federal public safety total over 90 mhz , the characteristics of these frequencies are dis - similar , requiring different technological solutions .

the fragmentation of spectrum assignments for public safety is a significant barrier to achieving needed capacity for the future , and is presently among the technical problems that plague public safety communications , such as out - of - date equipment , proprietary solutions , congestion , and interference .

an immediate barrier to interoperability is — simply put — that uhf and vhf frequencies cannot connect directly with each other , and that older , analog equipment widely used below 512 mhz cannot connect with newer digital equipment at 800 mhz .

technology for new frequencies at 4.9 ghz is still in the early stage of development but these frequencies appear suitable primarily for local - area ( short - range ) transmission .

none of the above frequency assignments can , using current technology , support wide - area communications relying on high - speed , data - rich transmissions .

providing new spectrum at 700 mhz for broadband communications capabilities , including interoperable connections , is viewed by many as the optimal solution for overcoming problems caused by incompatible radio frequencies and technologies .

with the passage of the deficit reduction act , congress achieved an important milestone in providing a date certain for the release of spectrum at 700 mhz for public safety use by february 2009 .

the 9 / 11 commission recommendation to use signal corps to assure connectivity in high - risk areas is apparently a reference to the army signal corps .

in testimony before congress , commissioner john f. lehman commented on the lack of connectivity for first responders and referred to the "tremendous expertise" of the department of defense ( dod ) and its capabilities in procurement , technology , and research and development .

referring specifically to the army signal corps , mr. lehman suggested that the dod should have responsibility to provide "that kind of support to the first responders in the high - target , high risk cities like new york. .

the role of a signal corps typically is to provide information systems and networks for real - time command and control .

the army maintains mobile units to provide capacity and specialized support to military operations , worldwide .

according to the u.s. army info site on the internet the mission of the signal corps is to provide and manage communications and information systems support for the command and control of combined arms forces .

signal support includes network operations ( information assurance , information dissemination management , and network management ) and management of the electromagnetic spectrum .

signal support encompasses all aspects of designing , installing , maintaining , and managing information networks to include communications links , computers , and other components of local and wide area networks .

signal forces plan , install , operate , and maintain voice and data communications networks that employ single and multi - channel satellite , tropospheric scatter , terrestrial microwave , switching , messaging , video - teleconferencing , visual information , and other related systems .

they integrate tactical , strategic and sustaining base communications , information processing and management systems into a seamless global information network that supports knowledge dominance for army , joint and coalition operations .

the army signal corps is intended to provide a communications backbone , a core network , with important elements such as spectrum management , the operation of communications centers , and support of communications networks that include both large area regional communications and radio coverage for local wireless interoperability .

the corps' communication backbone delivers connectivity on site among combined forces and connectivity to command centers .

these operations are scalable and can be deployed when and where needed .

congress responded to recommendations for improvements in programs to support communications and foster interoperability with language in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act that raises the bar for performance and accountability , as well as easing some of the obstacles to performance .

among the program goals the act sets for the department of homeland security and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) are the following .

develop a comprehensive , national approach for achieving interoperability .

coordinate with other federal agencies .

establish appropriate minimum capabilities for interoperability .

accelerate development of voluntary standards .

encourage open architecture and commercial products .

assist other agencies with research and development .

prioritize within dhs for research , development , testing and related programs .

establish coordinated guidance for federal grant programs .

provide technical assistance .

develop and disseminate best practices .

establish performance measurements and milestones for systematic measurement of progress .

the debate about public safety communications and the role of federal policy is long running .

the framework for current discussions — which accommodate recent advances in technology — most likely dates to a report in 1996 by the public safety wireless advisory committee ( pswac ) .

listed below are some key components of a desirable public safety communications policy for first responders described in the pswac study and in more recent reports , testimony , and other comments cited in this report .

according to these sources , a national policy for public safety communications needs to address and correlate a myriad of complex goals , such as coordinated assignment and use of spectrum at various frequencies .

muscular and sustained efforts to complete the development and application of technical and operational standards .

public sector adaptation of new technologies already available in the private sector such as for high - speed , data rich , and video or image transmissions .

long - term support of research and development for new technology .

coherent goals that encourage private investment in technology development .

nationwide network of communications operations centers ( regional signal corps ) that can serve as back - up facilities to each other and to state and interstate centers and networks .

interoperability of communications among first responders and public safety agencies .

managerial structure that can successfully coordinate not only disparate federal , state , and local agencies but also the different cultural and technical needs of independent first responder units .

framework to match policy goals with implementation needs to assure the effectiveness of federal funding for programs and grants .

beginning in 2003 , president george w. bush has issued several memoranda to establish and guide a national spectrum policy initiative , lead by the secretary of the department of commerce .

as required by the president , the secretary submitted a plan to implement recommendations previously provided by the federal government spectrum task force .

the planning process is being guided by the ntia , which has established seven projects dealing with aspects of spectrum policy .

these projects are: a .

improve stakeholder participation and maintain high qualifications of spectrum managers b .

reduce international barriers to u.s .

innovations in technologies and services c. modernize federal spectrum management processes with advanced information technology d. satisfy public safety communications needs and ensure interoperability e. enhance spectrum engineering and analytical tools f. promote efficient and effective use of spectrum g. improve long - term planning and promote use of market - based economic mechanisms in spectrum .

project d , dealing with public safety needs , has two components .

as part of project d , dhs , as directed by the president , will conduct an inventory of the spectrum requirements of the public safety community , identify the major public safety requirements for spectrum - dependent services at local , regional and state government agencies , and analyze the efficiency and effectiveness of the spectrum used by the public safety community .

the ntia , in coordination primarily with the fcc , will examine the feasibility of sharing spectrum among commercial , federal and local public safety , and critical infrastructure applications .

the fcc is seeking comment on goals for the test - bed , which will designate radio frequencies for shared use between federal and non - federal users .

the lead federal program for fostering interoperability is administered by the wireless public safety interoperable communications program , dubbed project safecom , part of the department of homeland security .

the key federal agencies for spectrum management in first responder communications are the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) .

among other responsibilities , the fcc supervises spectrum for non - federal public safety agency communications .

the ntia — part of the department of commerce — administers spectrum used by federal entities .

safecom has not to date played a major role in spectrum policy .

dhs has created an office of interoperability and compatibility ( oic ) of which safecom is a part .

in june 2004 dhs announced the creation of a regional technology integration initiative .

dhs has also announced the organization of a national incident management system ( nims ) in response to a presidential directive ( hspd - 5 ) .

a nims integration center is planned to deal with compatibility and could be responsible for at least some interoperable communications .

national telecommunications and information administration to address the need for interoperability spectrum , in june 1999 the ntia designated certain federally - allocated radio frequencies for use by federal , state , and local law enforcement and incident response entities .

the frequencies are from exclusive federal spectrum , and are adjacent to spectrum used by state and local governments .

ntia's "interoperability plan," — developed in coordination with the interdepartmental radio advisory committee ( irac ) — is used to improve communications in response to emergencies and threats to public safety .

in 1996 , the ntia created a public safety program to coordinate federal government activities for spectrum and telecommunications related to public safety .

today , its successor , the public safety division of the office of spectrum management , participates in various initiatives to improve and coordinate public safety communications .

the division is preparing a spectrum efficiency study and an interoperable communications summary guide .

two forums on public safety and spectrum use have been sponsored by the ntia , one in june 2002 and another in february 2004 .

additionally , evaluating spectrum for public safety use has been included in the ntia's ongoing work in support of president george w. bush's spectrum initiative policy .

federal communications commission over roughly the last 20 years , the fcc has initiated several programs that involve state , local , tribal and — usually — private sector representatives .

in 1986 , it formed the national public safety planning advisory committee to advise it on management of spectrum in the 800 mhz band , newly designated for public safety .

the following year , the fcc adopted a public safety national plan that , among other things , established regional planning committees ( rpc ) to develop plans that met specific needs .

the fcc encourages the formation of rpcs with a broad base of participation .

the rpcs have flexibility in determining how best to meet state and local needs , including spectrum use and technology .

the regional planning approach is also being applied to spectrum in the upper 700 mhz band .

technical and operational standards , including interoperability standards , were developed and recommended to the fcc through the public safety national coordination committee ( ncc ) .

standards for narrowband radio applications , for example , were recommended to the fcc and adopted in early 2001 .

established by the fcc in 1999 and ended in 2003 , the ncc had a steering committee from government , the public safety community , and the telecommunications industry .

homeland security after hurricane katrina , the fcc established a panel to examine the impact of hurricane katrina and make recommendations to the fcc regarding actions it might take to improve public safety operations , disaster preparation , and network reliability .

the independent panel has issued a report with recommendations for changes in communications preparedness and response that might be considered by the fcc or others .

the fcc has solicited comments on the panel's recommendations .

in september 2006 , the fcc established a public safety and homeland security bureau within the agency .

the new bureau brings together public - safety and communications functions previously dispersed throughout the agency .

the announced goal of the bureau is to promote "robust , reliable and resilient communications in times of emergency. .

among past actions by the fcc specifically in support of homeland security were the chartering of the media security and reliability council ( msrc ) and the renewal of the charter for the network reliability and interoperability council ( nric ) .

both of these are federal advisory committees .

msrc has been active in evaluating the effectiveness of the emergency alert system .

the primary role of nric is to develop recommendations for best practices for private sector telecommunications to insure optimal reliability , interoperability , and connectivity of networks .

the current nric focus groups are: near term issues , e911 ; long term issues , e911 ; best practices , e911 and public safety ; emergency communications beyond e911 ; best practices , homeland security - infrastructure ; best practices , homeland security - cybersecurity ; best practices , wireless industry ; best practices , public data networks ; and broadband .

spectrum and interoperability the fcc's strategic goal for spectrum is to "encourage the highest and best use of spectrum domestically and internationally in order to encourage the growth and rapid deployment of innovative and efficient communications technologies and services. .

regarding interoperability , the fcc describes its role as "directing efforts toward allocating additional spectrum for public safety systems , nurturing technological developments that enhance interoperability and providing its expertise and input for interagency efforts such as safecom. .

however , the fcc asserts that there are limitations on what it can do .

"the commission is only one stakeholder in the process and many of the challenges facing interoperability are a result of the disparate governmental interests ... making it difficult to develop and deploy interoperable strategies uniformly. .

department of homeland security national response plan the national response plan lays out organization charts for authority and responsibility in incidents of national significance and after the declaration of a disaster or an emergency .

one of the key players for emergency communications is the national communications system ( ncs ) .

the primary role of ncs is to assure federal communications and the integrity of certain vital networks , such as for banking .

it also is prepared to assist in recovery and restoration of service for commercial and emergency services .

the ncs has no significant role in providing emergency communications support for first responders .

the job of coordinating communications is assigned by the national response plan to the federal emergency communications coordinator .

as described in the plan , the power of this position to command and deliver needed communications support is limited , and in any event , it occurs after the fact .

office of interoperability and compatibility the function of the office of interoperability and compatibility ( oic ) is to address the larger issues of interoperability .

among the goals of the oic is the "leveraging" of "the vast range of interoperability programs and related efforts spread across the federal government" to "reduce unnecessary duplication" and "ensure consistency" in "research and development , testing and evaluation ( rdt&e ) , standards , technical assistance , training , and grant funding related to interoperability. .

to achieve this , dhs will create within oic "a series of portfolios to address critical issues. .

the oic's initial priorities are for communications ( safecom ) , equipment , training and "others as required. .

to fulfill the portfolios , oic will use a "systems engineering or lifestyle approach" to create "action plans. .

these will be "developed through a collaborative process that brings together the relevant stakeholders to provide clear direction on a path forward. .

this "end - user" input is expected to produce "a strategy and action plan" for each portfolio .

no time line for accomplishing these planned steps has of yet been provided .

safecom with the support of the administration , project safecom was designated the umbrella organization for federal support of interoperable communications .

it was agreed within dhs that safecom would be part of the science and technology directorate , in line with a policy for placing technology prototype projects under a single directorate ; this decision was reportedly based on the research - oriented nature of the programs envisioned for safecom by its administrators .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act affirmed this decision by giving dhs the authority to create an office for interoperability within the science and technology directorate and to manage safecom as part of that effort .

safecom has released a template for interoperability planning that can be used by states to establish a strategy for interoperability .

it prepared a methodology to establish a baseline for interoperability achievements as an evaluation tool to measure the success of future interoperability programs .

the methodology was applied in a study with voluntary participation .

the study sent surveys to fire response / emergency services and law enforcement in all 50 states and the district of columbia .

the agencies were asked to rate the level of interoperability within their jurisdictions , not including federal authorities .

the findings from this survey were published in december 2006 .

safecom absorbed the public safety wireless network ( pswn ) program , previously operated jointly by the departments of justice and the treasury .

pswn was created to respond to recommendations made by the public safety wireless advisory committee regarding the improvement of public safety communications over wireless networks .

pswn operated as an advocate for spectrum management policies that would improve wireless network capacity and capability for public safety .

safecom , however , has no authority over spectrum management decisions .

the following quote is a summary of safecom's position on spectrum policy .

spectrum policy is an essential issue in the public safety communication arena .

unfortunately , state and local public safety representatives are frequently not included in spectrum policy decisions , despite their majority ownership of the communications infrastructure and their importance as providers of public and homeland security .

safecom will hence play a role in representing the views of state and local stakeholders on spectrum issues within the federal government .

last year , safecom was appointed to an interagency spectrum task force to contribute such views , and the ongoing working relationship that has developed between safecom and the fcc will , we believe , pay huge dividends in the future .

safecom was chosen in october 2001 as one of 24 e - government initiatives .

it was categorized as a government - to - government initiative in the original strategizing for e - government programs .

when safecom was created in 2001 , the managing partner for safecom was the department of the treasury .

subsequently , the program was assigned to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , following fema when it moved to the emergency preparedness and response directorate of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

once at dhs , safecom was assigned to the directorate of science and technology .

as the government accountability office ( gao ) has noted in testimony and reports , the change in leadership has delayed progress at safecom .

the gao has also expressed concern over a lack of leadership and focus and raised questions of governance .

testimony by david boyd has stressed the importance to safecom of more authority in certain funding decisions and in its interactions with other federal agencies , and the need for an in - depth gap analysis — the assessment of current levels of interoperable communications capability compared to requirements .

the gao has recommended that the director of the office of management and budget work with dhs to review safecom's functions and establish a long - term program with appropriate authority and funding to coordinate interoperability efforts across the federal government .

other notable observations from the gao include: the fragmented federal grant structure for first responders does not support statewide interoperability planning .

safecom has developed grant guidance for interoperability , but cannot require that consistent guidance be incorporated in all federal first responder grants .

the federal government can provide the leadership , long - term commitment , and focus to help state and local governments meet interoperability goals .

for example , the federal government can provide the leadership and support for developing ( 1 ) a national database of interoperable communications frequencies , ( 2 ) a common nomenclature forthose frequencies , ( 3 ) a national architecture that identifies communications requirements and technical standards , and ( 4 ) statewide interoperable communications plans .

safecom , however , articulated a different approach in testimony and its 2003 strategy planning session .

in its strategy summary , it reported that it intends , over the course of 10 to 20 years , to "adopt a national strategy from the bottom up to incorporate effective public safety communications. .

boyd also reaffirmed his belief that "any effort to improve communications interoperability must be driven from the bottom up. .

this approach necessitates a focus on communications at the incident level .

at this level , safecom appears to be giving the greatest attention to improving radio interoperability , particularly through the deployment of cross - talk hardware .

this decision in turn leads to an emphasis on increasing the amount of equipment standardization , improving operating standards and protocols , and consulting on how to install and use new equipment .

according to boyd's testimony , the focus for safecom is on three areas: creation of an architectural framework , the development of standards , and the coordination of federal activities .

the architectural framework is intended to aid safecom in determining priorities for the development of standards .

the framework "will reflect a system - of - systems approach to develop interface standards to help improve the problem of communications interoperability. .

it appears that it will be modeled along the lines of a pyramid , with decision - making starting at the base and building up .

the organic nature of the safecom model for infrastructure development apparently requires a long time - line ( usually extending , in testimony , to 20 years ) and resists description in terms of long - term goals and deadlines .

by describing its achievements and plans within the framework of short - term milestones , many of which involve the preparation of studies by outside consultants , safecom appears to have avoided addressing many of the strategic goals originally envisioned for its mission , without an official explanation for the shift in emphasis .

safecom strategy as an e - government initiative in 2002 and 2003 , omb sequentially described safecom's mission , milestones and goals .

it appears that many of these goals have not been met , or have been modified .

the 2002 e - government strategy document described safecom's mission as follows: for public safety officials to be effective in their daily responsibilities , as well as before , during and after an emergency event , public safety agencies throughout all levels of government , i.e .

federal , state and local , must be able to communicate with each other .

this initiative would address the nation's critical shortcomings in efforts by public safety agencies to achieve interoperability and eliminate redundant wireless communications infrastructures .

at the same time , it would assist state and local interoperability and interoperability between federal public safety networks .

value to citizen: coordinated public safety / law enforcement communication will result in saved lives , as well as better - managed disaster response .

consolidated networks will yield cost savings through reduction in communication devices , management overhead of multiple networks , maintenance and training .

value to the government: billions of dollars could be saved through a right - sized set of consolidated , interoperable federal networks , linked to state wireless networks , resulting in a reduction in communications infrastructure , overhead , maintenance and training .

milestones - 2002 in february 2002 , safecom milestones , all planned for completion by the end of that year , included the following: define the communications concept of operations for interaction that identifies the communications requirements to address the two highest probable threat scenarios: bio terrorism and natural disasters .

develop an integrated public safety response solution that addresses the top two threat scenarios by using existing infrastructure augmented by available commercial capability .

complete a gap analysis of existing inventories of public safety wireless communications at federal , state and local level .

goals - 2003 in the april 2003 e - government strategy report , the immediate ( 2003 ) goals for safecom were restated , as follows: define the requirements for first responder interoperability at state , local , tribal , and federal levels to develop a long - term architecture .

identify gaps between existing wireless systems and interoperability requirements .

develop national architecture develop concept of operations for interoperability .

many goals not met comparing the stated goals of safecom as an e - government program , with its current progress and programs , it appears that the emphasis has been on short - term goals .

there is virtually no indication , in testimony , of long - term planning for national interoperability .

among its accomplishments , safecom has partly met the goal of developing a requirements statement with the qualitative assessment of communications needs at the incident level , as provided in the march 2004 "requirements" document .

a gap analysis is reportedly underway , a delivery date of late 2005 has been extended to mid - 2006 .

the "concept of operations" for "interaction" ( 2002 ) or "interoperability" ( 2003 ) could be equated with the pyramid structure advocated by safecom , discussed below , and this may provide the framework for an "integrated public safety response solution. .

an integrated response solution and a national architecture are promised for the future .

the 2002 milestone of providing a plan to use "existing infrastructure augmented by available commercial capability" is being addressed if infrastructure is defined as local radio communications equipment bolstered by cross - patch hardware .

it is not being met , and seems to have been rejected by safecom , if infrastructure is meant to include wide - area networks , internet communications backbones and other regional or national communications capacity that would provide broad - based communications the support .

in testimony , omb described safecom goals as including the provision of "interoperable wireless solutions for federal , state , and local public safety organizations," that would include "coordination of all federal interoperability efforts. .

in omb's description of long - term strategic goals , as outlined in the 2003 e - gov plan , there appears to be an implicit assumption that there are redundant wireless communications infrastructures that can be identified and eliminated .

this planning document describes the safecom initiative as addressing "critical shortcomings," including two significant points where communications interoperability is lacking ; interoperability between state and local authorities , as well as interoperability between federal public safety networks .

the plan indicates that some ( unidentified ) networks would be consolidated to yield costs savings .

further "billions of dollars" in savings are presumed by creating a right - sized set of consolidated , interoperable federal networks , linked to state wireless networks .

to date , there appears to be no information on safecom plans for improving wireless communications networks at the national or regional level ; the focus of the program on hardware solutions at the incident level would seem to preclude plans for network interoperability or the establishment of standards for new interoperable technologies such as mesh networks or cognitive radios .

work at the incident level is primarily local , focused on short - range interoperability solutions .

wide area networks and nationwide , end - to - end communications rely on technologies not being tested or evaluated by safecom at the incident level .

in particular , the build - from - the - bottom - up approach for interoperability , advocated by safecom , would appear to be at odds with the e - government goal of achieving efficiencies at the communications network level .

modern networks , with their incorporation of software programs on chips , other software - programmable technologies , nanotechnology , and meshed communications systems , to cite some examples , are generally built out from a common design , requiring some degree of centralization .

in that respect , the goals of the iwn appear to be more aligned to the original goals of the e - government strategy .

its intentions include the construction of a national network , the identification and prioritization of end - user functional requirements , and the use of open standards that would be adapted by other public safety agencies .

evolution of safecom's goals the explanation of safecom provided in 2002 by omb , would suggest that the original mission was much broader than the milestones that have been used to chart progress .

it is possible , therefore , that safecom has not merely suffered delays because of changes in the managing partner , as the gao has observed , but also because it has changed course , redefining its purpose .

regional technology integration initiative in june 2004 , the directorate of science and technology introduced a new initiative to facilitate the transition of innovative technologies and organizational concepts to regional , state , and local authorities .

the initiative has selected four urban areas from among those currently part of the homeland security urban area security initiative .

two of the areas that have been reported as choices are cincinnati , ohio and anaheim , california .

each area will reportedly receive $10 million to expand new systems that test more advanced technologies for public safety communications , including interoperability .

anaheim , for example , reportedly has created a virtual operations center ( instead of a building ) , relying on network technology to connect police , fire , medical services and public utilities in case of an emergency .

the announced goal is to get all who respond to disasters and other emergencies to work from a common base .

national incident management system ( nims ) nims also has announced plans to address questions of interoperability and communications , although no mention of spectrum policy is mentioned in the dhs report on nims issued march 1 , 2004 .

the objective for communications facilitation is summarized as "development and use of a common communications plan and interoperable communications processes and architectures. .

nims envisions mandatory compliance with "national interoperable communications standards , once such standards are developed. .

these standards will include interoperable wireless communications for "federal , state , local and tribal public safety organizations. .

integrated wireless network the integrated wireless network ( iwn ) for law enforcement is being planned as a joint program by the departments of justice , the treasury , and homeland security .

dhs is represented in the iwn joint program office through the wireless management office of the chief information officer .

iwn , from its description , will have limited interoperability at the state and local level .

the described objective of iwn is network integration for "the nation's law enforcement wireless communication , and data exchange capability through the use of a secure integrated wireless network. .

national communications system the national communications system is assigned responsibility for telecommunications under the secretariat of information analysis and infrastructure protection within dhs .

it was originally within the department of defense , established by executive order in 1984 "to assist the president ... in 1 ) the exercise of the telecommunications functions and responsibilities , and ( 2 ) the coordination of the planning for and provision of national security and emergency preparedness communications..." it consults with the national security telecommunications advisory committee ( nstac ) , among others , on issues related to national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications .

it is closely linked to the white house through nstac , which advises the president on national security telecommunications matters , and the national security council .

its primary functions for national security and emergency preparedness are to assure critical telecommunications access for selected federal and state agencies , to coordinate restoration of service with the private sector , and to establish priorities in the restoration of service .

among its services in time of disaster , ncs operates the national coordinating center ( ncc ) for telecommunications — which coordinates public and private sector efforts to restore telecommunications — and manages an individual mobilization augmentee program to in bring civilian and military reservists to assist recovery efforts .

other coordinating bodies safecom has created a federal interoperability coordination council ( ficc ) , made up of "all the federal agencies with programs that address interoperability. .

previously , as part of its e - government mandate to rationalize federal programs for interoperability , safecom met with representatives from 60 different programs operated by the federal government or funded by or partnered with a federal agency .

many of these programs include state committees and national associations such as the association of public - safety communications officials - international ( apco ) .

part of the national coordination committee's mission was to encourage the creation of statewide interoperability executive committees ( siec ) , to take part in coordination efforts .

the national public safety telecommunications council ( npstc ) is another important coordinating body .

npstc unites public safety associations to work with federal agencies , the ncc , siecs and other groups to address public safety communications issues .

it has been supported by the agile program , created by the national institute of justice ( nij ) .

agile has addressed interim and long - term interoperability solutions in part by testing standards for wireless telecommunications and information technology applications .

the agile program also has provided funding to regional planning committees for start - up costs and the preparation and distribution of regional plans .

agile has been restructured , replaced by a more limited function in communications technology , commtech .

commtech is not designed to play a primary role in coordinating interoperability policy within the public safety community .

the siecs , npstc , regional planning committees and other federally - supported but not federally - directed organizations play key roles as facilitators in advancing programs for public safety communications .

in recent testimony quoted above , both safecom and the fcc have described their roles primarily as facilitators also .

safecom and dhs , in its plans for the office of interoperability and cpatibility , seem to place a high priority on consultative functions .

it appears that oic policy will focus on portfolios of recommendations for achieving interoperability at an incident site and not on establishing the higher levels of interoperability provided by network support and back - up from regional communications command centers .

in its discussions of emergency operations centers and incident command systems , however , nims seems to indicate the need for a national network architecture and fixed as well as mobile operations centers for communications network support .

the regional technology integration initiative has been established to act as a catalyst between existing technology used by first responders and the innovative technology needed in the future .

it seeks to work at the local , state and regional levels but appears to favor solutions that can be applied on a regional basis .

