continuing appropriations acts ( commonly known as continuing resolutions or crs ) , which provide interim funding in the event that regular appropriations have not been enacted , have been an integral component of the annual appropriations process for decades .

whenever action on one or more of the regular appropriations acts for a fiscal year is incomplete , an issue that arises is the appropriate duration of any period for which continuing resolutions will be used .

continuing resolutions may have a relatively short duration , based on the expectation that action on the regular appropriations acts will be concluded within several days or weeks .

alternatively , continuing resolutions may have a longer duration to postpone final action on appropriations decisions until after elections , or through the beginning of the next congressional session .

finally , a continuing resolution may provide funding for the remainder of the fiscal year .

this report provides information on congressional practices with respect to the duration of continuing resolutions , including the use of full - year measures , and focuses particularly on the period covering fy1998-fy2012 .

the routine activities of most federal agencies are funded by means of annual appropriations provided in one or more of the regular appropriations acts .

when action on the regular appropriations acts is delayed , congress may use one or more continuing appropriations acts to provide stop - gap funding .

in the absence of regular appropriations , the failure to enact continuing appropriations in a timely manner results in a funding gap .

if a funding gap occurs , federal agencies are typically required to begin a "shutdown" of the affected projects and activities , which includes the prompt furlough of non - excepted personnel .

continuing appropriations acts commonly are referred to as continuing resolutions ( or crs ) because usually they provide continuing appropriations in the form of a joint resolution rather than a bill .

occasionally , however , continuing appropriations are provided in bill form .

in most of the years in which continuing resolutions have been used , a series of two or more have been enacted into law .

continuing resolutions may be designated by their order ( eg , first continuing resolution , second continuing resolution ) or , after the initial continuing resolution has been enacted , designated merely as a further continuing resolution .

the duration of a continuing resolution refers to the period for which budget authority is provided for the covered projects and activities .

the period ends either upon the enactment of the applicable regular appropriations act , or on an expiration date specified in the continuing resolution , whichever occurs first .

the duration of a continuing resolution may vary for different agencies covered thereunder as an agency's regular appropriations act is enacted , and its coverage under the continuing resolution ceases .

for example , section 107 of p.l .

108-84 ( 117 stat .

1043 ) , the first continuing resolution for fy2004 , set the duration of the measure at 31 days: sec .

107 .

unless otherwise provided for in this joint resolution or in the applicable appropriations act , appropriations and funds made available and authority granted pursuant to this joint resolution shall be available until ( a ) enactment into law of an appropriation for any project or activity provided for in this joint resolution , or ( b ) the enactment into law of the applicable appropriations act by both houses without any provision for such project or activity , or ( c ) october 31 , 2003 , whichever first occurs .

a continuing resolution may also contain an expiration date for one or more agencies or programs that differs from the one that applies generally to the covered agencies and programs .

if action on the regular appropriations acts is not complete by the time the first continuing resolution expires , subsequent continuing resolutions will often simply replace the expiration date in the preceding continuing resolution with a new one .

for example , section 1 of the second continuing resolution for fy2004 , p.l .

108-104 ( 117 stat .

1200 ) , stated that "public law 108-84 is amended by striking the date specified in section 107 ( c ) and inserting 'november 7 , 2003.' .

this action extended the duration of the preceding continuing resolution by seven days .

based upon their duration , continuing resolutions may be classified as either interim or full - year measures .

interim ( or temporary ) continuing resolutions provide funding for periods usually measured in days or weeks ( but sometimes months ) , while full - year continuing resolutions provide funding through september 30 , the last day of the fiscal year .

by enacting a series of interim continuing resolutions , congress secures additional increments of time for itself to complete action on some or all of the remaining regular appropriations acts .

the duration of any further continuing resolutions may be shortened , sometimes to a single day , to keep pressure on legislators to conclude their business , or may be lengthened to weeks to accommodate lengthy negotiations or congressional recesses .

in some cases , continuing resolutions have carried over into the next session when congress wanted to postpone making difficult political or policy decisions .

finally , when the separate enactment of one or more of the regular appropriations bills for a fiscal year does not seem likely to occur , a full - year continuing resolution may be used to complete legislative action .

continuing resolutions usually fund activities under a formula - type approach that provides spending at a restricted level , such as "at a rate for operations not exceeding the current rate," which is generally equivalent to the total amount of appropriations provided for the prior fiscal year .

exceptions to the formula , sometimes referred to as "anomalies," which provide a specific amount of budget authority for certain accounts or activities , can also be provided .

the amount of funding available for particular activities previously provided based on a rate ( or as an anomaly ) can be increased or decreased when the relevant regular appropriations act is subsequently enacted .

congress is not bound by these conventions in determining funding levels , however , and there have been several variations in practice over the years in how the funding for projects and activities under a continuing resolution has been provided .

continuing resolutions generally do not allow new activities to be initiated .

instead , funding is usually available only for activities conducted during the past year , and existing conditions and limitations on program activity are typically retained by language contained within the resolution's text .

over the past half century , the timing patterns for congressional action on regular appropriations acts have varied considerably , but tardy enactment has been a recurring problem .

during the 25-year period covering fy1952-fy1976 , when the fiscal year began on july 1 , at least one regular appropriations bill was enacted after the start of the fiscal year .

from fy1977 to fy2012 , after the start of the fiscal year was moved to october 1 , all of the regular appropriations acts were enacted on time in only four instances ( fy1977 , fy1989 , fy1995 , and fy1997 ) .

no continuing resolutions were enacted for three of these fiscal years , but continuing resolutions were enacted for fy1977 to fund certain unauthorized programs whose funding had been dropped from the regular appropriations acts .

during the 25 fiscal years covering fy1952-fy1976 , congress did not once enact all of the regular appropriations acts on time .

as a result , one or more continuing resolutions were enacted each year during this period , except for fy1953 .

in an effort to reduce the reliance on continuing resolutions , the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 ; 88 stat .

297 ) effectively lengthened the time available for congress to act on annual appropriations measures by moving the start of the fiscal year from july 1 to october 1 .

procedures under the act were fully implemented beginning in fy1977 , and this change in the start of the fiscal year yielded immediate results — all of the regular appropriations acts for fy1977 were enacted on time .

this initial success , however , was short - lived , and congressional reliance on continuing resolutions has persisted in the ensuing years .

as was previously noted , after fy1977 , all of the regular appropriations acts were enacted on time in only three other instances — for fy1989 , fy1995 , and fy1997 .

consequently , one or more continuing resolutions were needed each year during this period .

in total , 161 continuing resolutions were enacted into law during the period covering fy1977-fy2012 , ranging from zero to 21 in any single fiscal year .

on average , about six continuing resolutions were enacted each fiscal year during this interval ( see table 3 , at the end of the report , for further information on all crs enacted between fy1977 and fy2012 ) .

full - year continuing resolutions provide funding for one or more of the regular appropriations acts for the remainder of the fiscal year ( through june 30 for fy1976 and prior years , and through september 30 for fy1977 and subsequent years ) .

they represent a determination by congress to abandon any further efforts to enact separately the remaining unfinished regular appropriations acts for the fiscal year , and to bring the annual appropriations process for that year to a close ( except for the later consideration of supplemental appropriations acts ) .

while congress has employed full - year continuing resolutions on many occasions , it has not done so consistently over time .

prior to the full implementation of the budget act in fy1977 , full - year continuing resolutions were used occasionally .

full - year continuing resolutions , for example , were enacted into law for four of the six preceding fiscal years ( fy1971 , fy1973 , fy1975 , and fy1976 ) .

following the successful completion of action on the regular appropriations acts for fy1977 , congress returned to the use of full - year continuing resolutions for more than a decade .

for each of the 11 fiscal years following fy1977 , covering fy1978-fy1988 , congress enacted a full - year continuing resolution covering at least one regular appropriations act .

three years later , congress enacted another full - year continuing resolution , for fy1992 .

most recently , a full - year continuing resolution was enacted for fy2011 .

full - year continuing resolutions may provide appropriations in different ways , including ( 1 ) by formulaic provisions ( eg , "at a rate for operations not in excess of the current rate or the rate provided in the budget estimate , whichever is lower" ) , in which the amounts available for individual projects and activities must be determined by comparing two or more alternatives ; ( 2 ) by incorporating the full text of the applicable regular appropriations acts ( including incorporation by cross - reference to other measures ) , thereby obviating the need to make any funding determinations ; or ( 3 ) by a combination of the two .

for example , p.l .

112-10 , the full - year continuing resolution for fy2011 , provided full text budget authority for the department of defense in division a , while division b provided formulaic funding ( with anomalies ) for all other agencies and activities for the remainder of the fiscal year .

table 1 identifies the 14 full - year continuing resolutions enacted for the period since fy1977 .

eight of the measures included at least one formulaic funding provision , while the remaining six did not .

nine of the 14 full - year continuing resolutions during this period were enacted in the first quarter of the fiscal year — three in october , two in november , and four in december .

the five remaining measures , however , were enacted during the following session , between february 15 and june 5 .

as table 1 shows , full - year continuing resolutions enacted during the first six years of this period were relatively short measures , ranging in length from one to four pages in the statutes - at - large .

beginning with fy1983 and extending through fy1988 , however , the measures became much lengthier , ranging in length from 19 to 451 pages ( averaging 244 pages ) .

the greater page length of full - year continuing resolutions enacted for the period covering fy1983-fy1988 may be explained by two factors .

first , full - year continuing resolutions enacted prior to fy1983 generally established funding levels by a formulaic reference to pending regular appropriations acts .

with regard to a specific appropriations act , for example , funding levels may have been keyed to the lesser of the amounts provided in the house - passed or senate - passed versions of the act .

beginning with fy1983 , however , congress largely abandoned the use of formulaic references to establish funding levels .

instead , the full text of some or all of the covered regular appropriations acts usually was incorporated into the full - year continuing resolution , thereby increasing its length considerably .

secondly , the number of regular appropriations acts covered by full - year continuing resolutions increased significantly during the fy1983-fy1988 period .

for the period covering fy1978-fy1982 , the number of regular appropriations acts covered by continuing resolutions for the full fiscal year ranged from one to eight ( averaging four ) .

beginning with fy1983 and extending through fy1988 , the number of covered acts ranged from 5 to 13 ( averaging 9.25 ) .

in the above respect , p.l .

112-10 ( the full - year continuing resolution for fy2011 ) provided funding in a similar manner to the fy1983-fy1988 full - year continuing resolutions .

p.l .

112-10 provided budget authority for a total of 12 regular appropriations act by incorporating the full text of one appropriations bill ( the fy2011 department of defense appropriations act ) while also providing for the other 11 regular appropriations bills through formulaic provisions and specific anomalies .

continuing resolutions have been a significant element of the annual appropriations process during the last 15 fiscal years , covering fy1998-fy2012 .

as shown in table 2 , a total of 92 continuing resolutions were enacted into law during this period .

while the average number of such measures enacted per year was about 6 ( 6.1 ) , the actual number enacted ranged from 2 measures ( for fy2009 and fy2010 ) to 21 ( for fy2001 ) .

during these last 15 fiscal years , congress provided funding by means of a continuing resolution for an average of over four months ( 126.6 days ) each fiscal year .

taking into account the total duration of continuing resolutions enacted for each fiscal year , the period for which continuing appropriations were provided ranged from 21 days to 365 days .

on average , each of the 92 continuing resolutions enacted lasted for almost 29 ( 28.8 ) days ; 45 of these were for seven days or less .

two full - year continuing resolutions were used during this period , for fy2007 and fy2011 .

in the first four instances ( fy1998-fy2001 ) , the expiration date in the final continuing resolution was set in the first quarter of the fiscal year , on a date occurring between october 21 and december 21 .

the expiration date in the final continuing resolution for the next three fiscal years ( fy2002-fy2004 ) , however , was set in the following session on a date occurring between january 10 and february 20 .

while the expiration dates in the final continuing resolutions for five of the next eight fiscal years ( fy2005 , fy2006 , fy2008 , fy2010 , and fy2012 ) were in the first quarter of the fiscal year on a date occurring between december 8 and december 31 , the final continuing resolution for fy2009 carried an expiration date of march 11 , 2009 .

the final continuing resolutions for fy2007 and fy2011 provided funding through the remainder of the fiscal year .

figure 1 presents a representation of both the number and duration of continuing resolutions for fy1998-fy2012 .

as the figure shows , there is no significant correlation between these two variables .

for example , six continuing resolutions were enacted for both fy1998 and fy1999 , but the same number of measures lasted for a period of 57 days for fy1998 and only 21 days for fy1999 .

the largest number of continuing resolutions enacted for a single fiscal year during this period — 21 for fy2001 — covered a period lasting 82 days , at an average duration of 3.9 days per act .

the smallest number enacted — two each for fy2009 and fy2010 — covered 162 days and 79 days , respectively , at an average duration of 81 days and 40 days per act .

figure 1 also shows considerable mix in the use of shorter - term and longer - term continuing resolutions for a single fiscal year .

for example , for fy2001 , 21 continuing resolutions covered the first 82 days of the fiscal year .

the first 25 days were covered by a series of four continuing resolutions lasting between five and eight days each .

the next 10 days , a period of intense legislative negotiations leading up to the national elections on november 7 , 2000 , were covered by a series of 10 one - day continuing resolutions .

the next 31 days were covered by two continuing resolutions , the first lasting 10 days and the second lasting 21 days .

the first of these two continuing resolutions was enacted into law on november 4 , the saturday before the election , and extended through november 14 , the second day of a lame - duck session .

the second continuing resolution was enacted into law on november 15 and expired on december 5 , which was 10 days before the lame - duck session ended .

the remaining five continuing resolutions , which ranged in duration from one to six days , covered the remainder of the lame - duck session and several days beyond ( as the final appropriations legislation passed by congress was being processed for the president's approval ) .

table 3 provides more detailed information on the number , length , and duration of continuing appropriations acts enacted for fy1977-fy2012 .

as indicated previously , this represents the period during which the congressional budget process as established by the budget act has been in effect , that is , since the change in the start of the fiscal year from july 1 to october 1 .

