on november 16 , 1994 , the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) entered into force , but not for the united states .

unclos was the culmination of more than 10 years of intense negotiation .

however , the united states chose not to participate in unclos in the early 1980s because of provisions dealing with deep seabed mineral resources beyond national jurisdiction .

after a 1994 agreement amended parts of unclos dealing with deep seabed mineral resources , the unclos , annexes , and agreement package was formally submitted to the u.s. senate on october 7 , 1994 , for advice and consent to accession and ratification ( senate treaty doc .

103-39 ) .

however , the senate took no action .

more recently , the george w. bush administration reiterated support for u.s. accession to unclos .

in the 110 th congress , unclos was reported on december 19 , 2007 , by the senate committee on foreign relations ( s.exec.rept .

110-9 ) , but the senate did not take up the measure for ratification .

in the 111 th congress , then - secretary of state hillary clinton , at her confirmation hearing before the senate committee on foreign relations on january 13 , 2009 , acknowledged that u.s. accession to unclos would be an obama administration priority .

later in this confirmation hearing , then - senator john kerry , the committee chair , confirmed that unclos would also be a committee priority .

however , the senate took no action on unclos during the 111 th congress .

in the 112 th congress , the administration continued to encourage senate action on unclos , but again no action was taken .

in the 113 th congress , there has been little or no mention of unclos and no actions have been taken to ratify the treaty .

unclos and a subsequent 1994 agreement on deep seabed mining are extensive , complex documents touching on a wide range of policy issues and u.s. interests .

from the perspective of the united states , some of the most significant areas addressed by the convention deal with naval power and maritime commerce , coastal state interests , marine environment protection , marine scientific research , and international dispute settlement .

a number of issues may arise during senate consideration of unclos , including the question of whether the 1994 agreement adequately addresses the deep seabed portions of the convention that were at the core of u.s. opposition to the original unclos .

policy issues relating to areas beyond living resources that are likely to draw senate attention are discussed more fully in crs report rs21890 , the u.n. law of the sea convention and the united states: developments since october 2003 , by [author name scrubbed] , and include the dispute settlement process set forth in unclos and the u.s. declarations on dispute settlement ; the relationship between u.s. law and various parts of unclos regarding use of the world's oceans ; u.s. acceptance of the unclos / agreement interpretation and application of the common heritage of mankind concept ; the provisional application procedures as a precedent in the u.s. treaty process ; the nature of u.s. commitments undertaken by a decision of the international seabed authority ( isa ) council — what does a council decision commit the u.s. government to do ? .

should congress have a role and if so , under what circumstances ; and the cost and financing of the isa and u.s. participation therein , now and in the future .

the remainder of this report focuses on the living marine resource provisions of unclos .

the living resources provisions of unclos ( i.e. , those concerning fish , shellfish , sea turtles , and marine mammals ) recognize international interdependence on these resources and provide a framework for their cooperative and sustainable management .

these provisions , comprising articles 61 through 73 , deal specifically with: conservation ( article 61 ) , exploitation ( article 62 ) , transboundary and straddling stocks ( article 63 ) , highly migratory stocks ( article 64 ) , marine mammals ( article 65 ) , anadromous stocks ( article 66 ) , catadromous stocks ( article 67 ) , sedentary species ( article 68 ) , rights of landlocked nations ( article 69 ) , rights of geographically disadvantaged nations ( article 70 ) , non - applicability of articles 69 and 70 ( article 71 ) , restrictions on transfer of rights ( article 72 ) , and enforcement by coastal nations ( article 73 ) .

in addition , sedentary continental shelf species are more specifically addressed in article 77 ( 4 ) , living resources on the high seas are considered in articles 116-120 , and marine habitat protection is provided by articles 192-196 .

as presently understood and interpreted , these provisions generally reflect current u.s. policy with respect to living marine resource management , conservation , and exploitation as reflected primarily in the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act .

however , increasingly complex ocean policy is being formulated within the unclos regime , without strong u.s. participation to address u.s. concerns .

in support of current u.s. maritime policy , the u.s. government , particularly the u.s. coast guard , currently expends considerable resources enforcing u.s. and international fishing and living resources laws in the u.s .

exclusive economic zone ( eez ) off both the atlantic and pacific coasts as well as hawaii , howland - baker , guam , northern marianas islands , puerto rico , and other remote u.s. eez areas and in the high seas driftnet area of the western pacific .

recognizing the existing level of u.s. commitment and based on current u.s. interpretation , the living resource provisions of unclos are generally not seen as imposing significant new u.s. obligations , commitments , or encumbrances involving living resources and their management .

unclos could provide several new privileges , primarily related to participation in commissions developing international ocean policy .

some measure of increased stability in international living marine resource policy can be inferred as a beneficial aspect of u.s. participation in the unclos regime .

it appears that no new domestic legislation would be required to implement the living resources provisions of unclos .

article 297 ( 3 ) ( b ) offers assurances that domestic eez fisheries matters cannot be forced to undergo compulsory dispute settlement proceedings leading to binding decisions under unclos: the coastal state shall not be obliged to accept the submission to such settlement [compulsory procedures leading to binding decisions] of any dispute relating to its sovereign rights with respect to the living resources in the exclusive economic zone or their exercise , including its discretionary powers for determining the allowable catch , its harvesting capacity , the allocation of surpluses to other states and the terms and conditions established in its conservation and management laws and regulations .

article 297 ( 3 ) ( b ) does provide that disputes can be submitted to conciliation when ( 1 ) a coastal nation has failed to properly conserve and manage eez living resources such that they become seriously endangered ; ( 2 ) a coastal nation has arbitrarily refused to determine allowable catches and capacity to harvest species desired by a foreign nation ; or ( 3 ) a coastal nation has arbitrarily refused to allocate a declared surplus in a living resource to any foreign nation .

however , article 297 ( 3 ) ( c ) prohibits a conciliation commission from substituting its discretion for that of the coastal nation .

conciliation procedures are outlined in article 7 ( 2 ) of annex v , which states that a conciliation commission's report , including its conclusions and recommendations , is not binding .

the history of the international tribunal for the law of the sea ( itlos ) , however , merits scrutiny .

article 292 , providing for the prompt release of vessels , allows for application to the itlos for the prompt release of any vessel flagged by one member that is detained by another member .

the vast majority of the cases itlos has heard so far have been applications for the prompt release of fishing vessels that have been accused of unauthorized fishing in the eez of a member .

some observe that these cases may really represent fishery disputes in disguise .

as presently understood and interpreted , the los provisions generally appear to reflect current u.s. policy with respect to living marine resource management , conservation , and exploitation .

based on these interpretations , the living resource provisions of unclos are generally not seen as imposing significant new u.s. obligations , commitments , or encumbrances involving living resources and their management .

one possible benefit of u.s. ratification would be the international community's anticipated positive response to such u.s. action .

in addition , u.s. accession to unclos would provide the united states the opportunity to nominate a representative to the commission on the limits of the continental shelf and to seek clarification of u.s. continental shelf boundaries , thus addressing concerns related to shared continental shelf areas such as the bering sea's donut hole and the arctic waters of the chukchi and beaufort seas .

furthermore , accession could benefit the united states by allowing u.s. participation in the international seabed authority and appointment of u.s. representatives to its various subsidiary bodies .

moreover , u.s. accession to unclos would provide the united states with the opportunity to nominate national representatives as judges on the itlos and to fully participate in developing the practices of this important global body .

as the status of the international whaling commission ( iwc ) is currently in dispute , some suggest that the united states , if ratifying unclos , might offer a declaration recognizing the iwc as the "appropriate international organization" to regulate cetaceans as a means to marginalize any competing organizations that might seek to offer an alternative model of cetacean management .

such u.s. action might empower and energize the iwc , an organization that the united states has worked hard to develop as a key marine conservation body .

on the other hand , some u.s. interests view u.s. ratification as potentially complicating enforcement of domestic marine regulations .

these uncertainties reflect the absence of any comprehensive assessment of the social and economic impacts of unclos implementation by the united states .

although early itlos cases do not indicate a problem , some in the united states remain concerned that unclos's language concerning arbitrary refusal of access to surplus ( unallocated ) living resources might be a potential source of conflict .

additional concerns surround whether and to what extent the united states could regulate ballast water discharges to combat invasive species , supplemental to and in concert with international action taken by the international maritime organization ( imo ) .

if unclos is interpreted such that invasive species are covered under the convention's broad definition of pollution , the united states ( and other coastal nations ) could be constrained as to what preventive measures could be imposed on ships operating outside our territorial sea .

proponents of unclos maintain that u.s. participation in the development of policies and practices of the international tribunal for the law of the sea , the commission on the limits of the continental shelf , and the international seabed authority could help to forestall future problems related to living marine resources .

in addition , they indicate that the senate could choose to address some of the intentional ambiguities of unclos drafters with its power to make declarations and statements as provided for in article 310 .

such declarations and statements can be useful in promulgating u.s. policy and putting other nations on notice of u.s. interpretation of unclos .

a range of issues where u.s. interpretive statements might be helpful was discussed at a senate committee on foreign relations hearing on october 21 , 2003 .

