u.s. attention has focused on russia's fitful democratization since it emerged in 1991 from the collapse of the soviet union .

many observers have argued that a democratic russia with free markets would be a cooperative bilateral and multilateral partner rather than an insular and hostile national security threat .

at the same time , most observers have cautioned that democracy may not be easily attainable in russia , at least in part because of a dearth of historical and cultural experience with representative institutions and modes of thought .

concerns about democratization progress appeared heightened after vladimir putin became president in 2000 .

setbacks to democratization have included more government interference in elections and campaigns , restrictions on freedom of the media , civil as well as human rights abuses in the breakaway chechnya region , and the forced liquidation of russia's largest private oil firm , yukos , as an apparent warning to other entrepreneurs not to support opposition parties or otherwise challenge government policy .

democratization faced further challenges following terrorist attacks in russia that culminated in the deaths of hundreds of school - children in the town of beslan in september 2004 .

president putin almost immediately proposed restructuring all three branches of government and strengthening federal powers to better counter the terrorist threat to russia .

the proposed restructuring included integrating security agencies , switching to purely proportional voting for the duma ( lower legislative chamber ) , eliminating direct elections of the heads of federal subunits , asserting greater presidential control over the judiciary , and achieving more control over civil society by creating a "public chamber" consultative group of largely government - approved non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) .

after this restructuring had been largely implemented , president putin in his may 2006 state of the federation address hailed it as "even[ing] out the imbalances that have arisen in the structure of the state and the social sphere. .

much controversy has attended the restructuring of the political system .

on the one hand , some russian and international observers have supported the restructuring as compatible with russia's democratization .

they have accepted putin's argument that his moves counter chechen and international terrorists intent on destroying russia's territorial integrity and political and economic development .

on the other hand , critics of the restructuring moves have branded them as the latest of putin's democratic rollbacks since he came to power in 2000 .

in a sensational move , putin declared in april 2005 that he would not seek re - election , stating that "i will not change the constitution and in line with the constitution , you cannot run for president three times in a row. .

according to several observers , this declaration has spurred the maneuvering of putin's supporters to fine tune a system of "managed democracy" ( see below for definitions ) , if not authoritarianism , in order to gain substantial influence over electoral processes ahead of state duma elections scheduled for december 2007 and the russian presidential election set for march 2008 .

the u.s. administration and congress have welcomed some cooperation with russia on vital u.s. national security concerns , including the non - proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , strategic arms reduction , nato enlargement , and since september 11 , 2001 , the global war on terror .

at the same time , the united states has raised concerns with russia over anti - democratic trends , warning that a divergence in democratic values could eventually harm u.s. - russian cooperation .

following putin's beslan proposals , then - secretary of state colin powell urged russia not to allow the fight against terrorism to harm the democratic process , and president bush raised concerns about "decisions ... in russia that could undermine democracy. .

in the wake of russia's cutoff of gas supplies to ukraine in early 2006 , vice president dick cheney appeared to reflect an administration consensus that authoritarianism was deepening in russia .

he stated that russia's "government has unfairly and improperly restricted the rights of her people" and that such restrictions "could begin to affect relations with other countries. .

he called for russia to "return to democratic reform. .

some u.s. observers have urged circumspection in criticizing lagging democratization in russia , lest such criticism harm u.s. - russian cooperation on vital u.s. national security concerns .

others have urged stronger u.s. motions of disapproval , regardless of possible effects on bilateral relations .

the putin government and state - controlled media have criticized such u.s. administration statements as "interfering in russia's internal affairs," as not recognizing the grave threat of terrorism in russia , and as misrepresenting sensible counter - terrorism measures as threats to democratization .

this paper assesses russia's progress in democratization , including in the areas of elections , media rights , civil society , and federalism .

four scenarios of possible future political developments are suggested — a continuation of the current situation of "managed democracy," deepening authoritarianism , further democratization , or a chaotic interlude — and evidence and arguments are weighed for each .

lastly , u.s. policy and implications for u.s. interests , congressional concerns , and issues for congress are analyzed .

most analysts agree that modern democracy includes the peaceful change of leaders through popular participation in elections .

also , political powers are separated and exercised by institutions that check and balance each others' powers , hence impairing a tyranny of power .

democracies generally have free market economies , which depend upon the rule of law and private property rights .

the rule of law is assured through an independent judicial and legal system .

the accountability of government officials to the citizenry is assured most importantly through elections that are freely competed and fairly conducted .

an informed electorate is assured through the government's obligation to publicize its activities ( termed transparency ) and the citizenry's freedom of expression .

in contrast , in an authoritarian state the leadership rules with wide and arbitrary latitude in the political sphere but interferes somewhat less in economic and social affairs .

the government strictly limits opposition activities , and citizens are not able to change leaders by electoral means .

rather than legitimizing its rule by appealing to an elaborate ideology , an authoritarian regime boasts to its citizenry that it provides safety , security , and order .

some theorists have delineated a political system with mixed features of democracy and authoritarianism they label "managed democracy. .

in a managed democracy , the leaders use government resources and manipulation to ensure that they will not be defeated in elections , although they permit democratic institutions and groups to function to a limited extent .

presidential advisor vladislav surkov and the pro - presidential united russia party have advocated use of the term "sovereign democracy," which they define as a culturally appropriate form of government that is not influenced by other countries .

russia certainly has made some progress in democratization since the soviet period .

the extent of progress , however , and the direction of recent trends , are subject to dispute .

democratization has faced myriad challenges , including former president boris yeltsin's violent face - off with the legislature in 1993 and recurring conflict in the breakaway chechnya region .

such challenges , virtually all analysts agree , have hindered russia from becoming a fully - fledged or "consolidated" democracy in terms of the above definition .

some analysts have viewed putin as making decisions that have diverted russia further away from democracy , but they have argued that the country is not yet fully authoritarian and may be described as a "managed democracy. .

others insist that he is clearly antagonistic toward democracy , not least because he launched security operations in chechnya that have resulted in wide scale human rights abuses and civilian casualties .

the ngo freedom house claims that russia under putin has suffered the greatest reversal among the post - soviet states in democratic freedoms , and warns that the main danger to russia's future political stability and continued economic growth is an overly repressive state .

other observers agree with putin that stability is necessary to build democracy .

he stresses that the government's first priority is to deal with terrorism and other threats to sovereignty and territorial integrity , such as corruption .

some suggest that such a "strong state" may be compatible with free market economic growth .

the implications of putin's rule may be organized into three or perhaps four major trends or scenarios of russia's future political development , namely democratization , authoritarianism , or a middle ground that many observers term "managed democracy. .

another possible scenario ( perhaps considered as an interlude ) is a period of chaotic instability that may occur if president putin steps down in 2008 .

 ( the breakup of russia — also termed the "failed state" scenario — is deemed by many observers to be less likely , and is not examined here , but has been advanced by putin as a justification for his political changes. ) .

the main question in considering the scenarios is whether the current level of managed democracy can endure for some time , or whether it is a stage on the way to either more democratization or more authoritarianism .

implications include how the level of democratization may affect the economy and foreign policy .

successive administrations and congresses generally have agreed that a democratic russia would be a u.s. friend or ally rather than a strategic security threat .

they have viewed political developments in russia as a vital u.s. interest because of russia's capabilities , including its geographical size ( including its extensive borders with europe , asia , and central eurasia ) , educated population , natural resources , arms industries , and strategic nuclear weapons .

a democratic russia that is integrated into global free - markets could cooperate with the united states on a range of economic , political , and security issues , rather than use its capabilities for hostile confrontation , in this view .

at the same time , setbacks to democratization in russia have led successive u.s. administrations to argue that the united states should remain engaged with russia to cooperate on international and security issues and to urge it to democratize .

many observers argue that there has been a close relationship between domestic and foreign policy in russia , so u.s. policy - makers must try to encourage pluralism and discourage authoritarianism .

they maintain that when the soviet union ( of which russia was a part ) was communist , it opposed the west , and as it began to democratize , its foreign policy became more accommodationist .

these observers argue that a prospective russian dictator would need to rely on the military and security forces to maintain power .

these forces have lagged the most in adopting democratic values and continue to favor anti - american foreign policies that , if implemented , would threaten u.s. national security interests .

such policies conceivably might include a hostile nuclear strategic posture , stepped - up proliferation of arms and wmd technologies to governments or groups unfriendly to the united states , and neo - imperialist moves to threaten europe and to re - impose authoritarian , pro - moscow regimes in the former soviet republics .

other observers stress that russia's cooperation with the united states in the global war on terror is a critical u.s. security interest , while the issue of democratization in russia is of lower priority and if necessary , must be de - emphasized .

they assert that putin , regardless of his political orientation , has been at least somewhat effective in combating terrorist activities in chechnya and elsewhere in russia and safeguarding wmd and infrastructure from falling into terrorist hands .

a post - putin leadership in russia , they argue , would continue these policies , since they accord with russia's security interests .

in the 110 th congress , s. 198 ( nunn ) has appeared to reflect some of these assessments .

in introducing the bill on september 8 , 2007 , senator sam nunn stressed that "the proliferation of wmd is the number one national security threat facing the united states today. .

he argued that "it is in u.s. interests to eliminate and secure weapons and materials of mass destruction," rather than spend substantial time to decide whether russia and other prospective recipients of comprehensive threat reduction assistance are satisfying various conditions , including respect for human rights .

in the case that conditions are not met , waivers are exercised after lengthy delays , he argued , and these delays harm u.s. interests in combating wmd .

the conditions also provide no effective leverage on russian behavior , he stated .

many observers have maintained that u.s. democratization aid to russia will at best be effective at the margins , given limited funding and the large scope of the challenge .

those who advocate ending such aid point out that the russian government increasingly regards it only as interference in its internal affairs , so the aid actually reduces u.s. leverage to encourage russia to cooperate in the global war on terror and other issues .

they also maintain that civil society should be able to stand on its own resources , given russia's recent economic growth .

u.s. diplomatic and public expressions of disapproval about putin's beslan proposals and actions such as the chechnya conflict are likewise counterproductive , they assert , because they are regarded by putin as offensive and reduce u.s. credibility .

instead , the united states should work with russia only when solicited to foster democratization in chechnya and elsewhere in russia .

others reject the view that u.s. democratization aid can only be of marginal effectiveness in russia .

they argue that some of the assistance has proven beneficial , and that there would be much more of a positive effect if the aid were increased .

these observers suggest that such aid will serve u.s. interests because russia will ultimately become a more cooperative partner to the west .

they warn against any reduction of such aid at the present time , because russia's civil society is too fragile to stand on its own in the face of threats from the russian government .

these observers claim that u.s. diplomatic and public expressions of concern to russia about its democratic policies should be matched by an active u.s. democratization aid effort .

in particular , they urge stepped - up democratization aid as russia prepares for a duma election in late 2007 and an election to choose a new president in early 2008 .

they stress that the united states , as the world's oldest democracy and sole superpower , has a responsibility to urge russia to continue to democratize .

they have maintained that such a stance is in line with the administration's objective of fostering democracy and respect for human rights in the middle east and elsewhere in the world .

some observers dismiss the view that the united states has little leverage to encourage democratization in russia .

they agree with other analysts that the u.s. advocacy of democratization should not be permitted to endanger cooperation with russia on critical national security issues , but see a role for minor u.s. threats and sanctions against russia for civil and human rights abuses .

russia has a large stake in its major ongoing and potential exports of energy and other resources to the united states and the west , they argue , providing the west with major potential economic leverage to encourage democratization in russia .

