"child care reauthorization" is composed of two parts: legislation to reauthorize the childcare and development block grant ( ccdbg ) act and legislation to extend mandatory fundingappropriated under section 418 of the social security act .

the ccdbg act authorizesdiscretionary funds and contains all provisions pertaining to the administration of ccdbg programs .

section 418 of the social security act appropriates mandatory money to be administered underprovisions included in the ccdbg act .

the 108th congress did not complete action to reauthorize either the ccdbg act itself , orthe mandatory child care funding appropriated under the social security act ( along with thetemporary assistance for needy families block grant ) .

both expired at the end of fy2002 .

however , funding for the ccdbg has been continued via a series of temporary extensions ( in thecase of the mandatory funding ) and annual appropriations law ( for the discretionary funding portion ) .

in terms of reauthorization legislation , the house passed a consolidated bill , h.r .

4 ( personal responsibility , work , and family promotion act of 2003 ) , whichincluded discretionary funding authorization , a mandatory appropriation , and amendments to theccdbg act ( alongside provisions to amend and extend funding for temporary assistance forneedy families [tanf] ( 1 ) ) .

in the senate , two separate bills were reported from their respective committees , butultimately failed to reach a final vote on the full senate floor .

the senate finance committee'sreported substitute version of h.r .

4 ( personal responsibility and individualdevelopment for everyone act [pride] ) included mandatory funding for child care , while thesenate health , education , labor , and pensions committee's reported bill , s. 880 ( thecaring for children act of 2003 ) , included all provisions pertaining to discretionary fundingauthorization , and would have amended the ccdbg act itself .

although the senate bills nevermade it to a final floor vote , it should be noted that when the legislation was brought to the floor , oneamendment , offered by senator snowe , was accepted ( 78-20 ) .

that amendment proposed to increasemandatory child care funding above the amounts proposed in the house - passed , and senatecommittee bill .

below is a summary of key provisions in all three bills ( and the snowe amendment,as passed on the floor ) , followed by table 1 , a detailed side - by - side comparison of each bill'sprovisions with current law .

 ( 2 ) .

table 1 provides a detailed comparison of the child care provisions included in thehouse - passed and senate finance committee - reported versions of h.r .

4 , the senatehelp committee - reported s. 880 , with current law .

in some cases , current law refersto the child care and development block grant act , while current law provisions pertaining to themandatory child care funding are included in section 418 of the social security act .

the bracketedreferences in each of the cells refer to the section of the applicable law or proposed bill .

in thesection regarding the mandatory ( entitlement ) funding , the snowe amendment , as passed during theshort - lived senate floor consideration is noted .

table 1 .

comparison of current law with child care provisions in h.r .

4 as passed by the house , asreported by the senate finance committee , and s. 88 .

