the prospect and potential for severe weather or other natural disasters on or immediately before election day , in addition to lingering hypotheticals about terrorist attacks in the united states , have brought attention to the possibility of postponing as well as the authority to postpone , cancel , or reschedule an election for federal office .

there is no provision in the united states constitution which currently authorizes in express language any federal official or institution to "postpone" an election for federal office .

the constitution expressly delegates to the states the primary authority to administer within their respective jurisdictions elections for federal office , with a residual and superseding authority within the united states congress over most aspects of congressional elections ( other than the place of choosing senators ) .

additionally , the constitution provides an express authority in congress over at least the timing of the selections of presidential electors in the states .

as to the time established for holding federal elections under these express constitutional authorities , congress has legislated , originally in 1845 , a uniform date for presidential electors to be chosen in the states , and in 1872 , a uniform date for congressional elections across the country .

in addition to the absence of specific constitutional direction , there is also no federal law which currently provides express authority to "postpone" an election , although the potential operation of federal statutes regarding vacancies and the consequences of a state's failure to select on the prescribed election day may allow the states to hold subsequent elections in "exigent" circumstances .

a handful of states have provided in s tate law express authority to postpone or reschedule elections within their jurisdictions based on certain emergency contingencies , and others have provided general emergency provisions which might be applicable to election situations .

as to potential disruptions on or immediately before election day , particularly in regard to the presidential election , some of the confused scenarios and proposed solutions appear to stem from a misconception of the presidential election as being in the nature of a national referendum .

the presidential election is , however , in essence a series of state ( and district of columbia ) elections for presidential electors from that state ( or jurisdiction ) that the congress has mandated , since 1845 , to be held on the same day throughout the country .

an event which may disrupt an election for presidential electors in one state , or in a part of one state , may not affect or impact at all the election for presidential electors in other states , or in other portions of the affected state .

consistent with the states' authority over the administration and procedural aspects of elections to federal office within their jurisdictions is their initial responsibility for resolving issues of challenges and recounts in those elections .

this authority and these procedures may be relevant in the case of disruptions , disasters , or violence at the polling places on election day which could conceivably cast into question the efficacy and legitimacy of a particular election result in that jurisdiction .

the relevant state procedures could be applied after the fact of an election to resolve initial questions concerning the results of such elections .

it should be emphasized that while the states have the initial authority , or the "first cut" at resolving disputes and recounts in their respective jurisdictions regarding elections to federal office , the constitution expressly provides that the final authority over the elections and returns of its own members lies exclusively in each house of congress .

as to the elections for presidential electors , the constitution expressly gives to the congress the task of counting the electoral votes for president .

implicit within this explicit authority to count the electoral votes has been the practical necessity to determine which electoral votes to count .

while congress has established procedures and rules for counting the electoral votes and resolving disputed lists of electors , congress has , by statute , specifically given the states a "safe harbor" time within which to formally resolve presidential electoral disputes , prior to the meeting of the electoral college in december , which then would be considered "conclusive" upon the congress in counting those electoral votes for president .

the united states constitution does not require a uniform election date in the states for elections to the house or senate , or for the selection of presidential electors .

rather , this has been done by congress by the enactment of federal law .

the constitution , while declaring in the "times , places and manner" clause ( art .

i , §4 , cl .

1 ) that the states have the general authority over the administration of even federal elections within their respective jurisdictions , expressly provides that the congress may supersede a state provision regarding , among other things , the timing of congressional elections , and further provides that congress may establish the time for the election of presidential electors in the states ( art .

ii , §1 , cl .

4 ) .

under these express constitutional authorities , congress has established uniform dates for the general elections to federal office within the states , which now are mandated to be held on the first tuesday next following the first monday in november in the appropriate even - numbered years .

it was not until 1845 that a uniform date for electing presidential electors in the states was mandated by congress .

previous to that congressional enactment , the timing for selecting presidential electors could , and did , vary from state to state .

congress in 1844 and 1845 was , however , concerned about the allegations of fraud and corruption in the previous election ( 1840 ) for electors for president and vice president in several states .

it was asserted that some of the particular misconduct in that election appeared to have been encouraged , in part , because the states had differing dates for the presidential election , which allowed the alleged movement of populations and voters to key states having later elections ( described as "pipelaying" ) .

congress sought to eliminate such opportunities for fraud and corruption by establishing a uniform day throughout the country for selecting the electors for president and vice president , while assuring that those states that required an absolute majority to elect could continue to hold a run - off for presidential electors if needed in an election on a subsequent date .

the uniform date for congressional elections in the states was not established by the congress until 1872 .

in first enacting this legislation , the congress appeared to be concerned primarily with two factors , that is , the potential undue and unfair influence on elections in some states that earlier results and elections in other states may routinely have ; and the burden on voters who in some states would have to go to the polls twice for two different general elections to choose federal officers in presidential election years .

as noted , the united states constitution does not provide express authority for any federal official or institution to postpone an election for federal office in a particular state , in any part of one state , or in all of the states .

specifically , there is no current constitutional authority residing in the president of the united states , nor the executive branch of government , to postpone , cancel , or reschedule elections for federal office in the various states .

there might certainly be some potential emergency powers inherent in the president of the united states , as well as those delegated by statute , but there is no precedent for such powers being applied with respect to elections held in the various states for presidential electors , authority over which , as to the procedures and methods , has been expressly delegated in the constitution to the states .

it is possible that some scenarios could be imagined , however , where attacks , disruptions , and destruction are so severe and so dangerous in certain localities , particularly in crowded urban areas , that the president under a rule of necessity may look to protect the public safety by federalizing the state national guard and restricting movement and activities in such areas which would obviously affect the ability to conduct an election at those sites .

unlike the president , congress does have explicit constitutional authority over elections to federal office which is of an express , residual nature concerning congressional elections , and a broad implicit authority recognized by the supreme court to legislate to protect the integrity and proceedings of presidential elections ( as well as express authority over the date of the selection of presidential electors ) .

congress could , therefore , pass legislation regarding dates , and emergency postponements and / or rescheduling times for elections to federal offices .

the courts have recognized an expansive authority in the congress to "provide a complete code" for federal elections within the states , including presidential elections and , within the parameters of the specific dates for the length and terms of federal offices established within the constitution , congress would appear to have the authority to exercise its legislative discretion with regard to emergency scheduling and rescheduling .

as noted by the supreme court in the 19 th century with regard to congress's authority over the conduct of elections for federal office in the states: that a government whose essential character is republican , whose executive head and legislative body are both elective ... , has no power by appropriate laws to secure this election from the influence of violence ... is a proposition so startling as to arrest attention and demand the gravest consideration .

if this government is anything more than a mere aggregation of delegated agents of other states and governments , each of which is superior to the general government , it must have the power to protect the elections on which its existence depends from violence and corruption .

furthermore , in theory , congress could also enact a law delegating to the executive certain authority in this area regarding emergency rescheduling .

however , as a policy matter , and under the constitutional authority delegated to it , congress has traditionally allowed the states , within the framework of the federal constitutional and statutory mandates , to exercise the substantive control over the procedures and administrative details of elections within their own respective jurisdictions .

it should be noted , and as discussed in more detail in the following sections , that there are existing provisions under current federal law regarding a failure of a state to make a selection on the prescribed election day with respect to both congressional elections ( 2 u.s.c .

§8 ) and presidential elections ( 3 u.s.c .

§2 ) , which have traditionally left the details of such decisions up to the states .

constitutional provisions: congressional elections a rticle i , section 2 , clause 1 .

the house of representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several states ... .

article i , section 2 , clause 4 .

when vacancies happen in the representation from any state , the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies .

amendment seventeen .

the senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each state , elected by the people thereof , for six years ... .

when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate , the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: provided , that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct .

article i , section 4 , clause 1 .

the times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives , shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof ; but the congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations , except as to the places of chusing senators .

article i , section 5 , clause 1 .

each house shall be the judge of the elections , returns and qualifications of its own members .... presidential elections .

article ii , section 1 , cl .

1 .

the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of america .

he shall hold his office during the term of four years , and , together with the vice president , chosen for the same term , be elected , as follows: article ii , section 1 , cl .

2 .

each state shall appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress... .

article ii , section 1 , clause 4 .

the congress may determine the time of chusing the electors , and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the united states .

amendment xii .

the electors shall meet in their respective states , and vote by ballot for president and vice - president , ... and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as president , and of all persons voted for as vice - president , and of the number of votes for each , which lists they shall sign and certify , and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the united states , directed to the president of the senate ; – the president of the senate shall , in the presence of the senate and house of representatives , open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted ... .

dates of federal office terms .

amendment xx , section 1 .

the terms of the president and vice president shall end at noon on the 20 th day of january , and the terms of senators and representatives at noon on the 3 rd day of january , of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified ; and the terms of their successors shall then begin .

current federal statutory provisions .

2 u.s.c .

section 1 .

time for election of senators .

at the regular election held in any state next preceding the expiration of the term for which any senator was elected to represent such state in congress , at which election a representative to congress is regularly by law to be chosen , a united states senator from said state shall be elected by the people thereof for the term commencing on the 3d day of january next thereafter .

2 u.s.c .

section 7 .

time of election .

the tuesday next after the 1 st monday in november , in every even numbered year , is established as the day for the election , in each of the states and territories of the united states , of representatives and delegates to the congress commencing on the 3d day of january next thereafter .

2 u.s.c .

section 8 .

vacancies .

the time for holding elections in any state , district , or territory for a representative or delegate to fill a vacancy , whether such vacancy is caused by a failure to elect at the time prescribed by law , or by the death , resignation , or incapacity of a person elected , may be prescribed by the laws of the several states and territories respectively .

3 u.s.c .

section 1 .

time of appointing electors .

the electors of president and vice president shall be appointed , in each state , on the tuesday next after the first monday in november , in every fourth year succeeding every election of a president and vice president .

3 u.s.c .

section 2 .

failure to make choice on prescribed day .

whenever any state has held an election for the purpose of choosing electors , and has failed to make a choice on the day prescribed by law , the electors may be appointed on a subsequent day in such a manner as the legislature of such state may direct .

3 u.s.c .

section 5 .

determination of controversy as to appointment of electors .

if any state shall have provided , by laws enacted prior to the day fixed for the appointment of the electors , for its final determination of any controversy or contest concerning the appointment of all or any of the electors of such state , by judicial or other methods or procedures , and such determination shall have been made at least six days before the time fixed for the meeting of the electors , such determination made pursuant to such law so existing on said day , and made at least six days prior to said time of meeting of the electors , shall be conclusive , and shall govern in the counting of the electoral votes as provided in the constitution , and as hereinafter regulated , so far as the ascertainment of the electors appointed by such state is concerned .

