climate change is a global issue ; however , greenhouse gas emissions data on a global basis are incomplete .

some developing countries have no institutions for monitoring greenhouse gas emissions and have never reported such emissions to the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

in a similar vein , data on individual greenhouse gases , sources , and land - use patterns vary greatly in quality .

despite shortcomings in the data , the emerging picture of emissions has implications for considering alternative policies for controlling emissions .

first , the picture outlines the estimated contributions of individual countries .

second , evaluating those emissions in terms of socio - economic characteristics ( eg , population and economic activity ) provides insights on the potentially divergent interests of differing groups of nations — especially concerning developed nations versus developing ones .

the world resources institute ( wri ) has compiled greenhouse gas emissions and related data from a variety of sources into a database that is available for analysis .

covering 185 nations ( plus a separate entry combining the members of the european union ) , the database includes total emissions , per capita emissions , and greenhouse gas ( or carbon ) intensity ; selected socio - economic indicators ; and other measures .

emissions data for all six greenhouse gases identified by the unfccc are available for 1990 , 1995 , 2000 , and 2005 for both developed and non - annex i nations .

data for carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) are available back to 1850 and up to 2006 for both developed and non - annex i nations .

data on the effects of land use change and forestry on co 2 emissions are only available from 1990 to 2005 , and only for a subset of nations .

this report uses the data compiled by wri to examine a pivotal and long - running issue surrounding u.s. climate change policy: the appropriate roles of developed and developing countries in addressing climate change .

the unfccc states as its first principle in article 3: the parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future generations of humankind , on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities .

accordingly , the developed country parties should take the lead in combating climate change and the adverse effects thereof .

u.s. policymakers have struggled with the "common but differentiated responsibilities" of all nations and with the pledge for the developed countries to "take the lead in combating climate change. .

under the unfccc and the subsequent kyoto protocol , common actions include the responsibility to monitor and report emissions ; differentiated actions include the commitment to reduce emissions for designated developed nations ( including the united states ) , listed on annex i to the unfccc ( and hence known as annex i nations ) .

the original unfcc commitment was voluntary , and many annex i nations , notably including the united states , failed to meet the objective of reducing 2000 emissions to a 1990 baseline .

thus the kyoto protocol made mandatory individual annex i nations' commitments of percentage reductions for 2008-2012 , but meeting them has proved difficult — and the united states refused to join the commitment .

under both the unfccc and the kyoto protocol , non - annex i nations would be exempt from these specified control requirements — although they could voluntarily join in .

this split in responsibilities — with the consequent lack of greenhouse gas control requirements for major emitting non - annex i countries — played a key role in the united states' refusal to agree to the kyoto protocol .

two key issues emerged from the unfcc and kyoto commitments to reduce emissions by developed nations: first , meeting the commitments is proving to be both technically and politically difficult ; and second , it has become increasing evident that any reductions achieved by annex i nations could be nullified by increases in emissions from non - annex i nations like china and india that have been undergoing rapid economic growth and emitting increasingly large amounts of greenhouse gases — such that by 2005 china passed the united states to become the number one emitter of greenhouse gases in the world .

justifications for the differential treatment of the developed , annex i nations compared to the developing nations are both environmentally and economically based .

environmentally , the developed , annex i nations have dominated emissions .

cumulatively , from 1850 to 2006 , annex i nations had emitted approximately 74% of energy - related co 2 , while non - annex i nations had contributed 24% .

in 1990 , when the unfccc was being conceived , annex i nations accounted for 60% of emissions of all six greenhouse gases , while the non - annex i nations accounted for 40% .

by 2005 , however , non - annex i nations dominated , accounting for 51% of total emissions , while annex i nations accounting for approximately 47% .

thus , while annex i nations still dominate cumulative emissions , the fact that non - annex i nations are now contributing more than half the emissions confounds the assignment of future obligations .

economically , as the unfccc explicitly recognizes , the economic development being pursued by the non - annex i nations depends importantly on expanded use of energy , including fossil fuels , which are the main source of carbon dioxide , the dominant greenhouse gas .

from this perspective , a logic for the differing treatment of the two groups is that the developed , annex i countries can afford to control emissions because they have achieved a relatively high standard of living , while the developing nations have the right and should have the opportunity to expand energy use as necessary for their economic development .

this distinguishing of the responsibilities of the annex i and non - annex i nations generates crucial and interrelated tensions: first , this approach means that annex i nations bear the preponderance of the direct economic costs for addressing global climate change ; second , non - annex i nations retain the opportunity to develop their economies using least - cost energy regardless of greenhouse gas emissions ; this in turn means that from the perspective of the annex i nations , at least some developing nations — which may be competing in certain economic sectors — appear to be getting a free ride ; and third , despite investments in controls and resulting tensions between competing economies , actual global emissions will continue to rise if the increase in emissions from non - annex i nations exceeds any decrease in emissions achieved by annex i ones .

the crux of the copenhagen conference , to plot a post - kyoto course for addressing climate change , was how to engage the two largest emitters , the united states and china — the former having rejected kyoto in part because developing nations were not obligated to curtail emissions ; and the latter having become the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases .

politically , while george w. bush administration had been a reluctant partner in the unfcc process , including early negotiations pointing toward copenhagen , president obama has been a vigorous proponent of engagement .

at the copenhagen conference , he met twice with chinese premier wen jiabao in an effort to move the negotiations forward .

the copenhagen outcome showed both some progress in bridging the gap between the developed and developing nations , and continuing difficulties in finding common ground on how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .

the accord did not mandate specific reductions , but set a goal of reducing global emissions "so as to hold the increase in global temperature below 2 degrees c , and take action to meet this objective consistent with science and on the basis of equity. .

annex i nations commit to implement "quantified economy - wide emissions targets for 2020" and non - annex i nations commit to implement "mitigation actions. .

both sets of nations commit to reporting and verification procedures "in accordance with guidelines adopted by the conference of the parties. .

 ( monitoring , reporting , and verification were a key demand of the united states of developing nations. ) .

also , the accord contained the promise of $100 billion a year by 2020 "to address the needs of developing countries. .

to clarify how nations' emissions levels intersect with social and economic contexts , this paper focuses on the 20 individual nations that emitted the most greenhouse gases in 2005 ( see appendix a , appendix b , and appendix c ) .

in 2005 , not taking into account emissions implications of land use and forestry , the top 20 represented about 75% of global greenhouse gas emissions — up slightly from about 73% in 1990 ( latest available data from cait for all six greenhouse gases ) .

in addition , data for the 27-member european union are included , as the kyoto protocol allows the eu to address its greenhouse gas emission obligations collectively .

in 2005 , the 27-nation eu was the third - largest emitter of greenhouse gases , after china and the united states .

the data on greenhouse gas emissions highlight issues of both effectiveness and fairness in the effort to address global climate change .

differentiating responsibilities between annex i and non - annex i nations , as the unfccc has , does not focus efforts on all of the largest emitters .

as table 1 shows , the emissions dominance of annex i nations that existed in 1990 has ended: in 2005 non - annex i nations' global greenhouse gas emissions definitively surpass those of annex i nations , by a margin of 15% when taking land use and forestry into account .

on the other hand , on the basis of energy - related co 2 emissions , cumulative from 1850-2006 , annex i nations still dominate by margin of 3 to 1 .

moreover , contradictory issues of fairness arise .

for annex i countries , the present scheme of controlling greenhouse gases requires them to bear essentially all the direct economic costs .

for non - annex i countries , to the extent that development is linked to increasing greenhouse gas emissions , imposing controls on them could slow their development and hold down their standards of living vis - a - vis the developed nations .

finally , the focus on emissions levels at specific times ( eg , a baseline of 1990 ) has differential and arbitrary impacts on individual nations .

looking at the industrialization process , to the extent that fossil fuel use is a necessary ingredient of economic development , as acknowledged by the unfccc , the emergence of the global climate change issue at this time effectively determines the distinction between the developed , annex i nations and the developing , non - annex i nations .

for annex i nations , that energy exploitation has been incorporated into their economies and is part of their baseline for considering any controls on greenhouse gases .

for developing , non - annex i nations , however , economic development will require expanded energy use , of which fossil fuels can be the least costly .

thus imposing limits on fossil energy use at this time could result in developing countries being relegated to a lower standard of living than those nations that developed earlier .

similarly , certain land - use activities , such as clearing land for agriculture and exploiting timber , affect net greenhouse gas emissions .

nations that are currently exploiting their resource endowments , such as brazil and indonesia , could find themselves singled out as targets for controls .

yet developed nations , like the united states and most european countries , which exploited such resources in the past , have those greenhouse gas implications embedded in their baselines .

also , the focus on 1990 as a baseline means that the eastern european and former soviet union nations have the advantage of reductions in emissions from their subsequent economic contractions , which will allow them room for growth .

likewise , the discovery and exploitation of north sea gas has allowed great britain to back out coal and thereby reduce emissions since the baseline .

in all these cases , the time frame adopted for defining the climate change issue and for taking actions to address greenhouse gas emissions has differential impacts on individual nations , as a result of their individual resource endowments and stage of economic development .

the differential impacts give rise to perceived inequities .

thus the effort to find a metric for addressing greenhouse gas emissions baselines and targets that will be perceived as equitable is challenging .

the problems raised above prompt the question: what alternatives to controls derived from historically based emissions levels are available ? .

alternative metrics for taking into account greenhouse gas emissions and economic development include per capita emissions and economic intensity of emissions .

as stated above , the data on greenhouse gas emissions highlight issues of both effectiveness and fairness with respect to current efforts to address global climate change .

differentiating responsibilities between annex i and non - annex i countries fails to focus efforts on all the largest emitters .

in addition , contradictory issues of fairness arise , as annex i countries bear essentially all the direct economic costs of reducing emissions , and non - annex i countries are granted the right to increase emissions to meet developmental needs .

finally , the focus on historical emissions as a baseline for regulation has differential and arbitrary impacts on individual nations .

the result of the unfccc and kyoto protocol's setting emissions targets for only developed nations and focusing on returning their emissions to a specific baseline is twofold: ( 1 ) the current regime has had little effect on global emissions , and will have little effect in the near future ; and ( 2 ) the largest emitters , the united states and china , have not found it in their interests to join in the international effort to a significant degree .

indeed , the united states pulled completely out of the kyoto process under the george w. bush administration .

this process has continued to be difficult , as the recent copenhagen meetings illustrate .

this history of the unfccc and the kyoto protocol raises serious questions about how to develop greenhouse gas targets , time frames , and implementation strategies .

with respect to targets , the unfccc recognized the right of developing countries to develop and the responsibility of all countries to protect the global climate .

these goals of the unfccc suggest that if there is to be any permanent response to climate change that involves controlling greenhouse gases , then a regime that combines some measure reflecting the right of developing countries to develop , such as per capita emissions , and some measure reflecting the need to be efficient , such as carbon intensity , may be necessary to move the world toward a workable and effective climate change framework .

as shown above a global target focused on per capita emissions generally rewards developing nations , providing them room for economic growth ; the target's balance between limiting emissions and permitting growth determines the individual winners and losers .

for example , based on appendix b , a target of 3 tons carbon per person would allow all the developing nations in the top 20 emitters except south korea growth room ( south korea is at 3.1 tons per capita ) , while five developed nations ( united states , russian federation , germany , canada , and australia ) would have to make cuts .

in contrast , a target focused on greenhouse gas intensity would have more diverse implications for developing nations .

several major developing nations produce considerably higher greenhouse gas emissions per million dollars of gdp than some developed nations .

for example , in 2005 china's carbon intensity ( 372 tons / million international $gdp ) was about four times that of the united kingdom's ( 91 ) and italy's ( 93 ) .

thus a greenhouse gas intensity goal could be a counterforce to the economic development process for some countries , meaning that the winners and losers of a regime combining per capita and carbon intensity measures could be highly dynamic and contentious .

adding land - use implications would further complicate the regime , and selectively affect certain nations , especially those just now at the point of exploiting forests ( notably indonesia and brazil ) .

for the united states , a regime containing some mix of per capita and greenhouse gas intensity measures would likely imply a need to constrain emissions over some time frame .

the u.s. greenhouse gas intensity is declining , as is the case with most nations , but the decrease currently does not completely offset increased emissions resulting from the growth of population and of the economy .

the extent to which targets could translate into economic costs would depend on the other two features of the regulatory scheme: ( 1 ) time frame ( specifically , whether it would accommodate technological advances in less - carbon - intensive technology or accelerated commercialization of existing low - carbon technologies such as nuclear power ) ; ( 2 ) implementation strategy ( specifically , whether it encourages least - cost solutions and development of advanced technologies ) .

with respect to time frame , the data indicate two things: ( 1 ) most countries that achieved a significant reduction during the 1990s did so as a result of either an economic downturn or a substantial realignment in energy policy ; ( 2 ) many countries have not been able to stabilize their emissions despite the unfccc's voluntary goal , much less reduce them .

that failure was the impetus for the kyoto agreement's prescribed reductions and of the copenhagen meeting .

using economic contraction as an emission reduction strategy can scarcely be considered an option .

instead , the substantial development and / or deployment of less - carbon - intensive technology , improved land - management strategies , and other actions would be necessary to achieve stabilized emissions .

as noted above , greenhouse gas emissions are closely tied to industrialization — a synonym for "developed. .

with few exceptions , improvement in efficiency has been gradual .

a permanent transformation of the global economy necessary to ensure a long - term stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions may involve a multi - stage , long - term time frame .

the difficulty in implementing the unfccc suggests implementation and compliance are still an open issue .

the united states submitted climate action plans during the 1990s indicating it would achieve the unfccc goal of returning emissions to 1990 levels .

it did not .

there were no sanctions .

likewise , some kyoto signatories may not achieve their reduction targets in 2008-2012 .

the sanctions are unclear .

now , for the copenhagen accord , nations are asked to voluntarily commit to reductions .

given the wide range of situations illustrated by the data , a flexible strategy that permits each country to play to its strengths may make it easier for diverse countries like the united states and china to reach some acceptable agreement .

the extent of flexibility would depend on the balance between emission reductions and economic cost designed into the targets , time frame , and implementation strategy .

market - based mechanisms to reduce emissions focus on specifying either the acceptable emissions level ( quantity ) , or compliance costs ( price ) , and allowing the marketplace to determine the economically efficient solution for the other variable .

for example , a tradeable permit program sets the amount of emissions allowable under the program ( i.e. , the number of permits available caps allowable emissions ) , while permitting the marketplace to determine what each permit will be worth .

conversely , a carbon tax sets the maximum unit ( per ton of co 2 ) cost that one should pay for reducing emissions , while the marketplace determines how much actually gets reduced .

hence , a major implementation question is whether one is more concerned about the possible economic cost of the program and therefore willing to accept some uncertainty about the amount of reduction received ( i.e. , carbon taxes ) , or one is more concerned about achieving a specific emission reduction level with costs handled efficiently , but not capped ( i.e. , tradeable permits ) .

of course , combinations of these approaches are possible , depending on the flexibility desired .

the data presented here portray a very wide range of situations and conditions among the 20 top countries that represent over 70% of total emissions .

significant flexibility may not only be desirable but necessary for them to reach any significant agreement .

appendix a .

relative ranking of 20 top emitters ( plus eu - 27 ) of greenhouse gases based on 2005 greenhouse gas emissions appendix b. greenhouse gas emissions and other climate change - related indicators for 2005 top 20 emitting countries ( excludes land use change & forestry ) appendix c. additional emissions and other climate change - related indicators for 2005 top 20 emitter .

