the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) is responsible for inspecting most meat , poultry , and processed egg products for safety , wholesomeness , and proper labeling .

federal inspectors or their state counterparts are present at all times in virtually all slaughter plants and for at least part of each day in establishments that further process meat and poultry products .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety of virtually all other human foods , including seafood , and for animal drugs and feed ingredients .

several significant changes in meat and poultry inspection programs were included in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) , signed into law in june 2008 .

these include permitting certain state - inspected meat and poultry products to enter interstate commerce , just like usda - inspected products ; bringing catfish under mandatory usda inspection ; requiring an inspected establishment to notify usda if it believes that an adulterated or misbranded product has entered commerce ; and requiring establishments to prepare and maintain written recall plans .

recently , the effectiveness of the fsis inspection system has been compared favorably ( by some ) to fda's , particularly with regard to its import safety program .

at the same time , recalls of fresh and processed meat and poultry products , often due to microbiological contamination , and illness outbreaks caused by such products , continue to challenge the industry and government regulators .

these incidents have fueled interest in a number of bills in the 110 th and 111 th congresses to change other elements of usda's authorizing statutes .

what , if any , additional changes should lawmakers consider to improve safety oversight of meat and poultry production ? .

the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) observed in april 2009: despite numerous activities aimed at preventing foodborne human infections , including the initiation of new control measures after the identification of new vehicles of transmission ( eg , peanut butter - containing products ) , progress toward the national health objectives has plateaued , suggesting that fundamental problems with bacterial and parasitic contamination are not being resolved .

although significant declines in the incidence of certain pathogens have occurred since establishment of foodnet , these all occurred before 2004 .

of the four pathogens with current healthy people 2010 targets , salmonella , with an incidence rate of 16.2 cases per 100,000 in 2008 , is farthest from its target for 2010 ( 6.8 ) .

the lack of recent progress toward the national health objective targets and the occurrence of large multistate outbreaks point to gaps in the current food safety system and the need to continue to develop and evaluate food safety practices as food moves from the farm to the table .

not all of these infections are from consumption of meat and poultry products .

a more recent cdc article reported that , among 243 foodborne disease outbreaks attributed to a single commodity in 2006 , the most outbreaks were attributed to fish ( 47 ) , poultry ( 35 ) , and beef ( 25 ) .

however , the most cases were attributed to poultry ( 1,355 ) , leafy vegetables ( 1,081 ) and fruits / nuts ( 1,021 ) .

pairing pathogens with commodities , the cdc found that the most outbreak - related cases were clostridium perfringens in poultry ( 902 cases ) , salmonella in fruits nuts ( 776 ) , norovirus in leafy vegetables ( 657 ) , shiga - toxin e. coli in leafy vegetables ( 398 ) , salmonella in vine - stalk vegetables ( 331 ) , and v. parahaemolyticus in mollusks ( 223 ) .

nonetheless , large recent recalls of meat and poultry products , often due to microbiological contamination , have brought closer attention to usda's and industry's record in detecting harmful pathogens and preventing them from reaching consumers and making them sick .

although government officials had asserted that the number of both recalls and illnesses had declined over the long term , illness data from the past several years appear to indicate that this overall decline has not continued .

as noted earlier , media reports appeared in late 2009 that raised questions about the safety of the meat being supplied to school meals programs .

meanwhile , several lawmakers also have called for a review of how usda screens meat and poultry destined for school meals and / or for consideration of legislation in the second session of the 111 th congress that would require the department to enforce more rigorous testing , recall , and other procedures for products to be used in the programs .

although schools use cash to purchase directly most of the foods used in these programs , a significant amount — by law , at least 12% of the combined value of cash and commodity assistance — is provided through commodities purchased by usda and transferred to schools through the states .

this 12% now amounts to about $1 billion annually for all types of commodities .

usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) handles purchases for most commodities , including meat and poultry , and has purchased approximately 133 million pounds of beef alone in each of the past three years .

usa today reported that , during the dates covered by the beef packers inc. recall , usda purchased four orders totaling nearly 450,000 pounds of ground beef for the school lunch program .

one order reportedly tested positive for the salmonell a strain that triggered the retail recall — and was rejected by usda .

however , it would have been prudent for the department to reject the other three orders even though they did not produce positive test results , one food safety expert told the newspaper .

such pathogen tests do not guarantee that the pathogen is absent .

"because salmonella is seldom distributed evenly in any lot of beef , '94% of the time , i won't find it even though it's there,'" the article quoted the expert as saying .

on the other hand , the three lots that were not rejected were produced during production runs on days following those that the recalled beef was produced ; the assembly lines are cleaned each night , making it very unlikely that the pathogen would have survived , he added .

a subsequent usa today article observed that on the one hand , ams's safety rules for school - bound meat and poultry are more stringent than the department's ( presumably meaning fsis's ) rules are for commercially marketed products .

on the other hand , the article asserted , many of the larger fast food and supermarket chains set testing and safety standards that are far higher than those required by ams .

for example , mcdonald's , burger king , and costco test the ground beef they buy five to 10 times more frequently than the department's tests for a typical production day .

the new york times reported on a separate case where e. coli and salmonella have been found "dozens of times" in meat produced for the school lunch program by beef products inc .

the times stated that the meat was diverted before it went into the program .

although one of the company's facilities reportedly has been suspended from the school lunch buying program three times in three years , usda ( again , presumably fsis ) has allowed the facility to remain in production for other customers .

the times article outlines the company's use of "a product made from beef that included fatty trimmings the industry once relegated to pet food and cooking oil. .

because the "trimmings were particularly susceptible to contamination," the company began treating the product with ammonia gas , which , it said , proved highly effective in killing pathogens .

the challenge , according to the time s , has been how to keep the ammonia levels high enough to kill the pathogens but not negatively affect the taste of the product .

furthermore , the government reportedly did not require that the ammonia - treated meat be so labeled , because the government agreed with beef products' assertion that it was a processing agent and not an additive .

the food safety expert quoted by usa today , james marsden , generally defended the ams purchasing program in a recent internet posting .

he observed that ground beef destined for schools must be tested for both salmonella and e. coli o157:h7 , both of for which ams has a "zero - tolerance" policy and thus will not accept any products where it is found .

furthermore , suppliers must hold the product until tests confirm that samples are negative for the pathogens .

marsden added that other provisions in the ams purchasing program require that slaughter plants include at least two pathogen intervention steps and that carcasses themselves be tested regularly for e. coli o157:h7 .

however , he also reiterated the "potential weakness" in the program that he described in the usa today article , namely what he called "an overreliance on microbiological test results. .

currently , the agriculture secretary must go to the courts to obtain an order to seize and detain suspected contaminated products if a firm refuses to issue a recall voluntarily .

the gao has criticized agencies' efforts to ensure that companies carry out recalls quickly and efficiently , particularly of products that may carry severe risk of illness .

a 2004 gao report concluded that the agencies do not know how well companies are carrying out recalls and are ineffectively tracking them .

as a result , most recalled items are not recovered and thus may be consumed , gao reported .

at past hearings , consumer and food safety advocacy groups have testified in favor of obtaining these new enforcement tools to improve food safety in general , and to strengthen usda's enforcement of the new haccp system in particular .

these groups have asserted that civil fines would serve as an effective deterrent and could be imposed more quickly than criminal penalties or the withdrawal of inspection .

they also have argued that the authority to assess civil penalties would permit usda to take stronger — and more rapid — action against "bad actors," or those processors who persistently violate food safety standards .

food safety advocates argue that fsis should have the authority to mandate product recalls as a backup guarantee in case voluntary recalls moved too slowly or were not comprehensive enough .

meat and poultry industry trade associations have testified in opposition to granting usda new enforcement powers .

both producers and processors argue that current authorities are sufficient and that only once has a plant refused to comply with usda's recommendation to recall a suspected contaminated product .

industry representatives have testified that usda's current authority to withdraw inspection , thereby shutting down a plant , is a strong enough economic penalty to deter potential violators and punish so - called bad actors .

furthermore , they say , new enforcement powers would increase the potential for plants to suffer drastic financial losses from suspected contamination incidents that could ultimately be proven false .

it is also argued that voluntary procedures encourage cooperation between industry and its regulators , whereas mandatory recall authority might discourage it .

mandatory authority would foster a more adversarial system of mistrust and possible litigation , making recalls less rather than more effective , industry representatives argue .

in august 2004 , the consumer group center for science in the public interest ( cspi ) began a national campaign to urge usda to publicize the names of retail outlets where recalled meat has been distributed , so that consumers can learn more quickly whether they have purchased potentially contaminated products .

usda and industry leaders have contended that distribution records are proprietary , and exempt from provisions of the federal freedom of information act ; such information , they argue , should be limited mainly to public officials so that they can monitor recalls .

however , in the march 7 , 2006 , federal register , fsis proposed posting on its website the names of retailers who have products subject to a voluntary recall .

fsis announced on july 11 , 2008 , that it would begin to post such names in august 2008 .

the lists cover retailers involved in the potentially most serious ( class i ) recalls only .

reviewing fsis protocols for handling recalls following the topps case ( see box , " topps recall " ) , usda's oig concluded that while the agency has improved its investigative and recall procedures , it still needed "a science - based sampling protocol to collect and analyze a representative sample of product at an establishment to conclude whether contamination occurred there. .

provisions of the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( h.r .

3580 ; p.l .

110-85 ) require the secretary of hhs both to establish a food registry for the reporting of food adulteration , and to encourage more coordination and communication when recalls occur , but it applies to fda - regulated foods .

in the senate but not the house version of the omnibus farm bill ( h.r .

2419 ) was a requirement that usda establish similar "reportable food registries" for meat and poultry and their products .

the final conference substitute , enacted as p.l .

110-246 , amends the meat and poultry laws to require an establishment to notify usda if it has reason to believe that an adulterated or misbranded product has entered commerce .

another conference provision requires meat and poultry establishments to prepare and maintain written recall plans .

the proposed implementing rules for these two requirements were still in review at usda in mid - september 2009 .

several other bills to authorize mandatory recalls for meat and poultry products were introduced but not enacted in the 110 th congress .

in the 111 th congress , bills by representative degette ( h.r .

815 ) and by senator brown ( s. 425 ) would amend both the fmia and the ppia to require "[a] person ( other than a household consumer ) that has reason to believe" that any carcass , poultry , meat product , or poultry product "transported , stored , distributed , or otherwise handled by the person is adulterated or misbranded shall , as soon as practicable , notify the secretary of the identity and location of the article. .

the bills set forth a series of steps for voluntary recall and consumer notification and , if they are not taken , require the secretary to order them .

the bills ( which also would mandate similar requirements for fda - regulated products ) provide for hearing opportunities , among other related language .

a bill with similar objectives also was introduced by senator udall ( s. 1527 ) .

mandatory recall provisions have been incorporated into food safety legislation ( h.r .

2749 ) that cleared the house on july 30 , 2009 , as well as into a comprehensive bill ( s. 510 ) approved in november 2009 by a senate committee , but these bills' provisions apply to fda - regulated foods and not to fsis - regulated meat and poultry products .

recalls imply the ability to quickly trace the movement of products .

some argue , for example , that improved traceability capabilities would have enabled usda to determine the whereabouts of all related cattle of potential interest in the three u.s. case of bse ( bovine spongiform encephalopathy , or "mad cow disease" ) .

the traceability issue has also been debated in connection with protecting against agroterrorism ; verifying the u.s. origin of live cattle and meat products for export ; and facilitating recalls to prevent or contain foodborne illness outbreaks , among other things .

supporters of animal id and meat traceability point out that most major meat - exporting countries already have domestic animal id systems .

the u.s. meat industry had argued in the past that such a system would not be based on sound science , and would be technically unworkable .

however , following the domestic bse case , the industry , usda , and other professionals attempted to implement a universal , although not mandatory , national animal id ( but not meat traceability ) system .

however , this system was focused on animal disease control rather than on food safety objectives .

regardless , progress has been slow on this so - called national animal identification system ( nais ) .

some members of congress are among those who believed the programs should be mandatory in order to achieve universal participation .

although many producers themselves appear to be supportive , many also have expressed adamant opposition to the plan .

among other issues are cost , need for a mandatory rather than voluntary system , potential producer liability , and privacy of records .

on february 5 , 2010 , secretary of agriculture vilsack announced that usda was revising its approach to achieving a national capability for animal disease traceability .

the nais is to be abandoned .

in its place usda proposes a new approach that will allow individual states ( and tribal nations ) to chose their own degree of within - state animal identification ( id ) and traceability for livestock populations .

under this revised focus , states may chose to have no mandatory animal id and traceability capability , or to rely on existing id systems already in place to fight brucellosis , tuberculosis , and other contagious animal diseases , or to develop their own version of a more detailed birth - to - market id system as originally proposed under nais .

the flexibility is intended to allow each state to respond to its own producer needs and interests .

however , under the proposed revision usda will require that all animals moving in interstate commerce have a form of id that allows traceability back to their originating states .

animal id proposals were offered but not enacted in the 110 th congress .

for example , h.r .

1018 would have prohibited the establishment of a mandatory id system .

h.r .

2301 would have created a livestock identification board with members from industry to oversee a national program .

several other bills establishing broader traceability programs would have applied to animal id as well .

also in the 110 th congress , both the house and senate committee reports to accompany usda's fy2008 appropriation ( h.rept .

110-258 ; s.rept .

110-134 ) had questioned usda's progress and direction in implementing nais .

over several years through fy2008 , about $128 million had gone into the development of such a program .

the fy2009 usda appropriation ( p.l .

111-8 , division a ) , passed near the start of the 111 th congress , provided another $14.5 million for program , of which $3.5 million was for information technology , $9.4 million was for field implementation , and $1.6 million was for program administration .

explanatory language to accompany the appropriation further directed aphis "to make demonstrable progress" to implement the program , and to meet a number of specific objectives ( regarding 48-hour traceback ability ) that were in the agency's 2008 traceability business plan .

the fy2010 appropriation ( p.l .

111-80 ) provided $5.3 million for nais , $9.1 million less than fy2009 .

this was in contrast to no funding under the house bill and was $2 million less than the senate bill .

the conference report expressed concern that the lack of progress by aphis in registering animal premises in the united states would prohibit aphis from implementing an effective national animal id system , and that such a system was needed for animal health and would benefit livestock markets .

as of mid - 2009 , about 37% of premises were registered under nais , out of an estimated 1.4 million u.s. animal and poultry operations .

usda had stated that much higher levels of participation were needed to successfully implement nais .

the conference report stated further that , "[i]f significant progress is not made , the conferees will consider eliminating funding for the program. .

since fy2004 , approximately $142 million has been appropriated for nais .

with regard to proposed authorizing legislation in the 111 th congress , the broader food traceability provisions of h.r .

814 ( degette ) and s. 425 ( brown ) both include the requirement that fsis establish , within one year , a system that can trace each animal to any premises it was held at any time prior to slaughter , and each carcass , carcass part , or meat / poultry product from slaughter through processing and distribution to the ultimate consumer .

the bills also would authorize the secretary to require records to be maintained and to provide access to them for purposes of traceability .

traceability provisions have been incorporated into food safety legislation ( h.r .

2749 ) approved by the house and into a senate bill ( s. 510 ) , but these provisions would apply to fda - regulated foods and not to fsis - regulated meat and poultry products .

from time to time in the past , fsis has had difficulty in sufficiently staffing its service obligations to the meat and poultry industries .

usually a combination of factors causes these shortages , including new technologies that increase plant production speeds and volume , insufficient appropriated funds to hire additional inspectors at times of unexpected increases in demand for inspections , and problems in finding qualified people to work in dangerous or unpleasant environments or at remote locations .

these staffing problems were complicated somewhat by the addition of haccp requirements on top of the traditional inspection duties .

to ease funding pressures , most administrations over the past 20 years have proposed to charge the meat - packing industry new user fees sufficient to cover the entire cost , or at least a portion , of federal inspection services .

 ( fsis has been authorized since 1919 to charge user fees for holiday and overtime inspections , and does so ) .

the primary rationale for more extensive user fees has been that resources would then be adequate to hire new inspectors as necessary .

usda economists estimate that the cost passed on to consumers from such a fee would be no more than one cent per pound .

meat industry and consumer groups have consistently opposed increased fees , arguing that food safety is a public health concern that merits taxpayer support .

for example , as part of its fy2009 budget submitted to congress in february 2008 , the bush administration again had asked for new user fees , beginning after fy2009 , of $92 million by collecting licensing fees from meat and poultry establishments , and of another $4 million by charging plants that require additional inspections due to performance failures .

these fees were not adopted by congress , which also had opposed them when they were in the administration's fy2008 budget .

the $4 million user fee was again requested by the obama administration in its fy2010 proposal , but neither the house nor senate appropriations committee recommended its adoption ( which would require a change in authorizing legislation ) .

as noted , the enacted omnibus ( p.l .

111-8 , division a ) provides $971.6 million for fsis , approximately $41 million above the fy2008 level and approximately $20 million above the administration request .

this congressional appropriation is being augmented in fy2009 by existing ( currently authorized ) user fees , which fsis had earlier estimated would total $140 million for the fiscal year .

for fy2010 , the enacted appropriation ( p.l .

111-80 ) provides $1.019 billion , which is the administration - requested level and an increase over the enacted fy2009 level .

congressional consideration of the fy2011 budget request was getting underway in march 2010 .

the fy2009 omnibus appropriation continued language , which was also in the fy2007 and fy2008 usda appropriations measures , prohibiting fsis from implementing rules to allow the importation of poultry products from china into the united states .

the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2009 measure expressed "very serious concerns about contaminated foods from china," and called on usda to submit a report to congress on the safety implications of such changes and a plan of action to guarantee the safety of chinese poultry product imports .

a final rule to allow certain processed poultry products to enter from china had been published by fsis rule on april 24 , 2006 .

the chinese government in march 2009 strongly criticized the ban as a violation of trade rules and stated that it would challenge it in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

it also pointed out that china had "imported 580,000 tons of chicken products from the united states last year , accounting for 73.4% of total chicken imports. .

on april 17 , 2009 , china formally requested formal wto consultations on the issue , the first step toward referral to a dispute settlement panel ( which subsequently was established in july 2009 and composed in september 2009 ) .

the house - passed fy2010 appropriation for usda would have continued the chinese chicken prohibition ; the senate would have permitted such imports but only under specified conditions .

house - senate conferees on the final measure ( enacted as p.l .

111-80 ) adopted language that appears to be closer ( but not identical ) to the senate approach .

more specifically , section 743 of the final measure states that funds cannot be used to implement the rule unless the secretary of agriculture formally notifies congress that china will not receive any preferential consideration of any application to export poultry or poultry products to the united states ; the secretary will conduct audits of inspection systems and on - site reviews of slaughter and processing facilities , laboratories , and other control operations before any chinese facilities are certified to ship products to the united states , and subsequently such audits and reviews will be conducted at least annually ( or more frequently if the secretary determines it necessary ) ; there will be a "significantly increased level" of reinspections at u.s. ports of entry ; and a "formal and expeditious" information sharing program will be established with other countries importing chinese processed poultry products that have conducted audits and plant inspections .

furthermore , usda must provide a report to the house and senate appropriations committees within 120 days and every 180 days thereafter , indefinitely , that includes both initial and new actions taken to audit and review the chinese system to ensure it meets sanitary standards equivalent to those of the united states , the level of port of entry reinspections being conducted on chinese poultry imports , and a work plan incorporating any agreements between fsis and the chinese government regarding a u.s. equivalency assessment .

usda also is to meet specified requirements ( spelled out in section 743 ) for notifying the public about audits and site reviews in china and lists of certified chinese facilities .

many food safety advocates were supportive of the house appropriations language banning the poultry rule , arguing that china — the third leading foreign supplier of food and agricultural imports into the united states — lacks effective food safety protections , and that the 2006 rule was rushed into approval without an adequate safety evaluation .

opponents of a ban , particularly those in the u.s. animal industries , argue that it would undermine u.s. trade commitments , and believe it already has led to trade retaliation by the chinese .

as noted , federal law long prohibited state - inspected meat and poultry plants from shipping their products across state lines , a ban that many states and small plants have wanted to overturn .

limiting state - inspected products to intrastate commerce is unfair , these states and plants argued , because their programs must be , and are , "at least equal" to the federal system .

while state - inspected plants could not ship interstate , foreign plants operating under usda - approved foreign programs , which must be "equivalent" to the u.s. program , have been permitted to export meat and poultry products into and sell them anywhere in the united states .

those opposing state - inspected products in interstate commerce argued that state programs have not been required to have the same level of safety oversight as the federal , or even the foreign , plants .

for example , foreign - processed products are subject to u.s. import reinspection at ports of entry .

the opponents of interstate shipment note that a recent fsis review , which had found all 28 state programs to be at least equal to the u.s. program , was based largely on self - assessments .

in the 110 th congress , section 11015 of the enacted farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) amends the fmia and the ppia to authorize a new opt - in program for state - inspected plants .

this program is to supplement rather than replace the existing federal - state cooperative inspection program .

in states that choose to participate , a federally employed coordinator would supervise state inspectors in plants that want to ship across state lines .

eligible plants are limited to those with 25 or fewer employees — except that plants with between 25 and 35 employees can apply for coverage within the first three years of enactment .

the law sets federal reimbursement for state costs under the new program at 60% ; the current federal - state cooperative inspection program provides reimbursement at 50% of costs .

products inspected under the new program are to carry the federal mark of inspection , and meet all fmia and ppia requirements .

other provisions prohibit federally inspected establishments from participation , establish a new technical assistance division to assist the states , and require periodic audits by usda , among other things .

the new program , which reflects language in the senate version of the farm bill , reportedly was developed as a compromise by those on both sides of the issue .

it appears to be based in concept on the talmadge - aiken program ( see page 4 ) .

some proponents of ending the interstate ban on state - inspected meat contended that the new language is overly restrictive , while those who supported the change countered that it provides appropriate safeguards .

the farm bill required final rules to implement the new state program by december 2009 .

fsis published , on september 16 , 2009 , the proposed rules , with an initial 60-day comment period .

the proposal spells out standards for determining the average number employees in a plant ; clarifies that eligibility is limited to those states that already have a cooperative agreement to operate a meat or poultry inspection program ; describes the process for a state to apply for the interstate version ; and specifies that an eligible establishment is to apply for participation through the state - approved program , not fsis .

among other provisions , the proposed rule would prohibit a participating establishment from reverting to intrastate inspection if it fails to correct any violations of federal standards that are found .

a final rule had not yet appeared as of mid - march 2010 .

twenty - one cases of bse have been reported in north america .

eighteen of them were cattle born in canada , which reported its first native case in may 2003 and its latest case in march 2010 ( one earlier case was imported into canada from great britain ) .

the united states reported its first case in december 2003 ( one of the canadian - born animals , imported into the united states ) .

the united states also found two additional cases , in u.s. - born cattle .

the most recent u.s. case was in late february 2006 .

the most recent canadian case was announced by canadian officials on march 10 , 2010 , in a six - year - old beef cow in alberta .

in epidemiological investigations of the three u.s. cases , usda was unable to track down all related animals of interest , but those that were located tested negative for the disease .

despite a beef recall , some meat from the first u.s. bse cow may have been consumed , usda said , adding , however , that the highest - risk tissues never entered the food supply .

no materials from the other two u.s. cows entered the food supply , usda also said .

animal health officials initially indicated that all of the north american cases were caused by the consumption of bse - contaminated feed .

however , usda reportedly now believes that the two native - born u.s. cattle had "atypical" bse , which differs from other cases .

if these cases are determined to be "spontaneous," that may affect future control strategies .

fsis is one of the three federal agencies primarily responsible for keeping bse out of the food supply .

the other two agencies involved in bse are usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , which handles primarily the animal disease aspects , and fda , which regulates feed ingredients .

after the first u.s. bse case , fsis published , as interim final rules in the january 12 , 2004 , federal register , several actions to bolster u.s. bse protection systems , effective immediately: downer ( nonambulatory ) cattle are no longer allowed into inspected slaughter and processing facilities .

 ( this interim final rule was published in the july 13 , 2007 federal register . ) .

cattle selected for testing cannot be marked as "inspected and passed" until confirmation is received that they have tested negative for bse .

specified risk materials ( srm ) , which include the skull , brain , trigeminal ganglia , eyes , vertebral column , spinal column , and dorsal root ganglia of cattle over 30 months of age , and the small intestine of cattle of all ages , are now prohibited from the human food supply .

slaughter facilities are required to develop and implement procedures to remove , segregate , and dispose of srm and make information readily available for review by fsis inspection personnel .

srm from cattle 30 months or older cannot be in a product labeled as "meat" if derived from advanced meat recovery ( amr ) technology , which usda said would help ensure it does not contain spinal tissue .

mechanically separated meat may not be used for human food .

air injection stunning is banned , to ensure that portions of the animal brain are not dislocated into the carcass .

the fsis actions , which remain in effect , were in addition to other bse regulatory safeguards that have been in place for several years .

these include import controls and ongoing bse surveillance through carcass testing by aphis , and restrictions on the feeding of certain mammalian proteins to cattle by fda ( see box , " the fda "feed ban" " ) .

additional usda actions in the wake of the december 2003 bse discovery have included more attention to implementing a nationwide animal identification program that would enable all cattle and other animal movements to be traced within 48 hours in cases of animal disease ( see prior section on " meat traceability and animal identification " ) ; and an intensive , one - time bse testing program for higher - risk cattle ( since completed ) .

for many members of congress , much of the recent interest in bse has focused on trade rather than food safety concerns .

japan and korea , once among the four leading export markets for u.s. beef , took years to begin accepting u.s. beef products .

exports to japan , which restarted in 2005 , are still limited to products from younger cattle .

korean inspection procedures kept that market largely closed to the united states through much of 2007 and again during early 2008 .

on april 18 , 2008 , a new u.s. - korea agreement was announced that was to lead to that country's opening to most u.s. beef in accordance with accepted international veterinary guidelines .

however , korea first delayed implementation and then scaled back the types of products it would accept , following vigorous anti - government protests that grew from this agreement's announcement .

by july , and through the end of 2008 , u.s. beef again was moving into korea .

u.s. authorities have been hopeful that such positive developments could help to defuse the frustration of many members of congress , some of whom had been expected to reintroduce legislation calling for sanctions against trading partners that failed to accept assurances of u.s. beef safety .

u.s. access to korea's beef market has been an issue in the debate over implementation of the u.s. - korea free trade agreement ( fta ) .

a number of members had signaled that their support for legislation to implement the fta was contingent on korea fully opening its market for u.s. beef .

 ( see crs report rl34528 , u.s. - south korea beef dispute: agreement and status , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

a recent incident inciting u.s. lawmakers and trade officials was a vote in early january 2010 by taiwan's parliament to effectively reverse provisions in a u.s. - taiwan agreement that was to permit u.s. ground beef and offal to enter that country .

the agreement , reached in october 2009 after lengthy negotiations , also is to permit u.s. bone - in beef , but the parliament reportedly did not change that provision .

taiwan's actions , which u.s. trade officials declared "do not have a basis in science and constitute a unilateral violation of a bilateral agreement," could again lead to congressional proposals for some type of sanctions or retaliation .

on february 17 , 2008 , usda announced that hallmark / westland meat packing co. of california was voluntarily recalling 143 million pounds of fresh and frozen beef products dating to february 1 , 2006 .

about 50 million pounds were distributed to the school lunch and several other federal nutrition programs in at least 45 states .

this largest u.s. meat recall ever came after fsis found that for at least two years the facility had not always notified inspectors about cattle that had become nonambulatory after they had been inspected and approved — but before they were actually slaughtered — for food .

fsis regulations explicitly prohibit most nonambulatory cattle which are presented for ante - mortem inspection , because of their higher risk of bse .

fsis also cited evidence that the plant had violated the humane methods of slaughter act ( hmsa ) , which first came to light after animal welfare advocates secretly videotaped what they described as employees inhumanely handling downer cattle before slaughter .

the hmsa stipulates , among other things , that "[n]o method of slaughtering or handling in connection with slaughtering shall be deemed to comply with the public policy of the united states unless it is humane. .

fsis published a final rule in the march 18 , 2009 , federal register that now specifically requires cattle slaughter establishments to notify government inspectors when cattle become nonambulatory even if they have already passed ante - mortem inspection .

all such cattle must be condemned — that is , diverted from the human food supply — and properly disposed of .

the 110 th congress had held several hearings in which the effectiveness and usda implementation of the hmsa , and its bse rules , were challenged .

bills to legislatively prohibit the slaughter of nonambulatory livestock for food included h.r .

661 , s. 394 , and s. 2770 .

they were not enacted .

in the 111 th congress , the senate - passed version of the american recovery and investment act of 2009 ( h.r .

1 ) included a provision to prohibit permanently the use of federal funds for inspecting any nonambulatory disabled cattle for use as human food , regardless of the reason for becoming nonambulatory .

however , the provision was removed by house - senate conferees prior to final enactment as p.l .

111-5 .

a freestanding bill ( h.r .

4356 ) to ban such cattle from the food supply and to ensure that they are humanely euthanized was introduced in december 2009 ; the measure was pending at the start of 2010 .

a subcommittee of the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing on the issue on march 4 , 2010 , where , among other witnesses , the government accountability office testified on a new gao report concluding that fsis inspectors may not be taking consistent actions to enforce the hmsa .

for background , see crs report rs22819 , nonambulatory livestock and the humane methods of slaughter act , by [author name scrubbed] .

