the united states and many of its trading partners use trade remedy laws to lessen the adverse impact of various trade practices on domestic industries , producers , and workers .

these laws are deemed consistent with u.s. international obligations provided they conform to the trade remedy provisions agreed to as part of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations ( 1986-1994 ) and other trade agreements to which the united states is a party .

this report will , first , discuss congressional interest in these laws , and give an overview of recent legislation to amend the laws in congress .

second , it describes ad and cvd laws , procedures and investigations , and provides a statistical overview of existing cases .

third , safeguard statutes and investigations are discussed .

finally , an appendix provides a chart outlining briefly all u.s. trade remedy statutes , major actors , and remedies presented .

"safeguard" or "escape clause" trade laws are designed to provide domestic industries with relief from injurious import surges resulting from fairly competitive trade .

in order to obtain relief , the usitc must determine that a domestic industry is substantially injured by import surges .

presidential action is necessary to obtain relief under these statutes .

although individual u.s. safeguard actions ( in particular , the 2002 action on steel ) have been the subject of intense debate , on the whole , many economists find safeguard measures less objectionable than ad or cvd actions .

some reasons for this include their temporary nature , the requirement that industries take steps to positively adjust to import competition , the higher injury threshold , and the requirement of presidential action .

many in congress support trade remedy laws and actions because they can assist in mitigating the adverse effects of international trade on domestic industry , producers , and workers .

some key industries may currently be facing injury from increased import competition , which can lead to factory closures and loss of domestic manufacturing jobs .

some workers in the service sector are also feeling the effects of import competition due to increased offshore outsourcing .

these factors , among others , are reasons that many in congress support strengthening these laws and insist that the united states must preserve the ability to "rigorously enforce its trade laws" in international negotiations .

others believe that trade remedy actions ( the vast majority of which are ad or cvd investigations and orders ) in and of themselves introduce inefficiencies in both domestic and international economies that result in decreased economic welfare .

for example , some in congress have become concerned about the additional costs accruing to u.s. producers who use imports of intermediate goods subject to ad and cvd orders in finished products , such as steel , to manufacture finished products such as automobiles and buildings .

in addition , in a global trading environment in which many domestic manufacturers ( makers of shoes and furniture , for example ) also import a portion of their product lines , the distinctions between u.s. domestic producers and foreign exporters have become less clear .

competitive advantage and a liberalized world trading system create both winners and losers in domestic economies .

acting on legislation in a manner consistent with previously agreed upon multilateral commitments , balancing that action with the need to regulate and minimize unfair trade practices , and assisting domestic import - competing industries to become more internationally viable presents congress with policy challenges .

